Dislocation Majorana Bound States in Iron-based Superconductors Lun-Hui Hu1, 2 and Rui-Xing Zhang1, 3, 2, ‚àó 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA 2Institute for Advanced Materials and Manufacturing, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37920, USA 3Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA (Dated: September 20, 2022) We show that lattice dislocations of topological iron-based superconductors such as FeTe1‚àíxSex will intrinsically trap non-Abelian Majorana quasiparticles, in the absence of any external magnetic field. Our theory is motivated by the recent experimental observations of normal-state weak topology and surface magnetism that coexist with superconductivity in FeTe1‚àíxSex, the combination of which naturally achieves an emergent second-order topological superconductivity in a two-dimensional subsystem spanned by screw or edge dislocations. This exemplifies a new embedded higher-order topological phase in class D, where Majorana zero modes appear around the ‚Äúcorners‚Äù of a low- dimensional embedded subsystem, instead of those of the full crystal. A nested domain wall theory is developed to understand the origin of these defect Majorana zero modes. When the surface magnetism is absent, we further find that s¬± pairing symmetry itself is capable of inducing a different type of class-DIII embedded higher-order topology with defect-bound Majorana Kramers pairs. We also provide detailed discussions on the real-world material candidates for our proposals, including FeTe1‚àíxSex, LiFeAs, Œ≤-PdBi2, and heterostructures of bismuth, etc. Our work establishes lattice defects as a new venue to achieve high-temperature topological quantum information processing. I. INTRODUCTION Crystals of quantum materials are rarely perfect in the real world. While it appears natural to always sup- press lattice disorders and pursue crystals of a higher purity, defectiveness in topological quantum materials of- ten binds exotic massless quasiparticles that hold great promise for future electronics. A prototypical example is the famous Jackiw-Rebbi problem and its condensed matter realization in polyacetylene , where zero-energy fermionic modes are trapped by the domain wall de- fects of a one-dimensional (1D) dimerized atomic chain. Since then, gapless electronic or Majorana zero modes have been established in lattice or order-parameter de- fects of various topological phases, including weak and crystalline topological insulators (TIs) [3‚Äì7], topological superconductors (TSCs) [8‚Äì17], and topological semimet- als , etc. For example, locally irremovable lattice topological defects such as screw/edge dislocations can trap 1D helical bound states in 3D weak TIs, providing an intriguing bridge between lattice and electronic topolo- gies. Experimental evidence for dislocation-trapped elec- tronic modes has been reported in Bi1‚àíxSbx and bis- muth , both of which are known to be weak TI can- didates. Similar phenomena, if exist in superconductors (SC), would lead to a new mechanism of enabling Majo- rana modes. However, we are not aware of any realistic superconducting system that has been theoretically pro- posed or experimentally supported to feature Majorana dislocation-bound states. ‚àó ruixing@utk.edu Recent years have also witnessed a Majorana rev- olution in the high-Tc topological iron-based super- conductors (tFeSCs), including FeTe1‚àíxSex [22‚Äì24], (Li,Fe)OHFeSe , LiFeAs [26‚Äì28], etc. Notably, the topology of tFeSCs only lies in their normal states , that a band inversion at the Z point generates both a nontrivial Z2 electronic band topology and a helical Dirac surface state . Below the critical temperature Tc, a nodeless pairing gap is developed for both bulk and surface states, wiping out all normal-state topological physics around the Fermi energy. Despite the bulk-state triviality, striking evidence of Majorana signals has been extensively reported in superconducting vortices [22‚Äì28], atomic vacancies , and magnetic adatoms . While the vortex Majorana signals in tFeSCs are usually believed to arise from the Fu-Kane mechanism [35‚Äì37], origins of the vacancy/impurity-related zero-bias peaks are still under debate [38‚Äì43]. Noting that vacancies and add-on impurities are both locally removable and point- like, one may also wonder if extended irremovable lattice defects such as dislocations or disclinations could invoke any interesting field-free topological physics in tFeSCs. Our main finding in this work is that screw or edge dis- locations can naturally bind 0D Majorana zero modes in tFeSCs and similar superconducting systems, in the ab- sence of any external magnetic field. Noting that a pair of dislocations, as well as the 2D ‚Äúcutting plane‚Äù attached to them, can be viewed as an effective 2D subsystem em- bedded in a 3D crystal, the four dislocation Majorana bound states (dMBSs) manifest as ‚Äúcorner‚Äù Majorana modes for this 2D subsystem, one at each corner. There- fore, our mechanism exemplifies an unprecedented Majo- rana mechanism that is based on the second-order topol- ogy of 2D subsystems, which is in sharp contrast with arXiv:2207.10113v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Sep 2022 2 earlier proposals on vortex/vacancy Majorana modes en- abled by the first-order topology for 1D subsystems (i.e., vortex/vacancy lines). We thus dub this new phase ‚Äúem- bedded second-order topological phase‚Äù (ET2). ET2 in tFeSCs is completely driven by the normal-state topology , screw dislocations , and surface magnetism M that coexists with superconductivity [45‚Äì 48], all of which have been experimentally observed in FeTe1‚àíxSex. In particular, we show that dMBSs emerge once the dislocation Burgers vector b = (bx, by, bz) satis- fies bz ‚â° 1 mod 2, as a result of nested mass domains for surface Dirac fermions. Remarkably, this ET2 condition is a natural outcome of a less recognized weak topologi- cal index ŒΩ = (0, 0, 1) of tFeSCs. Therefore, our theory is directly applicable to other weak-index-carrying super- conducting topological materials, such as Œ≤-Bi2Pd . We further discuss the impact of s¬±-wave pairing sym- metry on our recipe, and find it capable of inducing a new type of class DIII ET2 with dislocation Majorana Kramers pairs (dMKPs), in the absence of any surface magnetism. Promising real-world material candidates and experimental signatures are also discussed. II. DISLOCATION MAJORANA BOUND STATES We start by deriving the key result in our work, the recipe for dMBSs in tFeSCs, with the help of a nested domain wall construction approach. We then proceed to discuss boundary conditions of dislocation-induced cut- ting plane and find that a 0D dMBS can be ‚Äúinflated‚Äù to a 1D ‚Äúhinge‚Äù chiral Majorana fermion under certain circumstances. Nonetheless, each corner of the cutting plane will always host a single zero-energy mode. This directly leads to the concept of embedded higher-order topological phase ET2. A. Recipe for dMBSs Let us first provide some motivations for our recipe. To trap a 0D bound state in a 3D system, one can start from a 3D gapless quasiparticle (e.g. a massless Dirac fermion) and further constrain its degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) in all three spatial directions. This ‚Äúdimensional reduction‚Äù procedure can be feasibly achieved by deco- rating the Dirac fermion with a hierarchical set of Z2 mass domains, with each domain effectively reducing the dimension of gapless state by one. For example, the 2D gapless surface of a 3D TI can be viewed as a domain wall bound state for a 3D massive Dirac fermion, with the TI bulk and the outside vaccum carrying opposite Dirac masses, respectively. A second SC/magnetism do- main for the 2D surface Dirac fermion further reduces the gapless d.o.f. to 1D, i.e., leading to a 1D chiral Ma- jorana domain-wall mode . To eventually achieve a 0D Majorana mode, it clearly requires a third Z2-type mass domain wall. We will show that, under certain cir- cumstances, lattice domains introduced by screw/edge dislocations can serve as mass domains and thus con- tribute the last piece of the jigsaw puzzle. This approach is thus dubbed a nested domain wall construction for de- fect MBSs. Another key motivation is from the material side. Re- cent experimental breakthroughs have revealed hidden topological Dirac surface states for several high-Tc iron- based SCs . Among these tFeSC candidates, FeTe1‚àíxSex is of particular interest to us, as it ad- ditionally harbors surface ferromagnetism that coexists with bulk superconductivity below its superconducting Tc ‚àº 14.5 K [45‚Äì48]. Furthermore, screw dislocations for FeTe1‚àíxSex can be generated in a highly control- lable manner during the growth process . There- fore, it is natural to expect FeTe1‚àíxSex to be a won- derful playground for studying a new lattice topological defect-based Majorana platform in the absence of any external magnetic field. And a possible recipe for Majo- rana bound states will be extremely helpful to diagnose the topological situation here. We now derive the topological condition of defect MBSs for tFeSCs. Our starting point is a 3D TRI TI with bulk isotropic s-wave spin-singlet superconductiv- ity. The normal-state topology is indicated by a strong Z2 topological index ŒΩ0 and a set of weak Z2 indices ŒΩ = (ŒΩ1, ŒΩ2, ŒΩ3) . In particular, ŒΩ0 = 0 (ŒΩ0 = 1) dic- tates an even (odd) number of Dirac surface states, while the values of weak indices ŒΩ1,2,3 decide the momentum- space locations of the surface states. The bulk s-wave SC, however, necessarily spoils the normal-state topol- ogy by introducing an isotropic SC gap Œ¥SC to all Dirac surfaces through a ‚Äúself-proximity‚Äù effect. Motivated by FeTe1‚àíxSex, we further introduce surface magnetism Œ¥M to both top and bottom (001) surfaces of our TI system. The explicit type of magnetism is flexible as long as it can act as a mass term for Dirac surface state and fur- ther competes with the surface SC. Since the side surfaces are magnetism-free, when |Œ¥M| > |Œ¥SC|, (1) a SC/magnetism domain emerges around the edges be- tween top/bottom and side surfaces. This condition thus generates a 1D chiral Majorana mode around both top and bottom surfaces, i.e., a chiral Majorana hinge mode. We emphasize that the chiral Majorana hinge mode here is a result of 2D surface topology alone, that the top and bottom surfaces both feature a BdG Chern num- ber of |C| = 1, as will be discussed in Sec. III B. The 3D bulk topology will not be altered and thus remains trivial throughout the surface magnetism decoration. Our last ingredient, the lattice dislocations, is intu- itively a ‚Äúgluing fault‚Äù when combining two identical copies of our setup. For example, as schematically shown in Fig. 1 (a), the screw dislocations are formed when the left parts of the two crystals are combined perfectly, while the right parts mismatch with each other by a displace- 3 Surface Magnetism Weak topology Bulk s-wave SC t0eiœÄb‚ãÖŒΩ t0 (a) (b) (f) (e) (d) (c) x y z Œ¥M > Œ¥SC t = 0 Œ¥SC > 0, Œ¥M = 0 t = t(x) Nested domain wall theory for class-D ET2. (a) shows a single screw dislocation with a Burgers vector b = (0, 0, 1) along with other key ingredients for ET2: weak electronic topology, bulk SC, and surface magnetism. In (b), we cut the crystal in halves following the orange cutting plane in (a), which leads to two disjoint magnetism-gapped top surfaces and two SC-gapped side surfaces. Further folding the top surfaces following the trajectory arrows leads to the ‚Äúbilayer‚Äù configurations of Dirac surface states in (c). The competition between magnetism (M) ans SC leads to a pair of counterpropagating 1D Majorana modes once Œ¥M > Œ¥SC. In (d), we glue everything together to restore the crystal, and the introduction of a dislocation decorates the intersurface hopping between Dirac particles on the orange cutting plane with a phase factor of eiœÄb¬∑ŒΩ. This gaps out the Majorana modes in a nontrivial way shown in (e), which can be mapped to a 1D Jackiw-Rebbi domain wall problem and results in a localized Majorana zero mode at the surface dislocation core. We carry out a numerical simulation of a pair of screw dislocatons for FeTe1‚àíxSex on a 28 √ó 28 √ó 28 lattice. Four zero-energy modes are found and their spatial wavefunctions are found to localized around each dislocation core, as shown in (f). ment vector b=(0,0,1), i.e., the Burgers vector. While a screw or an edge dislocation appears one-dimensional, it must be attached to a 2D cutting plane Pc that only terminates at either another dislocation to form a disloca- tion dipole or the crystal boundary. Example of a cutting plane is highlighted by the orange line in Fig. 1 (a). To explore the fate of chiral Majorana hinge modes during the gluing process, it is helpful to fold the top surfaces of the two to-be-glued crystals as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Then the previous interfacial problem is now mapped to a 2D bilayer system in the y-z plane, with each layer hosting a TI surface state. Distribution of Œ¥M and Œ¥SC are shown in Fig. 3 (c). The domain wall will bind a pair of counterpropagating chiral Majorana modes as denoted by the green and red arrows in Fig. 1 (c). Combining the two crystals is equivalent to introducing an interlayer coupling t for only the bottom parts of the bilayer, i.e., the previous side surfaces, which will also couple the oppositely propagating Majorana modes and gap them out. However, the interlayer mass term for the Majorana fermions will obtain a phase factor eiœÄb¬∑ŒΩ, fol- lowing the side Dirac surface states . In the presence of a lattice dislocation, the cutting plane [i.e., orange region in Fig. 1 (c)] features a finite Burgers vector b, while the purple region has a zero Burgers vector because of the perfect lattice matching. Assuming the dislocation at y = 0, we have the mass term ÔøΩ t0 y < 0, t0eiœÄb¬∑ŒΩ y > 0. (2) Crucially, when b ¬∑ ŒΩ = 1 mod 2, (3) we have t(y) = t0sgn(y). Namely, when Eq. (3) is ful- filled, the chiral Majorana pair at the SC/magnetism do- main experiences an additional mass domain due to the dislocation-induced lattice mismatch. This exactly re- sembles a 1D Jackiw-Rebbi problem and further results in a 0D MZM localized around the defect core, as shown in in Fig. 1 (e), completing the final part of our nested do- main wall construction for defect MBSs. Similar nested domains will simultaneously show up for the dislocation core at the bottom surface, as well as the other two cor- ners of the cutting plane. This is how both Eq. (1) and Eq. (3) together serves as a sufficient topological condi- tion for the emergence of defect MBSs. 4 B. Boundary Conditions & Majorana Inflation Geometrically, a dislocation-induced cutting plane Pc can terminate at either a crystal surface or another dislo- cation, leading to two seemingly different yet equivalent boundary conditions. For example, we can start from a dislocation dipole and move one dislocation towards the crystal side surface. This expands Pc until the disloca- tion hits the side surface and further merges with it. This process is reversible and thus transforms the aforemen- tioned boundary conditions from one to another. In Fig. 2 (a), we schematically show the distributions of Majorana modes for the dislocation-dipole geometry. Each of the four dislocation cores will bind one MZM denoted by the quasiparticle operators Œ≥i = Œ≥‚ÄÝ i with i ‚àà {1, 2, 3, 4}. In the cylindrical geometry shown in Fig. 2 (a), the chiral Majorana hinge modes always fea- ture a finite-size gap that is inversely proportional to the cylinder radius , as shown in Fig. 2 (b). This gap is a manifestation of the anti-periodic boundary condition of 1D Majorana modes and can be removed by updating the boundary condition to a periodic one with a œÄ-flux inser- tion. Thus, despite their chiral Majorana dispersions, the hinges do not carry any strictly zero-energy mode when they enclose a dislocation dipole. Because of this finite-size hinge gap, when the defect MZM merges with the hinge Majorana modes as shown in Fig. 2 (c), its zero-energy nature remains. This is be- cause a zero mode can only be spoiled while interacting with another zero mode. Numerically, we find that the defect MZM eventually merges with the 1D chiral hinge mode, making the hinge to harbor a 1D zero-energy state at k = 0, as schematically shown in Fig. 2 (d). There- fore, the corner-localized 0D MZMs of ET2 can be in- flated to 1D zero modes by simply changing the termi- nations of the cutting plane Pc. Notably, this inflation process is reversible, and one can similarly ‚Äúcondense‚Äù a 1D zero mode into a 0D dMBS by recovering the dislo- cation dipole. C. Embedded Higher-Order Topology The fact that dMBSs are ‚Äúcorner‚Äù Majorana modes of the cutting plane motivates us to define a higher-order topology [53‚Äì57] for the dislocation-spanned subsystem. In particular, ‚Ä¢ an embedded nth-order topology (dubbed ETn) is defined by the presence of (d‚àín)-dimensional gap- less boundary of a d-dimensional subsystem, which is further embedded in a D-dimensional bulk sys- tem with D > d > n > 0. ETn is thus a higher-order generalization of ‚Äúembed- ded topology‚Äù proposed in Ref. . Our recipe for dMBSs features D = 3, d = 2 and n = 2, which thus corresponds to a class D ET2 phase by definition. E! k 1D chiral MZM (d) Œ≥! Œ≥" (c) E! k Finite size gap (b) Œ≥! Œ≥" (a) Œ≥# Œ≥$ Œ≥# Œ≥$ ‚ÄúInflation‚Äù of a Majorana mode from 0D to 1D. (a) shows a schematic of a dislocation dipole and their dMBSs. The surface Chern number enforces a pair of 1D chi- ral Majorana modes circulating around he top/bottom sur- face. The chiral Majorana modes yield a finite-size energy gap, as schematically shown in (b). When the cutting plane terminates at the sample boundary shown in (c), the defect MZMs Œ≥2,4 move to the hinges and merge with the chiral hinge modes, decorating each 1D chiral mode with a zero-energy state. Notably, the total number of zero-energy Majorana modes remains to be four while evolving from (a) to (c). III. MODEL In this section, we provide a minimal lattice model for FeTe1‚àíxSex to demonstrate the above ET2 recipe. Bulk superconductivity and surface ferromagnetism (FM) are also included in our model setup. By analyzing the com- petition of SC and FM for the Dirac surface states, we map out a surface topological phase diagram to discuss when Eq. (1) will be fulfilled. This can be directly trans- lated to a condition for ET2 to emerge in FeTe1‚àíxSex, which we verify through explicit screw dislocation simu- lations for our minimal model. A. Hamiltonian Our minimal Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) Hamilto- nian for FeTe1‚àíxSex is HBdG(k) = ÔøΩH0(k) ‚àí Œº ‚àÜ(k) ‚àÜ‚ÄÝ(k) ‚àíH‚àó 0(‚àík) + Œº ÔøΩ , (4) where the normal-state Hamiltonian H0 = v(sin kyŒì1 ‚àí sin kxŒì2 + sin kzŒì4) + m(k)Œì5. The Œì matrices are Œì1 = œÉx ‚äó sx, Œì2 = œÉx ‚äó sy, Œì3 = œÉx ‚äó sz, Œì4 = œÉy ‚äó s0, Œì5 = œÉz ‚äó s0, where s0,x,y,z and œÉ0,x,y,z are Pauli matrices for spin and orbital d.o.f., respectively. Here m(k) = 5 m0‚àím1(cos kx+cos ky)‚àím2 cos kz and Œº is the chemical potential. We choose v = 1, m0 = ‚àí4, m1 = ‚àí2, m2 = 1 to ensure a single topological band inversion at Z , leading to ŒΩ0 = 1 and ŒΩ = (0, 0, 1). This well matches the low-energy topological band ordering of FeTe1‚àíxSex. To introduce superconductivity, we adopt a spin-singlet extended s-wave pairing for our model, where the pairing ‚àÜ0 (‚àÜ1) is the on-site (nearest-neighbor) intra-orbital pairing strength. Finally, following the experimental observations of FeTe1‚àíxSex in Ref. , we introduce uniform sur- face ferromagnetism to both top and bottom (001) sur- faces in a finite-size slab geometry, with Nz layers stacked along ÀÜz direction. HFM = f(z)[g1œÉ0+g2œÉz]‚äó(s¬∑M) with f(z) = Œ¥z,1+Œ¥z,Nz for a lattice layer index z = 1, 2, ..., Nz. Here Œ¥z,i is the Kronecker delta function, M denotes the surface magnetization, and g1 ¬± g2 are the effective isotropic Land ÃÅe g-factor for the two orbitals involved in our model. We take g1 = 0.5 and g2 = 0.2 in our numer- ical simulations throughout this work. More discussions on the experimental aspects of FeTe1‚àíxSex and other candidate materials, can be found in Sec. V. B. Surface Topological Phase Diagram: Condition for dMBSs & Partial Fermi Surface The first step to realize dMBSs or class-D ET2 is to identify the concrete condition to achieve Eq. (1) for our system by studying the competition between magnetism and superconductivity on the (001) surfaces. Note that the (001) Dirac surface state is localized around ÃÑŒì, the center of the surface Brillouin zone (BZ). As a result, the surface state will develop an isotropic pairing gap from the self-proximity effect , irrespective of the s¬± nature of ‚àÜ(k). In fact, the s¬± pairing will only play a role for ET2 when the surface magnetism is absent (i.e., for sym- metry class DIII), which will be discussed in Sec. IV. For the purpose of FeTe1‚àíxSex and its class D ET2 physics, we can simplify the pairing term to an on-site s-wave type by setting ‚àÜ1 = 0. We further remark that the surface Dirac fermion has a continuous rotation symmetry around the z-axis in the low-energy limit. Therefore, the effect of a general FM configuration M = (Mx, My, Mz) is always equivalent to that of M‚Ä≤ = (0, M‚à•, Mz) up to a coordinate trans- formation, where M‚à• = ÔøΩ M 2x + M 2y . Without loss of generality, we thus consider M = (0, My, Mz), and the surface Hamiltonian reads, Hsurf =vF (kxœÑzsy ‚àí kyœÑ0sx) ‚àí ŒºœÑzs0 +‚àÜ0œÑysy + Œ£yœÑ0sy + Œ£zœÑzsz, (5) where s and œÑ represent spin and particle-hole degree of freedom, respectively. vF is the surface Fermi ve- locity. Up to the first-order perturbation approxima- tion, Œ£y ‚âà g1My and Œ£z ‚âà g1Mz are the Zeeman en- (a) (b) (c) (d) 1 0 1 Mz My 0 Œº Mz 1 1 0 0 2 ‚àíœÄ/2 0 œÄ/2 kx 0 ‚àí1 1 Energy 0 ‚àí1 1 Energy ‚àíœÄ/2 0 œÄ/2 kx ET2 Trivial PFS ET2 Trivial (My, Mz) and (Mz, Œº) are shown in (a) and (b). The darker the blue color is, the larger the surface energy gap is. The region colored in white has no energy gap, and could indicate the existence of either a surface topological phase transition or a partial Fermi surface (PFS). Note that ET2 and PFS can coexist. (c) shows the surface spectrum of a PFS along kx with (My, Mz) = (0.5, 0.05). An example of surface spectrum with coexisting ET2 and PFS is shown in (d) with (My, Mz) = (0.9, 0.05). ergies . Notably, condition of Eq. (1) is primarily concerned with the gap structures at ÃÑŒì. We thus find that E ÃÑŒì = ¬± ÔøΩ Œº2 + ‚àÜ2 0 ¬± ÔøΩ Œ£y 2 + Œ£z 2. If we add back Œ£x ‚âà g1Mx, then the surface gap closing condition is Œº2 + ‚àÜ2 0 = Œ£2 with Œ£ = (Œ£x, Œ£y, Œ£z). It is then easy to check that the ET2 condition of Eq. (1) now becomes ÔøΩ Œº2 + ‚àÜ2 0, (6) which coincides with the condition for the Dirac surface states to carry a BdG Chern number |C| = 1. This non- trivial C accounts for the chiral Majorana hinge modes in Fig. 1 (c), a crucial step to complete the nested do- main wall configuration for achieving ET2. According to Eq. (3), a pair of screw or edge dislocations featur- ing an odd bz will span a 2D cutting plane with class D ET2. Given the existence of such dislocations, Eq. (6) now serves as the ET2 condition for FeTe1‚àíxSex. On the other hand, a large in-plane M is capable of inducing partial Fermi surface (PFS) in a superconduct- ing TI . As shown in Fig. 3 (c) and (d), PFS occurs when some surface quasi-particle bands cross zero energy to form metal-like band patterns. While the for- mation of PFS is irrelevant to our target ET2 physics, however, it can coexist with ET2 and thus contributes an important part of our surface phase diagram. As 6 an intuitive example, we consider M = (0, My, 0) and find the dispersion of Hsurf at ky = 0 is EŒ±Œ≤(kx) = Œ±Œ£y+Œ≤ ÔøΩ (vF kx ‚àí Œ±Œº)2 + ‚àÜ2 0 with Œ±, Œ≤ = ¬±. For Œ±Œ≤ < 0, EŒ±Œ≤ has two zero-energy solutions at kx = k(¬±) Œ± , with k(¬±) Œ± = 1 vF (Œ±Œº ¬± ÔøΩ Œ£2y ‚àí ‚àÜ2 0). (7) Therefore, when |Œ£y| ‚â• |‚àÜ0|, E+‚àí = 0 and E‚àí+ = 0 lead to four kx solutions that form two sets of partial Fermi surfaces. Thanks to the rotation symmetry of Dirac sur- face Hamiltonian, we expect this PFS condition to be generalized to |Œ£‚à•| ‚â• |‚àÜ0| for Mz = 0, (8) where Œ£‚à• = g1M‚à•. Combining Eq. (6) with Eq. (8), we conclude that with |Mz| ‚â™ M‚à•, increasing M‚à• will always first drive the formation of PFS (M‚à• ‚âà |‚àÜ0|) before ET2 phase is achieved (M‚à• = ÔøΩ ‚àÜ2 0 + Œº2). The above analytical results are in excellent agreement with our numerical surface topological phase diagram in Fig. 3 (a). This My-Mz phase diagram is essentially an energy-gap mapping of surface BdG spectrum for Eq. (4) in a thick slab geometry along ÀÜz direction, where we take Œº = ‚àÜ0 = 0.2. The color in this logarithmic plot is a measure of the energy gap of the lowest BdG band, and in particular, regions colored in white feature a vanish- ing BdG gap, i.e., either a topological phase transition or a PFS phase. Clearly, our analytical condition of ET2 (black dashed line) in Eq. (6) matches perfectly with the numerical finding in Fig. 3 (a). In addition, Eq. (8) pre- dicts a critical M (c) y ‚à• /g1 = ‚àÜ0/g1 = 0.4, also agree- ing with numerically-mapped boundary of PFS phase at Mz = 0. As shown in Fig. 3 (a), PFS survives until Mz reaches a critical value of ‚àº 0.4, and it is generally ab- sent when Mz > M‚à•. Importantly, PFS coexists with ET2 most of the time in the phase diagram. So we ex- pect that in a large M‚à• system, observation of PFS will serve as a promising indicator for ET2 in the system. In Fig. 3 (b), we further study the effect of chemical potential Œº on the formation of ET2. For a small Œº, the topological phase boundary separating ET2 and trivial phase is well captured by the dashed guideline predicted by Eq. (6). Notably, the phase boundary undergoes a sudden turn at Œº ‚àº 0.7 and starts to deviate from the analytical results. This is because the bulk-band physics is getting more involved as Œº grows, and thus our effective surface theory is no longer expected to faithfully describe the phase boundary of ET2. C. Numerical Simulation of dMBSs To confirm the ET2 phase, we consider to place our minimal model for FeTe1‚àíxSex on a 28 √ó 28 √ó 28 lattice. Periodic boundary conditions are considered for both x and y directions of the lattice cube to eliminate possible n Energy (a) t0eiœÄB‚ãÖŒΩ t0 ŒîSC > 0 t = 0 ŒîSC < 0 t = t(x) (b) (c) (d) x y z Time-reversal-invariant ET2 phase driven by an extended s-wave pairing with (‚àÜ0, ‚àÜ1) = (‚àí0.85, 0.5). (a) and (b) illustrate a nested domain wall construction similar to that in Fig. 1. Two pairs of helical Majorana modes now show up, the gluing of which leads to a Kramers pair of Majorana bound states at each dislocation core. (c) shows the energy spectrum of a 36 √ó 36 √ó 20 lattice with a dislocation dipole that supports eight Majorana zero modes. By plotting the spatial wavefunction distribution of these Majorana modes in (d), we numerically confirm that each dislocation core binds one Majorana Kramers pair. unwanted hinge modes in our simulations. Out-of-plane FM are considered for both the top and bottom layers of the lattice cube, following HFM. We further decorate our lattice system with a pair of screw dislocations with a Burgers vector b = (0, 0, 1). The dislocation dipole spans a 2D cutting plane Pc that is parallel to the y-z plane. In principle, one can consider a pair of edge dislocations instead, as along as their Burgers vectors satisfy bz ‚â° 1 mod 2. (9) As the FM is gradually turned on, the (001) surface gaps close and reopen in our cubic geometry following Fig. 3 (a), after which four zero-energy modes show up in the energy spectrum. In Fig. 1 (f), we visualize the spatial distribution of the zero-mode wavefunctions in the cubic geometry and find each of the four surface dis- location cores is trapping one of the zero modes. These dislocation-bound Majorana zero modes are exactly the defining boundary signature of ET2 in our system. IV. s¬±-WAVE PAIRING & CLASS DIII ET2 For tFeSC candidates such as FeTe1‚àíxSex and LiFeAs, the bulk s¬± pairing as described by ‚àÜ(k) is supported by experimental observations [64‚Äì66]. In particular, ‚àÜ1 Ã∏= 0 is crucial for enabling a relative œÄ-phase difference for 7 the local superconductivity orders of the Œì and M pock- ets. As we have discussed, in the above ET2 recipe, it is the competition between SC and FM, rather than the explicit SC pairing type, that is crucial for enabling the dislocation Majorana bound states. In this section, we show that s¬± pairing is indeed important for achieving a new class of time-reversal-invariant ET2 in symmetry class DIII, but only when the surface FM is absent. Our new recipe for class DIII ET2 is motivated by the deep connection between hinge Majorana modes and ET2, as revealed in the nested domain wall picture. Even in the absence of surface FM, a bulk s¬± pairing itself is capable of inducing a pairing mass domain for Dirac fermions living on the top (bottom) and side surfaces. As a result, the inter-surface hinge will harbor a pair of 1D helical Majorana modes that respect time-reversal sym- metry . As shown in Fig. 4, we can now follow a ‚Äúcut and glue‚Äù procedure to reveal the dislocation physics. Similar to the steps we carried out in Sec. II, cutting the crystal now yields two pairs of helical Majorana modes trapped to the top hinges of the two smaller crystals [as shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b)], as well as another two pairs bound to the bottom hinges. When gluing the crystal back together, a dislocation will introduce a œÄ-phase do- main to the inter-hinge binding term following Eq. (2), which will now trap a Kramers pair of Majorana zero modes around each of the surface dislocation core. We now provide a lattice simulation to verify the ex- istence of class DIII ET2 with our minimal model of FeTe1‚àíxSex in Eq. 4. We adopt the same model param- eters of Fig. 1 (f), with no surface FM assumed and an additional update of ‚àÜ0 = ‚àí0.85 and ‚àÜ1 = 0.5 to empha- size the effect of s¬± pairing. Note that the s¬± condition for tFeSCs with ‚àÜ(Œì)‚àÜ(M) < 0 is generally achieved when |‚àÜ0| < 2|‚àÜ1|. The energy spectrum for the system is calculated for a 36√ó36√ó20 lattice geometry, with a pair of screw dislocations placed in the y-z plane. As shown in Fig. 4 (c), eight Majorana modes (orange circles) show up in the energy spectrum that are well separated from other higher-energy states. The small energy splitting for the Majorana modes is due to the finite-size effect of the cubic geometry. By plotting the Majorana wavefunctions in the real space, we find in Fig. 4 (d) that each surface dislocation core now harbors a pair of Majorana modes, which unambiguously demonstrates the existence of class DIII ET2 trapped by the lattice dislocations. V. MATERIAL CANDIDATES In this section, we will discuss material candidates that can harbor ET2 physics in both class D and class DIII. We will focus on the tFeSCs, especially FeTe1‚àíxSex and LiFeAs, and further discuss their experimental relevance. However, ET2 is not a privilege of tFeSCs and can in principle exist in other superconducting systems as well. We will discuss Œ≤-PdBi2 as such an example. A. FeTe1‚àíxSex As highlighted in Sec. II and Sec. III, FeTe1‚àíxSex naturally combines all necessary ingredients of our class D ET2 recipe and manifests itself as perhaps the most promising platform for dMBSs. Thanks to the re- cent extensive experimental studies on both the normal- state topology and high-temperature superconductivity of FeTe1‚àíxSex [29‚Äì31], we are capable of discussing its ET2 possibility in a quantitative manner. Evidence of surface magnetism in FeTe1‚àíxSex has been experimentally established by a variety of measurement approaches. For example, an angle-resolved photoemis- sion spectroscopy (ARPES) study in Ref. reveals a direct surface gap of ‚àº 8 meV exactly at the surface Dirac point, in additional to the surface SC gap at the Fermi level. The spoiling of the Kramers degeneracy of Dirac surface state happens even above the superconducting transition temperature Tc, directly implying the break- ing of time-reversal symmetry. Even though other more complex scenarios such as time-reversal-broken supercon- ductivity is in principle possible , a most straight- forward interpretation of this magnetic gap would be the development of out-of-plane FM order on the surface. Similar evidence of surface FM has also been detected by the nanoscale quantum sensing of magnetic flux by nitro- gen vacancy (NV) centers , where the magnetization is reported to feature an in-plane component as well. Earlier experimental studies further reveals a sur- face superconducting order of ‚àÜ0 ‚àº 2 meV and a chemi- cal potential of Œº ‚àº 4.4 meV, in addition to Œ£z ‚àº 4 meV. Considering the condition in Eq. (6), ET2 phase can be achieved with either (i) a slight electron doping to re- duce Œº, or (ii) an enhancement of surface FM. Notably, engineering surface FM could be more experimentally ac- cessible. For example, neutron scattering measurements have revealed that a single interstitial Fe impurity can induce magnetic Friedel-like oscillation involving > 50 neighboring Fe sites . As a result, an interstitial Fe impurity on the surface is capable of generating a local magnetic patch with Œ£z ‚àº 10 meV , which is large enough to enable ET2. Although interstitial Fe impuri- ties could naturally exist during sample growth, they can also be deposited to the sample surface as adatoms . This provides us a highly controlled approach to enhance surface FM of general tFeSCs. Remarkably, for FeTe1‚àíxSex films epitaxially grown with pulsed laser deposition (PLD), formation of screw dislocations can be feasibly controlled by simply tun- ing the deposition rate . In particular, samples grown at a low deposition rate generally feature spiral- like surface morphology that encodes a screw dislocation with a Burgers vector of b = (0, 0, 1). This thus con- tributes the last key ingredient for materializing dMBSs in FeTe1‚àíxSex at zero magnetic field. 8 Probe Mag. Type Orientation Surf. Gap ARPES FM !z ~8 meV NV Center FM !x-!z N/A in FeTe1‚àíxSex with ARPES and NV center . Materials SCing Tc Z2 Index Bound State FeTe0.55Se0.45 14.5 K (1; 0,0,1) MZM LiFeAs 17 K (1; 0,0,1) MKP (Li, Fe)OHFeSe 41 K (1; 0,0,0) N/A Œ≤-PdBi2 5.3 K (1; 0,0,1) MZM with dislocation Majorana zero modes (MZMs) or Majorana Kramers pairs (MKPs) can realize an ET2 of class D or DIII. (Li,Fe)OHFeSe is not expected to carry any ET2 physics. B. Other Fe-based Superconductors Besides FeTe1‚àíxSex, evidences of Dirac surface states and vortex Majorana modes have also been found in other tFeSCs such as LiFeAs [26‚Äì28] and (Li,Fe)OHFeSe . We first note that the topological band physics in (Li,Fe)OHFeSe is mainly attributed to the band inversion at Œì, thus leaving the system with zero weak indices. We therefore do not expect (Li,Fe)OHFeSe to carry ET2 physics proposed in this work. A simi- lar conclusion could be reached for CaKFe4As4, whose normal-state band inversion also happens at Œì due to a band folding effect . The band structure of LiFeAs resembles that of FeTe1‚àíxSex and features a weak-index vector ŒΩ = (0, 0, 1). While we are not aware of any surface mag- netism for LiFeAs, evidence of s¬± pairing has been re- ported in earlier ARPES measurements . This would make LiFeAs a good platform to host class DIII ET2 and the associated defect Majorana Kramers pairs. C. Œ≤-PdBi2, Bismuth, and Beyond Just like FeTe1‚àíxSex, Œ≤-PdBi2 features both a sin- gle band inversion at Z and intrinsic SC with a transi- tion temperature of Tc = 5.3 K. By evaporating Cr atoms on Bi-terminated surface of Œ≤-PdBi2, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) technique can organize Cr atoms into a magnetic lattice that competes with SC on the sur- face . In particular, both FM and anti-FM can be achieved by simply adjusting the lattice constant of the Cr adatoms. Therefore, we expect our ET2 results on FeTe1‚àíxSex to be directly applicable to Œ≤-PdBi2 as well. ET2 can also be achieved in an extrinsic manner by assembling all the necessary elements together in a het- erostructure. For example, candidates of weak topo- logical insulators carrying Z2 indices (ŒΩ0; ŒΩ1, ŒΩ2, ŒΩ3) = (0; 0, 0, 1) have been experimentally established in a plethora of Bi-related materials, including BiTe , Bi2TeI , Bi4I4 , and ZrTe5 etc. While these candidates are non-superconducting, one can design a ABC ‚Äútrilayer‚Äù structure by growing a thin film of the above weak TIs on some superconducting substrates and further deposit another ferromagnetic layer on top. When a lattice screw dislocation with b = (0, 0, 1) oc- curs, the dMBSs should appear when Eq. (1) is satisfied. We further note that a similar structure has been suc- cessfully fabricated for Bi(111) grown on a Nb(110) sub- strate, of which a ferromagnetic Fe cluster is placed on top . Notably, the topological nature of Bi is dis- putable because of the tiny energy gap at L point, and Bi is believed to be either a higher-order topological in- sulator with trivial Z2 indices, or a strong topological insulator with (ŒΩ0, ŒΩ1, ŒΩ2, ŒΩ3) = (1; 1, 1, 1). Interestingly, the latter scenario is recently supported by the observa- tion of helical electron modes bound to a screw dislocation via an STM study . These experimental progresses have together established Bi as another promising plat- form for dMBSs. VI. EXPERIMENTAL DETECTION Signatures of ET2 for above material candidates can be feasibly revealed by mapping out the local density of states (LDOS) around lattice dislocations in experi- ments with the state-of-the-art STM technique. In this section, we numerically simulate the LDOS signals of dislocation-trapped Majorana modes for our minimal Hamiltonian in Eq. 4 using the iterative Green function method . The geometry we considered involves an in-plane 20 √ó 40 lattice with a pair of screw disloca- tions embedded in the y-z place, sitting symmetrically around the z-axis at (x, y) = (10, 20). The spatial dis- tance of the dislocations is denoted as Œ¥rd. After suffi- cient iteration steps, the LDOS on the top (001) surface is D(r, E) = ‚àí 1 œÄIm[Gsurf(r, E)], where Gsurf(r, E) is the surface Green function. This simulated LDOS signal can be directly compared with ultra-low-temperature STM data in future experiments. When Œ¥rd is much greater than the Majorana local- ization length lM ‚àº 3, the hybridization between neigh- boring defect Majorana modes is negligible, as shown in Fig. 5 (a). We then expect each dislocation to carry a sharp LDOS peak at the zero bias, as numerically con- firmed in Fig. 5 (b). Moving away from the dislocation core, the peak intensity gradually drops to zero without any further splitting, implying the existence of a single zero-energy mode. Meanwhile, we carry out a similar simulation with Œ¥rd ‚àº O(lM), where the dMBSs hybridize 9 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Energy (b) LDOS [a.u.] (c) (d) 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 Energy LDOS [a.u.] x y (a) x y away, with each dislocation core trapping a well-defined zero mode. The inset is a zoom-in plot around the dislocation core, which clearly shows the spatial anisotropy of the Majorana wavefunction. By doing a line cut across the dislocation following the green reference line, energy-dependent LDOS plots at each site is shown in (b), which shows a sharp zero-energy LDOS peak. The two circles on the horizontal axis indicate the position of the surface magnetic gap. When the two dislocations are brought together in (c), the zero-energy LDOS peak splits due to Majorana hybridizations, as shown in (d). strongly [Fig. 5 (c)]. We similarly check the LDOS data near the bottom dislocation core and find the absence of any zero-bias peak in Fig. 5 (d). Instead, a double- peak structure emerges, indicating the annihilation of the dMBSs. As for FeTe1‚àíxSex, we expect lM to be of the or- der of the superconducting coherence length ŒæSC ‚àº 5 nm, similar to that of vortex Majorana modes . This sets a crucial length scale for Œ¥rd, that only when Œ¥rd ‚â´ ŒæSC will a clear experimental Majorana signal be expected. We now remark on several phenomenological distinc- tions between defect and vortex Majorana modes. First, a quantum vortex always traps finite-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) states inside the SC gap, which can introduce Majorana-like signals near the zero energy and further complicates interpretations of experi- mental data. As for ET2, however, we do expect the dis- location core to carry fewer or even no subgap states be- sides the dMBS, as shown in our numerical simulations. This ‚Äúcleanliness‚Äù of Majorana signal of ET2 can signif- icantly enhance the unambiguity of future experiments on relevant topics. In addition, while a vortex Majo- rana wavefunction is usually circular symmetric , our dMBS wavefunction is found to be anisotropic, since the screw dislocations explicitly break in-plane mirror sym- metries of the lattice. This feature is clearly revealed in the surface LDOS plot of Fig. 5 (a), which should be accessible via STM measurements. Because of the known inhomogeneity of FeTe1‚àíxSex samples, it is likely that local magnetic and non-magnetic patches, instead of a uniform FM order, will appear on a real-world sample surface . Nonetheless, our pre- diction of dMBSs still holds once the dislocation core overlaps with the FM patch, which can be feasibly as- sembled by moving Fe adatoms. We further notice that applying a ÀÜz-directional magnetic field can facilitates the creation of ET2 phase by enhancing the magnetic gap, at the price of introducing additional SC vortex physics. While our dMBS is immune to an applied magnetic field, Ref. predicts that the field-induced SC vortices liv- ing inside the magnetic patch do not harbor any vortex Majorana modes, and are thus dubbed ‚Äúempty vortices‚Äù. With such an external magnetic field, we thus expect the dMBS to contribute the only zero-bias peak signal to a STM scanning inside a local FM patch, and it will be further surrounded by a set of ‚Äúsatellite‚Äù empty vortices with no Majorana signal. This unique phenomenon, if being observed, will serve as a rather compelling experi- mental evidence for ET2. VII. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS We have proposed a new magnetic-field-free mecha- nism to trap non-Abelian Majorana zero modes with lat- tice dislocations, and further establish topological iron- based superconductors such as FeTe1‚àíxSex as an ideal venue to realize dMBSs. This exotic defect Majorana physics manifests as an exemplar of an embedded higher- order topology, paving the way for exploring emergent subsystem topological physics. Notably, our recipe for dMBS is beyond tFeSCs and it further provides theoreti- cal guidance to experimentally design and achieve dMBSs in other weak-index-carrying material systems such as Œ≤- PdBi2. Given the remarkable capabilities of manipulat- ing both the screw dislocations and surface magnetism in FeTe1‚àíxSex that have been reported in the literature, we 10 believe that our proposal of dislocation Majorana physics will soon be experimentally realizable. We further note that the ET2 uncovered in this work is ‚Äúextrinsic‚Äù, in the sense that the dMBS cannot be char- acterized by a 2D bulk topological invariant of the sub- system. An interesting future direction is to explore the possibility of crystalline-symmetry-protected ‚Äúintrinsic‚Äù ET2. While a screw dislocation necessarily breaks the majority types of lattice symmetries, edge dislocations or even partial dislocations are probably better geometric subsystems to consider for this purpose . Meanwhile, a generalization of ET2 to nonsuperconducting systems should also be straightforward, and we do expect an ET2 phase in class AIII or BDI to carry fractionally-charged zero modes that are stabilized by chiral symmetry. Finally, motivated by the recent theoretical proposal of boundary-obstructed topological phases , we con- jecture the existence of defect-obstructed topological phase (DOTP) as a new class of topological matter. Namely, two phases that are both bulk and boundary topologi- cal equivalent can be defect obstructed, if the subsystem energy gap of a lattice or order-parameter defect must close while connecting the two phases. For example, the vortex topological phase transition of a doped s-wave su- perconducting TI described in Ref. could separate two phases that are defect (i.e., vortex) obstructed. Both phases, living before and after the vortex transition, are bulk topologically trivial. However, a topological vortex phase does feature a different 1D BdG Wannier orbital configuration from that of a trivial phase, a feature that is revealed only when a 1D vortex line is inserted in the bulk system. Apparently, the DOTP is deeply connected to the embedded (higher-order) topological physics. We believe that a description of DOTP based on the topolog- ical quantum chemistry language is necessary to advance our understanding of subsystem topologies and will pos- sibly lead us to a novel simple mathematical diagnostic approach for both ET and ET2. We will leave this inter- esting direction to future works. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank X. Liu, C.-Z. Chen, X.-Q. Sun, and J. Yu for helpful discussions. We are particularly indebted to L.-Y. Kong and X. Wu for the inspiring discussions on the candidate materials. This work is supported by a start-up funding at the University of Tennessee. R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, Phys. Rev. D 13, 3398 (1976). W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer, and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 1698 (1979). Y. Ran, Y. Zhang, and A. Vishwanath, Nature Physics G. Rosenberg, H.-M. Guo, and M. Franz, Phys. Rev. B V. JuriÀáci ÃÅc, A. Mesaros, R.-J. Slager, and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 106403 (2012). R.-J. Slager, A. Mesaros, V. JuriÀáci ÃÅc, and J. Zaanen, Phys. Rev. B 90, 241403 (2014). B. Roy and V. JuriÀáci ÃÅc, Phys. Rev. Research 3, 033107 N. Read and D. Green, Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267 (2000). A. Y. Kitaev, Physics-Uspekhi 44, 131 (2001). D. A. Ivanov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 268 (2001). L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 R. M. Lutchyn, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. J. D. Sau, R. M. Lutchyn, S. Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010). P. Hosur, P. Ghaemi, R. S. K. Mong, and A. Vishwanath, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 097001 (2011). D. Asahi and N. Nagaosa, Phys. Rev. B 86, 100504 J. C. Y. Teo and T. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, T. L. Hughes, H. Yao, and X.-L. Qi, Phys. Rev. B 90, K.-I. Imura and Y. Takane, Phys. Rev. B 84, 245415 R.-X. Zhang and C.-X. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 156802 H. Hamasaki, Y. Tokumoto, and K. Edagawa, Applied Physics Letters 110, 092105 (2017). A. K. Nayak, J. Reiner, R. Queiroz, H. Fu, C. Shekhar, B. Yan, C. Felser, N. Avraham, and H. Beidenkopf, Sci- ence advances 5, eaax6996 (2019). D. Wang, L. Kong, P. Fan, H. Chen, S. Zhu, W. Liu, L. Cao, Y. Sun, S. Du, J. Schneeloch, et al., Science 362, L. Kong, S. Zhu, M. Papaj, H. Chen, L. Cao, H. Isobe, Y. Xing, W. Liu, D. Wang, P. Fan, et al., Nature Physics S. Zhu, L. Kong, L. Cao, H. Chen, M. Papaj, S. Du, Y. Xing, W. Liu, D. Wang, C. Shen, et al., Science 367, Q. Liu, C. Chen, T. Zhang, R. Peng, Y.-J. Yan, C.-H.- P. Wen, X. Lou, Y.-L. Huang, J.-P. Tian, X.-L. Dong, G.-W. Wang, W.-C. Bao, Q.-H. Wang, Z.-P. Yin, Z.-X. Zhao, and D.-L. Feng, Phys. Rev. X 8, 041056 (2018). L. Cao, W. Liu, G. Li, G. Dai, Q. Zheng, Y. Wang, K. Jiang, S. Zhu, L. Huang, L. Kong, F. Yang, X. Wang, W. Zhou, X. Lin, J. Hu, C. Jin, H. Ding, and H.-J. Gao, Nature Communications 12 (2021). W. Liu, Q. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Zhong, F. Yang, L. Kong, L. Cao, G. Li, K. Okazaki, T. Kondo, et al., arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.03786 (2021). M. Li, G. Li, L. Cao, X. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Jin, C.-K. Chiu, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Wang, and H.-J. Gao, Nature Z. Wang, P. Zhang, G. Xu, L. K. Zeng, H. Miao, X. Xu, T. Qian, H. Weng, P. Richard, A. V. Fedorov, H. Ding, 11 X. Dai, and Z. Fang, Phys. Rev. B 92, 115119 (2015). P. Zhang, K. Yaji, T. Hashimoto, Y. Ota, T. Kondo, K. Okazaki, Z. Wang, J. Wen, G. D. Gu, H. Ding, and S. Shin, Science 360, 182 (2018). P. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, K. Yaji, Y. Ishida, Y. Ko- hama, G. Dai, Y. Sun, C. Bareille, K. Kuroda, T. Kondo, K. Okazaki, K. Kindo, X. Wang, C. Jin, J. Hu, R. Thomale, K. Sumida, S. Wu, K. Miyamoto, T. Okuda, H. Ding, G. D. Gu, T. Tamegai, T. Kawakami, M. Sato, and S. Shin, Nature Physics 15, 41 (2018). C. Chen, K. Jiang, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, and J. Wang, Nature Physics 16, 536 (2020). J.-X. Yin, Z. Wu, J. Wang, Z. Ye, J. Gong, X. Hou, L. Shan, A. Li, X. Liang, X. Wu, et al., Nature Physics S. S. Zhang, J.-X. Yin, G. Dai, L. Zhao, T.-R. Chang, N. Shumiya, K. Jiang, H. Zheng, G. Bian, D. Multer, M. Litskevich, G. Chang, I. Belopolski, T. A. Cochran, X. Wu, D. Wu, J. Luo, G. Chen, H. Lin, F.-C. Chou, X. Wang, C. Jin, R. Sankar, Z. Wang, and M. Z. Hasan, Phys. Rev. B 101, 100507 (2020). L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, G. Xu, B. Lian, P. Tang, X.-L. Qi, and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 047001 (2016). L.-H. Hu, X. Wu, C.-X. Liu, and R.-X. Zhang, arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11357 (2021). K. Jiang, X. Dai, and Z. Wang, Phys. Rev. X 9, 011033 Y. Zhang, K. Jiang, F. Zhang, J. Wang, and Z. Wang, Phys. Rev. X 11, 011041 (2021). X. Wu, J.-X. Yin, C.-X. Liu, and J. Hu, arXiv preprint R. Song, P. Zhang, and N. Hao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, C.-K. Chiu and Z. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 237001 A. Ghazaryan, A. Kirmani, R. M. Fernandes, and P. Ghaemi, arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.12425 (2022). A. Gerbi, R. Buzio, E. Bellingeri, S. Kawale, D. Marr`e, A. S. Siri, A. Palenzona, and C. Ferdeghini, Supercon- ductor Science and Technology 25, 012001 (2011). N. Zaki, G. Gu, A. Tsvelik, C. Wu, and P. D. Johnson, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 N. J. McLaughlin, H. Wang, M. Huang, E. Lee-Wong, L. Hu, H. Lu, G. Q. Yan, G. Gu, C. Wu, Y.-Z. You, and C. R. Du, Nano Letters 21, 7277 (2021). Y. Li, N. Zaki, V. O. Garlea, A. T. Savici, D. Fobes, Z. Xu, F. Camino, C. Petrovic, G. Gu, P. D. Johnson, J. M. Tranquada, and I. A. Zaliznyak, Nature Materials C. Farhang, N. Zaki, J. Wang, G. Gu, P. D. Johnson, and J. Xia, arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.06905 (2022). M. Sakano, K. Okawa, M. Kanou, H. Sanjo, T. Okuda, T. Sasagawa, and K. Ishizaka, Nature Communications L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 216403 A. R. Akhmerov, J. Nilsson, and C. W. J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 216404 (2009). J. Alicea, Reports on progress in physics 75, 076501 W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, and T. L. Hughes, Science 357, 61 (2017). W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, and T. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev. B 96, 245115 (2017). F. Schindler, A. M. Cook, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, S. S. Parkin, B. A. Bernevig, and T. Neupert, Science advances 4, eaat0346 (2018). F. Schindler, Z. Wang, M. G. Vergniory, A. M. Cook, A. Murani, S. Sengupta, A. Y. Kasumov, R. Deblock, S. Jeon, I. Drozdov, et al., Nature physics 14, 918 (2018). R.-X. Zhang, F. Wu, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. Lett. T. I. Tuegel, V. Chua, and T. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev. B S. Velury and T. L. Hughes, Phys. Rev. B 105, 184105 C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, H. Zhang, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B 82, 045122 (2010). R.-X. Zhang, W. S. Cole, and S. Das Sarma, Phys. Rev. N. F. Q. Yuan and L. Fu, Phys. Rev. B 97, 115139 (2018). Z. Zhu, M. Papaj, X.-A. Nie, H.-K. Xu, Y.-S. Gu, X. Yang, D. Guan, S. Wang, Y. Li, C. Liu, J. Luo, Z.-A. Xu, H. Zheng, L. Fu, and J.-F. Jia, Science 374, 1381 T. Hanaguri, S. Niitaka, K. Kuroki, and H. Takagi, Sci- ence 328, 474 (2010). P. J. Hirschfeld, M. M. Korshunov, and I. I. Mazin, Re- ports on Progress in Physics 74, 124508 (2011). A. Chubukov, Annual Review of Condensed Matter Physics 3, 57 (2012). L.-H. Hu, P. D. Johnson, and C. Wu, Phys. Rev. Research J. L. Lado and M. Sigrist, Phys. Rev. Research 1, 033107 V. Thampy, J. Kang, J. A. Rodriguez-Rivera, W. Bao, A. T. Savici, J. Hu, T. J. Liu, B. Qian, D. Fobes, Z. Q. Mao, C. B. Fu, W. C. Chen, Q. Ye, R. W. Erwin, T. R. Gentile, Z. Tesanovic, and C. Broholm, Phys. Rev. Lett. X. Wu, S. B. Chung, C. Liu, and E.-A. Kim, Phys. Rev. Research 3, 013066 (2021). P. Fan, F. Yang, G. Qian, H. Chen, Y.-Y. Zhang, G. Li, Z. Huang, Y. Xing, L. Kong, W. Liu, et al., Nature com- munications 12, 1 (2021). W. Liu, L. Cao, S. Zhu, L. Kong, G. Wang, M. Papaj, P. Zhang, Y.-B. Liu, H. Chen, G. Li, et al., Nature com- munications 11, 1 (2020). K. Umezawa, Y. Li, H. Miao, K. Nakayama, Z.-H. Liu, P. Richard, T. Sato, J. B. He, D.-M. Wang, G. F. Chen, H. Ding, T. Takahashi, and S.-C. Wang, Phys. Rev. Lett. D.-J. Choi, C. G. Fern ÃÅandez, E. Herrera, C. Rubio-Verd ÃÅu, M. M. Ugeda, I. Guillam ÃÅon, H. Suderow, J. I. Pascual, and N. Lorente, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 167001 (2018). M. Eschbach, M. Lanius, C. Niu, E. MÔøΩly ÃÅnczak, P. GospodariÀác, J. Kellner, P. Sch Ãàuffelgen, M. Gehlmann, S. D Ãàoring, E. Neumann, et al., Nature communications 8, 1 (2017). N. Avraham, A. K. Nayak, A. Steinbok, A. Norris, H. Fu, Y. Sun, Y. Qi, L. Pan, A. Isaeva, A. Zeugner, C. Felser, B. Yan, and H. Beidenkopf, Nature Materials 19, 610 R. Noguchi, T. Takahashi, K. Kuroda, M. Ochi, T. Shira- sawa, M. Sakano, C. Bareille, M. Nakayama, M. Watson, 12 K. Yaji, et al., Nature 566, 518 (2019). P. Zhang, R. Noguchi, K. Kuroda, C. Lin, K. Kawaguchi, K. Yaji, A. Harasawa, M. Lippmaa, S. Nie, H. Weng, et al., Nature communications 12, 1 (2021). B. J Ãàack, Y. Xie, J. Li, S. Jeon, B. A. Bernevig, and A. Yazdani, Science 364, 1255 (2019). M. L. Sancho, J. L. Sancho, J. L. Sancho, and J. Rubio, Journal of Physics F: Metal Physics 15, 851 (1985). A. Burleson, L.-H. Hu, and R.-X. Zhang, to appear soon. E. Khalaf, W. A. Benalcazar, T. L. Hughes, and R. Queiroz, Physical Review Research 3, 013239 (2021). X. Wu, W. A. Benalcazar, Y. Li, R. Thomale, C.-X. Liu, and J. Hu, Physical Review X 10, 041014 (2020).