Coexistence of in-plane and out-of-plane exchange Bias in correlated kagome antiferromagnet Mn3- xCrxSn Xiaoyan Yang1, Yi Qiu2, Jie Su2, Yalei Huang1, Jincang Zhang1, 3, †, Xiao Liang4, ‡, Guixin Cao1, * 1 Materials Genome Institute, Shanghai University, 200444 Shanghai, China 2College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 3Zhejiang Laboratory, Hangzhou 311100, China 4Information Materials and Device Applications Key Laboratory of Sichuan Provincil Universities, Chengdu University of Information Technology, 610225 Sichuan, China Abstract: The materials exhibiting exchange bias (EB) have been extensively investigated mainly due to their great technological applications in magnetic sensors, but its underlying mechanism remains elusive. Here we report the novel coexistence of in-plane and out-of-plane EB in the Cr-doped Mn3Sn, a non-colinear antiferromagnet with a geometrically frustrated Kagome plane of Mn. Field-cooling experiments with the applied field parallel and perpendicular to the frustrated Kagome plane exhibits loop shifts and enhanced coercivities. Interestingly, a maximum EB field of 1090 Oe is observed along out-of-plane direction in the Mn2.58Cr0.42Sn sample, higher than that of in-plane value. Our results indicate that the exchange bias along perpendicular kagome plane is primarily induced by Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interactions due to the breaking of interfacial symmetry, while the EB along kagome plane is due to the exchange effects at interface of AFM and FM component originating from the net moment. These findings provide a new insight on EB in the kagome AFM materials, which are important and highly potential to the application of antiferromagnetic spintronics. Introduction The exchange bias effect usually results from the interfacial exchange coupling between antiferromagnetic (AFM) and ferromagnetic (FM) part, resulting in unidirectional anisotropy 1-3. The EB phenomenon is reflected in the magnetic hysteresis loop by a shift along the magnetic field axis 4, which arises after the sample is cooled through the Néel point in a magnetic field. Based on the traditional EB model assumed uncompensated spins 5, the AFM spins remains in the state they were frozen into during the process, * Corresponding author, G. Cao, Email: guixincao@shu.edu.cn ‡ Corresponding author, X. Liang, E-mail: liangxiao920@163.com † Corresponding author, J. Zhang, E-mail: jczhang@shu.edu.cn while the FM is rotated and are responsible for the spin memory. In a system with a compensated interface 3, the EB models based on domain state in dilated AFMs4 and symmetry properties 6 have been proposed. Despite the extensive theoretically study, understanding the full nature of EB effect remains a great challenge7, 8. Numerous experimental investigations on exchange biased FM/AFM bilayers and multilayers have been performed 9-15 to understand the mechanism behind and to develop its potential applications in spintronic devices. The magnetic anisotropy of AFM and the ratio of AFM and FM determine the exchange bias 16, 17: large AFM anisotropy benefits the shift of hysteresis loop, while the AFM and FM spins may rotate simultaneously for a small AFM anisotropy, inducing the coercivity only. In this Letter, we explore the Exchange bias and micromagnetic configurations in both parallelly and perpendicularly magnetized single crystals of Cr doped Mn3Sn. Undoped Mn3Sn is a hexagonal Weyl semimetal, in which noncolinear antiferromagnetic configuration is in the x-y plane with a stacked kagome lattice 18. The geometrical frustration leads to a 120° structure of Mn moments, whose symmetry allows a very small spin canting and thus producing spontaneous weak ferromagnetism (approximately 0.002 μB/Mn) tilted toward the easy axis x (21̅1̅0) 19. With such a vanishingly small anisotropy energy, the coupling of the weak magnetization to the magnetic field plays an essential role for the magnetic field control of the sublattice moments 20-22. Therefore, it provides a great condition for the generation and study of EB in the correlated AFM system. In fact, recent work have observed the EB phenomena in Mn3Sn 22 and similar AFM thin films 3, and alloys16. Here we show that Cr doping induces additional FM component to the in-plane direction and causes a symmetry broken in the out-of-plane direction. As a result, large EB effects occur in both in-plane and out-of-plane direction, which origin from the enhanced exchange coupling of AFM/FM interface and Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya (DM) interaction induced by the broken interface inversion symmetry, respectively. Our Mn3-xCrxSn series enable us to tune the HEB by changing the composition x, thereby outlining a route towards the design of organic spintronic devices. Experimental method Mn3-xCrxSn single crystals were grown by the Sn-flux growth method 23, 24. The crystals were characterized by energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX; HGST FlexSEM-1000) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). To obtain more detailed structural information, single crystal XRD data of Mn3-xCrxSn was collected at 300 K on a Rigaku XtaLAB Synergy diffractometer, with Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). Data reduction and empirical absorption correction were performed using the CrysAlisPro program. Magnetic property measurements were performed in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS). First-principles calculations based on the density functional theory (DFT) are performed by VASP5.4. Hexagonal Mn3Sn adopts a D019-type structure with space group P63/mmc at 300 K according to our single crystal XRD results (Fig.1S), consistent with previous report 20. With Cr content until x=0.42, no obvious structural transition occurs (Fig.1S(c) and (d)). According to the symmetry of hexagonal lattice, we mark it in three directions x [21̅1̅0], y [011̅0]) and z . In Mn3Sn, Sn lies in the center of the Mn hexagonal ring forming a Kagome lattice (Fig. 1S(a)). With increasing Cr until x-0.42, the lattice constants a and c decrease with no structural transition observed as displayed in Fig.1(c) and (d). Results and discussion We first present in Fig.1(a) and (b) the calculated magnetic structure for Mn3-xCrxSn (x=0, 0.125). In pure Mn3Sn, the in-plane Mn moments shows a 120° spin structure with a uniform negative vector chirality, so called inverse triangular antiferromagnetic structure. The magnetic moment per Mn atom is about 3.167 μB, and the in-plane spin direction is a little canted from 120° due to DM interactions, which leads to a weak net ferromagnetic moment of 0.002 μB/Mn, consistent with the previous reports20. The calculated magnetic moment of Cr atom is 3.04 μB, which is a little lower than Mn atoms, and the spin directions of Mn nearby the Cr atoms tilted both in in-plane and out-plane directions as shown in Fig.1(b). Comparing with the spin distributions in pure Mn3Sn (see Fig.1(a)), the in-plane spin directions of upper layer Mn (Mn2, Mn5) and lower layer Mn (Mn3, Mn6) are left-handed and right-handed rotated 2~3 degrees, respectively. However, the in-plane spin directions of Mn4 and Cr1 little rotated (~±0.3 degree). Furthermore, the spin direction of all atoms trend to tilted from in-plane to out-plane directions. Correspondingly, we show that the magnetic texture sensitively determines the vary of the band structure as shown in Fig.1(c) and (d). The pure Mn3Sn holds two pairs of Weyl points near the Fermi-level (-0.1~0.1eV), and one of them is overlaped due to band folding in supper cell. While in Mn2.875Cr0.125Sn, the nontrivial band features are disappeared, which means topological phase transition caused by spin structure changes. Moreover, we would expect striking exchange bias because of the DM interaction and magnetic exchange effect from the weak ferromagnetic moment and inverse triangular antiferromagnetic structure. To identify the effects of the Cr-doping induced variations in spin structure, we did the magnetic property measurements on high quality Mn3-xCrxSn single crystals (x = 0~0.42). Similar to previous observations 24, Susceptibility (χ) of Mn3Sn undergoes an inverse triangular AFM to spiral phase transition at T1 = 270 K, then exhibits a ferromagnetic-like transition at T2 = 200 K as shown in Fig.2(a). Upon further cooling, the zero- field cooling (ZFC) and field fooling (FC) χ curves shows a clear bifurcation, consistent with the spiral and glass magnetic states coexistence 25. Note that the magnetic structure at low temperature (low-T) sensitively depends on the synthesis method and element contents 24-28. With increasing Cr content, both T1 and T2 are obviously suppressed and shift to lower temperature for both B//x and B//z axis in x = 0.06 as shown in Fig.2S. When x = 0.16, the T1 transition is completely suppressed and T2 undergoes further decreasing to lower temperature T2 = 150 K for B//x and B//z when Cr content increases to x = 0.42 as displayed in Fig.2S (e) and (j). Therefore, our results here shows that the spiral structure transition T1 is completely suppressed by Cr content with x=0.16, comparable with the previous report that of x=0.15 29. Here, we argue that compared with pure Mn3Sn, spiral structure disappears at low temperature in the Cr-doped Mn3-xCrxSn and produces an inverse triangular spin structure. Meanwhile, the existence of a small irreversibility between ZFC and FC curves suggests that the low temperature phase is not perfectly AFM in nature. We identify the coexistence of AFM and FM phase at low-T region, which provides the exhibition of Cr-doping tuned EB in the system. To verify the possible EB effect, we have measured the M(H) under FC 1 T and -1 T respectively, for both B//x and B//z axis. As shown in Fig.2(c) and (d), we observed the shift of the hysteresis loop in negative (positive) field direction by about 1899 Oe and 2100 Oe when applied 1 T (-1 T) field for B//x and B//z axis, respectively. It can be noted that the produced value of HEB and coercive field (HC) is nearly the same for the FC 1 T and - 1 T directions for both B//x and B//z. Therefore, we conclude that the observed EB behavior is intrinsic for and HC = - (HL +HR) /2, where HL and HR are the left and right coercivity 30. Mn3Sn displays weak ferromagnetic behavior due to the magnetic frustration from the instability inverse triangular structure as we calculated. Through Cr-doping, the net moment originating from the inversed non- colinear spin structure varies to z axis (Table IS and IIS). By applying a magnetic field, we can manipulate the magnetization direction of Mn3Sn domains. Hence, to investigate in detail the EB effect with applied field parallel and perpendicular to the kagome plane, respectively, in the Cr-doped Mn3Sn system, we measured the field cooling process, a magnetic field of +1 T is applied at 300 K, and the samples are cooled to 2 K and the loops are then recorded. The +BFC loop shifts to a negative field direction, indicating the existence of EB in Mn3-xCrxSn. HEB and HC exhibit a monotonic increase upon increasing Cr content. Strikingly, additional Cr doping causes more than a tenfold increment in exchange bias field when compared with that in pure Mn3Sn along both x-y plane and z axis. However, the HEB for B//z is much larger than that of B//x and B//y, though the Hc along three axis’s are comparable with each other (Fig.4(b)). Notably, at 2 K, the Mn3Sn produces a HEB of 70 Oe in FC mode. While, with x= 0.42, the perpendicular exchange bias possesses a maximum value of 1070 Oe (Fig 4(a)). Moreover, the sudden increase of HEB occurs at x=0.16, after that, the increasing Cr content cause the change of easy axis from x-y plane to z axis along with strong uniaxial anisotropy in Mn3- xCrxSn as shown in Fig.4(a). To further investigate the physical origin of doping induced HEB enhancement, we calculated the magnetocrystalline anisotropy energy (MAE) in CrxMn3-xSn as shown in Fig.4 (c). Here, MAE is defined as the total energy difference of the spin aligns to 0 and direction in Mn3Sn unit cell. In pure Mn3Sn, MAE is calculated for -1.2 meV per unit cell, that indicates weak in-plane magnetic anisotropy of this material. With creasing Cr substitution content, MAE increases and changes to positive when substitution content x exceeding 0.125, which indicates the out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy. Our experiments results are consistent with the calculations [Fig. 3 (c)]. The anisotropy transformation may be due to the lattice strain ie. Jahn-Teller effect, which would significantly enhance the out-of-plane DMI. Meanwhile, by subtracting the AFM background from the hysteresis loop, we calculated the net magnetic moment of per Mn/Cr atom for B//x and B//z (Fig.4(d)). As expected, the net magnetic moment tends to increase with increasing Cr content. Moreover, its trend with increasing Cr content calculated from experimental results is consistent with that from the theoretical results as shown in Fig. 4 (d). As we know, traditionally, the unidirectional anisotropy and exchange bias can be qualitatively understood by assuming exchange interaction at the AFM-FM interface 1-3. In our present system, the unidirectional anisotropy and the magnetic environment for in-plane and out-of-plane are obviously different. Moreover, the EB anisotropy is clear. Therefore, the anisotropy evolution and relevant origin of EB exhibited need to be discussed separately. In-plane EB model. The EB of Mn3Sn thin film with field parallel to the kagome plane have been investigated based on the AFM-FM interface model 22. Through Cr-doping, Cr atom sits on the Mn site, which induce the in-plane geometric frustration and a little rotation of the in-plane spin directions of Mn4 and Cr1 31. Therefore, the AFM component in undoped part and the increasing WFM due to Cr-doping creates exchange coupling interface, hence holding a mechanism consistent with AFM-FM interface model in nature 32. The descripted in-plane model was displayed in Fig. 5(a). The phenomenological formula of the HEB can be expressed as HEB in = (SFSAFΣJij cos θij) (MFtF) ⁄ , where SF and SAF are the spins of the magnetic moments, and the angle between them (cos θij. Jij ) is the spin-spin interaction strength between SF and SAF. MF and tF are the magnetization and thickness of the FM domain, respectively 33. With increasing Cr doping, SF increases due to the magnetic frustration in the in-plane part. Meanwhile, the value of Jij increase also owing to the additional FM component. Therefore, the significant increased in- plane EB originates from the enhancement of the ferromagnetic spins and interaction strength. Out-of-plane EB model. With increasing Cr content, we have observed the enhanced MAE as shown in Fig.4, illustrating the significantly enhanced out-of-plane DMI. In addition, taking Mn2.875Cr0.125Sn as an example, the calculated magnetic moment of Cr atom is 3.04 μB, which is a little lower than Mn atoms, and the spin directions of Mn nearby the Cr atoms tilted both in in-plane and out-plane directions. Therefore, with the increasing Cr content, the out-plane magnetic moments are significantly increased, which indicates DMI increased near Cr doped area of the material, and this effect is damping away from the doping center, predicting 2D-Skyrmions in CrxMn3-xSn. All these indicates that the observed large perpendicular EB with applied field perpendicular to the kagome plane originates from the enhanced DMI. The DMI induced perpendicular EB was previously observed in the FM/AFM layer systems with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy 3, 34. Depending on the calculated spin structure and observed MAE, we give a sketched picture to explain the large out-of-plane EB as shown in Fig. 5(b). Hi dm is the DM field experienced by a Mn or Cr spin, originating from the interaction of atoms between neighboring kagome planes. The DM interactions across the interface induce an effective magnetic field acting on the triangular sublattice |Hcell dm|= |Σi=1 3 Hi dm|, which points normal to the interface. An exchange bias arises due to the DM interactions with the EB field can be expressed as HEB dm = (|Hcell dm| cos α)/(MFtF), where α is the angle of FM magnetization with respect to the effective DM field 3. On the one hand, the spin orbit scattering of the embedded Cr ions enhance the strength of the DM interaction 35. In present system, Cr-doping breaks the inversion symmetry of neighboring layers across the interface, causing a large increase of Hcell dm. Moreover, the increasing Cr content induces uniaxial anisotropy when x>0.16, causing the increase of α. We indicate that the contribution of these two parameters results in a large perpendicular EB. Comparing the two models, we indicate that the in-plane EB is based on an exchange coupling interaction across neighboring AFM/FM domains, while the out-of-plane EB achieves interlayer pinning effect via the DM-interaction. Notably, NN atoms in the same layer also generate nonnegligible DM-interaction, but do not contribute to the EB effect 3. Shuai Dong et al. reported that the EB will not occur if μ0HFC is perpendicular to DM field in the ideal case 6. Moreover, N. C. Koon used full micromagnetic calculations to illustrate that the interface exchange coupling is relatively strong when the FM/AFM axis are oriented perpendicularly 36, similar to the classical "spin-flop" state in bulk antiferromagnets 37, 38. This theory explains the strong vertical coupling behavior in our experiments. Moreover, the out-of-plane blocking temperature is much smaller than that of in-plane temperature, demonstrating that the contribution of the DM-interaction to EB is more likely to disappear with thermally disturbed in this system. It would be interesting to verify this origin in future study. We will now turn our focus to the details of the temperature and cooling field dependence of EB effect at three axes for Mn2.72Cr0.42Sn with the maxim EB effect. As shown in Fig. 5(c) and (d), with increasing temperature, the offset of loops decreases gradually and disappears completely above blocking temperature. Importantly, the in-plane (300 K) and out-of-plane blocking temperature (50 K) shows a significant difference, which further illustrates the different mechanism of the EB. The hysteresis loops in different direction after various field cooling are shown in Fig. 5(e) and (f). In ZFC mode, we can observe that samples still present HEB, showing a value of 112 Oe in z direction [Fig. 4(f)]. The origin of this spontaneous EB is that partial ferromagnetic ordering induces the exchange anisotropy during the virgin magnetization, which is needed for the zero field cooled EB 39. In the FC mode, the HEB and HC show a nonmonotonic change, and HC exhibits the same trend with that of HEB. It was reported that the responsible mechanism for HC enhancement is the domain wall pinning due to defects at the FM/AFM interface 40, which explains the comparable value for both in-plane and out-of-plane in present systems. With cooling field BFC increasing, the out-of-plane HEB increases initially and achieves a maximum value of 1090 Oe at BFC = 0.1 T. However, the maximum in-plane HEB is 1029 Oe at BFC = 0.5 T. The peaks of out-of-plane and in-plane HEB appear in different cooling fields. The EB field is usually thought of as a balance, which is between the Zeeman energy of the FM domain and the exchange coupling energy at the interface 41. Therefore, the cooling field of BFC = 0.1 T and 0.5 T can be considered as an effective depinning threshold field, at which the Zeeman coupling can overcome the magnetic interaction. The results show that the spin-spin exchange coupling and interlayer DM interaction have different threshold fields. Ultimately, Combining the results of Fig. 4 (c) and (f), The BFC and temperature dependence of EB effect confirms that the EB in different directions is strongly anisotropic. In summary, we theoretically found that Cr-doping tune the inverse triangular antiferromagnetic structure of Mn3Sn tilting to out-of-plane, inducing large net moment with enhanced MAE and enhanced DMI along perpendicular to the kagome plane. Correspondingly, the coexistence of in-plane and out-of-plane EB were experimentally observed in the AFM systems. Strikingly, additional Cr doping causes more than a tenfold increment in exchange bias field when compared with that in pure Mn3Sn, which is the origin of the perpendicular EB observed here. The found of the large EB in the typical AFM system with frustrated kagome structure provides a new avenue for the correlation mechanism of the symmetry breaking and DMI. Acknowledgements: Supported by Key Research Project of Zhejiang Lab (No. 2021PE0AC02) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 51902033), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No. M2020683282), and the Scientific Research Foundation of CUIT (Grant No. KYTZ202006). A portion of this work was performed on the Steady High Magnetic Field Facilities, High Magnetic Field Laboratory, CAS. JS acknowledges the support by the NNSFC (Grant No. 22003003).