1 All-electrical switching of a topological non-collinear antiferromagnet at room temperature Yongcheng Deng,1,2# Xionghua Liu,1,2# Yiyuan Chen,3,4# Zongzheng Du,3,4# Nai Jiang,1,2 Chao Shen,1,2 Enze Zhang,1,2 Houzhi Zheng,1,2 Hai-Zhou Lu,3,4* Kaiyou Wang1,2,5,6* 1 State Key Laboratory for Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, China 2 Center of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 3 Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering and Department of Physics, Southern University of Science and Technology (SUSTech), Shenzhen 518055, China 4 Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Quantum Science and Engineering, Shenzhen 518055, China 5 Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 6 Center for Excellence in Topological Quantum Computation, University of Chinese Academy of Science, Beijing 100049, China # These authors contributed equally to this work. * Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.L., or K.W. * Email: luhz@sustech.edu.cn, kywang@semi.ac.cn Non-collinear antiferromagnetic Weyl semimetals, combining the advantages of a zero stray field and ultrafast spin dynamics as well as a large anomalous Hall effect and the chiral anomaly of Weyl fermions, have attracted extensive interests. However, the all- electrical control of such systems at room temperature, a crucial step toward practical applications, has not been reported. Here using a small writing current of around 5 × 106 A cm−2, we realize the all-electrical current-induced deterministic switching of the non-collinear antiferromagnet Mn3Sn with a strong readout signal at room temperature in the Si/SiO2/Mn3Sn/AlOx structure, without external magnetic field and injected spin current. Our simulations reveal that the switching is originated from the current-induced intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques in Mn3Sn itself. Our findings pave the way for the development of topological antiferromagnetic spintronics. 2 Antiferromagnets have recently attracted tremendous interests as candidates for next- generation spintronics devices with the prospect of offering higher storage density and faster data processing than their ferromagnetic counterparts1,2. However, the weak readout signals of conventional collinear antiferromagnets driven by electrical approaches greatly restrict their practical applications3,4. Alternatively, large magnetotransport signatures such as the intrinsic anomalous Hall effect in topological antiferromagnets could provide a solution to this issue5,6. In particular, the non-collinear antiferromagnetic Weyl semimetal Mn3Sn has recently fascinated the condensed matter physics and information technology communities because of its nontrivial band topology7,8 and unusual magnetic responses9-11. Mn3Sn hosts an ABAB stacking sequence of the (0001) kagome lattice of Mn (Fig. 1a) with a 120o non-collinear antiferromagnetic ordering of the Mn magnetic moments below the Néel temperature of TN ≈ 430 K9. This antiferromagnetic state on the kagome bilayers can be viewed as a ferroic ordering of a cluster magnetic octupole (Fig. 1b), which macroscopically breaks the time-reversal symmetry and results in a large anomalous Hall effect9,12. With the assistance of an auxiliary magnetic field, the deterministic switching of the magnetic octupole in Mn3Sn has been achieved by spin-orbit torques from a heavy-metal layer13,14. However, as a critical step toward practical applications, the field-free manipulation of Mn3Sn driven by electrical currents at room temperature has not been reported. Here, we demonstrate the all- electrical switching of the topological antiferromagnetic states in heavy-metal-layer-free Mn3Sn devices. Experiments were performed on sputter-deposited Mn3Sn (50 nm)/AlOx (2 nm) thin films, and the reference samples with heavy metals consisting of Ru (3 nm)/Mn3Sn (50 nm)/AlOx (2 thermally oxidized Si substrate. Unless otherwise stated, all the measurements were performed on the Mn3Sn (50 nm) /AlOx (2 nm) materials or devices without heavy metals. We first characterize the structure, transport properties, and magnetic properties of Mn3Sn. The X-ray diffraction peaks of (010) and (020) at 18 and 36 degrees confirm the hexagonal D019 Mn3Sn structure, and no additional peaks coming from plausible impurity phases were observed15,16 (see the details in Supplementary Section S1 and more related analysis in Supplementary Sections S2-S4). Besides, the microstructure of our film and the chemical composition of Mn3.06Sn0.94 were measured by cross-sectional high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX)17,18 (Supplementary 3 Fig. S3), respectively. The magnetotransport phenomena observed in our thin films (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. S4) are consistent with the previous measurements13, where the angular dependence of the in-plane longitudinal magnetoconductivity (Δσ = σ − σ⊥) and planar Hall conductivity σH PHE can be well fitted by the theoretical equations for the chiral anomaly of Weyl fermions19 (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Section S6). Fig. 1 | Crystal and magnetic structures, magnetotransport and magnetic properties of the Mn3Sn device. a, Mn3Sn crystal structure. The large red and blue spheres (small grey and black spheres) represent the Mn (Sn) atoms at the z = 0 and 1/2 planes, respectively. b, Magnetic structure of Mn3Sn. The Mn magnetic moments (green and pink arrows) lie in the kagome-plane and form an inverse triangular spin structure, ferroic ordering of a cluster magnetic octupole (big orange arrow) made of six moments (colored hexagon). c, Angular dependence of the in-plane longitudinal magnetoconductivity ∆σ (top) and planar Hall conductivity σH PHE (bottom) of the 50-nm-thick Mn3Sn device at room temperature and 1.8 Tesla. The red and cyan solid lines for ∆σ and σH PHE are the fitting results using the theoretical equations for the chiral anomaly (Eqs. S6-S7 in Supplementary Section S6). d, Optical micrograph of our fabricated Hall device and measurement scheme. e, (top) Anomalous Hall resistivity and (bottom) magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) signal versus μ0HZ for the 50-nm- thick Mn3Sn device at room temperature. Both of them exhibit clear hysteresis loops with a 4 coercive field μ0HC of approximately 0.75 T. f, Temperature dependence of ∆ρH 0 and μ0HC derived from the hysteresis loops of the 50-nm-thick Mn3Sn device, suggesting a Néel temperature TN  430 K (Supplementary Fig. S7). We measured the anomalous Hall resistivity ρH as a function of the out-of-plane magnetic field μ0HZ to quantitatively estimate the population of switchable domains in the device (Fig. 1d). A clear hysteresis of the anomalous Hall resistivity with a zero-field change ∆ρH 0 is observed (Fig. 1e (top)), which shows that the negative (positive) value of ρH is produced by the ‘+z (−z) domain with the positive +z (negative −z) component of the polarization direction of the magnetic octupole13,15,20,21. The field-swept measurements of the magnetic circular dichroism (MCD) exhibit a hysteresis loop of M - μ0HZ with a coercive field of μ0HC ≈ 0.75 T (Fig. 1e (bottom)), which is in agreement with the measured anomalous Hall resistivity (Fig. 1e (top)). Moreover, the M - μ0HZ curves were measured at different temperatures (T) using a vibrating sample magnetometer and the extracted magnetization of around 8 emu/cc at 300 K and 5 mT (Supplementary Fig. S5f), which is comparable with the previous reported values13,15,20,21. The longitudinal resistivity and Hall resistivity as a function of temperature under zero magnetic field are illustrated in Supplementary Figs. S6. Both the M - T and ρH - T curves show a rapid decrease at around 250 K, which corresponds to the transition to spiral phase22-24. Besides, the Néel temperature TN , corresponding to the disappearance of ∆ρH 0 and μ0HC of the anomalous Hall hysteresis loops, is found to be approximately 430 K (Fig. 1f and Supplementary Fig. S7), which is close to that of single crystal Mn3Sn9. The results confirm that our thin films have similar physical properties to those of previous reports. We then examine the possible current-induced topological non-collinear antiferromagnetic state switching. For the reference samples, the current-induced deterministic switching can only be observed under an auxiliary magnetic field for Ru/Mn3Sn/Pt devices (Supplementary Fig. S8), which are consistent with the previous works13,14. Interestingly, different current-induced switching behaviors were observed in our heavy-metal-layer-free devices. Figure 2a presents the ρH − μ0HZ curve of a 50-nm-thick Mn3Sn device. Under zero magnetic field, a 50 − ms writing current pulse Iwrite followed by a DC reading current of Iread = 0.1 mA is applied along the x direction. Surprisingly, as shown the black curve in Fig. 5 2b, the electrical current flowing through the device leads to a clear negative (positive) jump in ρH at a positive (negative) threshold writing current, implying a reversing of the z component of the octupole. The magnitude of the Hall resistivity jump ∆ρH J is approximately 58% of ∆ρH 0 in the field-swept measurements (Fig. 2a). Figure 2b also shows the ρH − Jwrite loops in an in-plane magnetic field μ0Hx of ± 0.2 T and ± 0.4 T. With the increase of positive (negative) applied magnetic field, the gradual shift of ρH − Jwrite loops toward a negative (positive) Jwrite, together with the reduction of ∆ρH J , is observed, which is clearer in the field dependence of the threshold current in Fig. 2c. The current-induced magnetization switching disappears for a sufficiently large bias field, e.g., 1 T > μ0HC, probably because the magnetic octupoles are aligned to the external field direction. Compared with the Mn3Sn/(heavy-) metal reference devices (Supplementary Fig. S8), here, the writing current is fully injected into the Mn3Sn layer without passing through a highly conductive metal layer. In addition, the strong inversion asymmetry along the x(y) direction was confirmed by our nonlinear Hall measurements25,26. As a low frequency AC current is applied along the x(y) direction, a considerable second harmonic voltage is measured along the y(x) direction in our Mn3Sn device, probably due to the boundaries between grains and/or magnetic domains. The nonlinear Hall effect in our Mn3Sn device is considerably stronger than that measured in the reference samples, justifying a larger Rashba effect in the heavy-metal- layer-free device (Supplementary Fig. S9). We explain that the field-free deterministic switching originates from current-induced spin accumulations in the Mn3Sn layer without inversion symmetry. Notably, the critical writing current density Jc required for switching the octupole, at zero magnetic field, is estimated to be 5 × 106 A cm−2 in our Mn3Sn device, which is less than half required for the reference Ru/Mn3Sn/Pt/AlOx sample. This is nearly one order of magnitude smaller than the recently reported values 4 × 107 A cm−2for the collinear antiferromagnet/Pt devices4, and comparable to the values reported for antiferromagnet/ferromagnet27 and collinear antiferromagnet devices3,28. The increase of the device temperature due to Joule heating at the maximum current pulse is estimated to be 38 K (Supplementary Fig. S10). The temperature of the device is still substantially lower than the Néel temperature (≈ 430 K) even when Jwrite is on, thus the Joule heating effect cannot be the predominant reason behind the observed switching. Furthermore, we performed the same zero-field current-induced switching 6 measurements at lower temperatures (200 and 250 K), which display similar behaviors of switching with slightly larger threshold currents (Supplementary Fig. S11). Fig. 2 | Zero-field current-induced switching of the antiferromagnetic states in the Mn3Sn device. a, Anomalous Hall resistivity ρH dependence on μ0HZ for the Mn3Sn device at room temperature. b, ρH versus Jwrite at μ0Hx = 0, ±0.2 T, ±0.4 T for the Mn3Sn device at room temperature. c, The critical current density Jc as a function of μ0Hx for positive and negative current-sweeping directions, respectively, of the ρH vs Jwrite loops. d, The normalized ρH (top) and Jwrite (bottom) for the Mn3Sn device at room temperature for a series of applied positive and negative Jwrite = 6 × 106 A cm-2, where ρH was measured at Iread = 0.1 mA after each writing current pulse. e, f, ρH versus μ0HZ and Jwrite loops for the Mn3Sn device at room temperature. The minimum μ0HZ min and Jwrite min determine the magnitude of the field- and current-driven Hall resistivity switching. Our experiments confirm that the deterministic switching of the Mn3Sn devices is due to the current-induced torque exerted on the non-collinear antiferromagnetic spin texture. This reproducible bipolar switching can act as an antiferromagnetic memory. The alternating current pulses ( |Jwrite| > Jc ) along opposite directions switch the antiferromagnetic state back and forth reproducibly (Fig. 2d), indicating its reliable controllability. Remarkably, our Mn3Sn device can provide multilevel signals by varying the magnitude of μ0HZ or Jwrite. With a fixed 7 maximum positive magnetic field (Fig. 2e) or writing current (Fig. 2f), the change of ρH increases with increasing the magnitude of μ0HZ min or Jwrite min (Section III in Methods). This multi-level plasticity controlled by electrical currents at zero magnetic field suggests a great potential of Mn3Sn in neuromorphic computing21,27,29,30. To compare the efficiency of the readout signal driven by an electrical current with that of other heavy metal/magnet bilayer structures, we defined the readout efficiency as ξ = ∆ρH J /Jc. In the case of our Mn3Sn device, ξ is approximately 2.4 × 10−13 Ω cm3/A (marked with a red star in Fig. 3), which is close to those of the ferromagnetic materials such as Co2MnGa, CoFeB, etc.31-38 but one to three orders magnitude larger than those of ferrimagnets, collinear antiferromagnets, and Mn3Sn/Pt devices13,39-41. Interestingly, a scaling law of ξ with the magnetization M is observed for collinear antiferromagnets, ferrimagnets and ferromagnets, as indicated by the shaded region in Fig. 3. This is because the anomalous Hall resistance is proportional to the magnetization, whereas the critical switching current is insensitive to the magnetization in the case of the current-induced magnetization switching dominated by the spin Hall effect in heavy metal/magnet bilayer systems42. The large ξ for Mn3Sn is due to the strong anomalous Hall effect originated from the non-zero Berry curvature in momentum space7,8. The readout efficiency obtained in our pure Mn3Sn is one order of magnitude higher than that in , probably because our Mn3Sn devices have the higher inversion asymmetry and without a current being injected into the heavy metal layer. We can thus achieve a strong readout anomalous Hall signal driven by a small writing current of 5 × 106 A cm−2 in our Mn3Sn device. 8 Fig. 3 | Readout efficiency as a function of magnetization. Double-logarithmic plot of the readout efficiency ξ = ∆ρH J /Jc as a function of the magnetization M for various materials, including ferromagnets (Co/Pt31, CoFeB/Ta32, CoFeB/W33, CoPt/CuPt34, CoFe/Ru/CoFe/Pt35, Fe3GeTe2/WTe236, Co2MnGa/Ti37, and SrRuO3/SrIrO338), ferrimagnets (CoxGd1-x/Pt39), collinear antiferromagnets (PtMn/Pt40, and Fe2O3/Pt41), and Mn3Sn/Pt13, at various temperatures. The red star indicates our Mn3Sn device at room temperature. The yellow shaded region highlights the scaling law of ξ with M. Now we illustrate the possible mechanisms of intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques that induce the deterministic all-electrical switching in our Mn3Sn device. We argue that the current-induced switching requires an inversion asymmetry in our polycrystal device, for the following reasons. 9 In our Mn3Sn polycrystal, the measured non-zero anomalous Hall signal implies that the different configurations in our samples are not compensated. To understand this, we note that any crystal grain in the polycrystalline Mn3Sn can be decomposed into the z-x, x-y, and y-z configurations, according to the direction of kagome plane (Fig. 4a). The octupole rotates only in the kagome plane, so the out-of-plane magnetic field Hz can only switch configurations z-x and y-z. Considering the weak tunneling between the kagome layers, Ix is not expected to be able to switch configuration y-z effectively, i.e., the in-plane current Ix can only switch configurations z-x and x-y. The anomalous Hall signal depends on the z-component of the octupole, so VAHE can be used to read out only configurations z-x and y-z. This infers that the Hall response of the μ0Hz-hysteresis is around 2 to 2.3 times (considering that the octupole may relax at positions within ±30 degrees from the full polarization) to that of the Jwrite- hysteresis, close to the data in Figs. 2a and 2b. According to the above discussion, only configuration z-x in Fig. 4a can be switched by the current and measurable to the anomalous Hall effect. More importantly, the z-x configuration of single crystal Mn3Sn requires an inversion asymmetry to be deterministically switched. Because the octupole is a pseudo vector, which is invariant under inversion, so it does not reverse as the current changes sign if there is inversion symmetry (see also the symmetry and microscopic analysis in Supplementary Sections S13 and S14). The occurrence of the inversion asymmetry in polycrystalline Mn3Sn was confirmed by our nonlinear Hall measurements. The inversion asymmetry can induce Rashba-like spin-orbit coupling, which can convert the injected electric current into spin currents or spin accumulations. The spin accumulations, when not aligned with the local Mn moments, can induce intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques to rotate the Mn moments. The octupole is defined by the Mn moments in the Mn3Sn magnetic structure with inverse triangular spin structure (Supplementary Sections S15). Thus, in this sense, it is switchable by the current, and its z component leads to a measurable anomalous Hall signal. To verify our speculations regarding the microscopic mechanism behind the observed switching, we performed numerical simulations for the octupole polarization. For a given electrical current Ix, the simulation starts with an initial magnetic structure of the Mn moments mia, which behave as local Zeeman fields on the electrons described by a s-d model. Using the linear-response theory, the local spin accumulations induced by the current in the presence of the Rashba spin-orbit coupling are calculated. The effective magnetic field of the spin 10 accumulations is then converted into magnetic torques Tia in the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation to generate a new magnetic structure. The above steps are iterated until the magnetic structure converges to yield the octupole moment for the given injected current (see details in Methods Section IV). Fig. 4 | Numerically simulated switching of the Mn3Sn octupole. The spin-orbit coupling converts the current Ix (experimental Jwrite) into spin accumulations, which exert intrinsic non- collinear spin-orbit torques to rotate the Mn moments and octupole. a, The kagome lattices in polycrystal can be decomposed into three configurations z-x, x-y, and y-z. Ix can switch configurations z -x and x -y and VAHE can read out configurations z -x and y -z , so the simulation focuses on configuration z-x. b, Simulated octupole angle φ versus time, driven by a Ix pulse with duration of 2- 30 ns (pink shadowed region), for Ix below (29 mA), at (30 mA), and well above (180 mA) the critical current. For Ix=180 mA, the insets show the dynamics of the torques (blue arrows) exerting on the Mn moments (green arrows), at three stages (hollow circles), as φ starts from π ∕ 6 (an easy axis), then is switched to π (normal to Ix) after turning on Ix, and finally relaxes to 7π ∕ 6 (another easy axis) after turning off Ix. c, Simulated x- and z-direction spin accumulations on Mn 2 (denoted in panel a), as a function of φ, for different Rashba spin-orbit coupling λR (Eq. 2 in Methods). d, The same as the 30 mA case in panel b, 11 but also for λR below and above the critical value. e, Simulated hysteresis loops of the Hall response VAHE driven by Ix, for different λR. f, The same as the 30 mA case in panel b. Combinations of the magnetic-structure parameters K/(Jm, D) (Eq. 1 in Methods) below (solid curves) and above (dashed curves) the critical combination are also considered. g, The same as the λR = 0.2t case in panel e, The presence of the x-axis magnetic field Hx is also considered. More simulation results by changing λR , K/(Jm, D), and initial states can be found in Supplementary Section S16. intensities, which demonstrates that the current must be sufficiently strong to drive a switching. Its insets also show the microscopic dynamics in terms of the calculated torques exerting on the Mn moments at different stages of a successful switching for Ix well above the critical value. The noncollinear antiferromagnetic structure tends to maintain during the switching and the rotation of the Mn moments (collectively as octupole) is determined by the sum of the nutation tendencies of the sublattice moments driven by the torques. Figures 4c-e show that a larger Rashba spin-orbit coupling λR leads to an enhanced spin accumulation, faster switching, and smaller critical current. Figure 4f shows that increasing/decreasing the magnetic-structure parameters K/(Jm, D) leads to a failed/faster switching, where Jm and D stabilize the inverse 120o triangular structure, whereas K introduces a small deviation to exert torques that relax the octupole to one of the six stable positions (φ = π/6 + integer times of π 3 ⁄ ). In other words, the switching requires the torques from the current-induced spin accumulations to overcome the stable-position-favored torques due to the magnetic structure, which favours the six stable positions. Figure 4g shows that the hysteresis loop can be shifted by the x-direction magnetic field of ±0.0012 T (the theoretical values are usually orders of smaller than those in the experiments9,13, probably because the external magnetic field is screened in the realistic polycrystals). More importantly, the simulations confirm that, without external magnetic fields and heavy metals, the all-electrical switching of the non-collinear antiferromagnet can be achieved, owing to the intrinsic non-collinear spin-orbit torques from the current-induced local spin accumulations in Mn3Sn itself. Our findings promise potential applications of Mn3Sn in information technologies. Specifically, the all-electrical control of the binary and multilevel states with large Mn3Sn readout signals could act as the building block for magnetic random access memory and 12 artificial synapses, respectively. Furthermore, the in-memory computing will be also achieved utilizing the all-electrical control of topological non-collinear antiferromagnets.