1 Fabrication and characterization of InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure devices Li Zhang1, Yuanjie Chen1, Dong Pan2, Shaoyun Huang1, Jianhua Zhao2, and H. Q. Xu1,3,* 1Beijing Key Laboratory of Quantum Devices, Key Laboratory for the Physics and Chemistry of Nanodevices, and School of Electronics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2State Key Laboratory of Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 912, Beijing 100083, China 3Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China *Corresponding author: hqxu@pku.edu.cn (Date: April 18, 2022) Abstract Semiconductor InSb nanosheet/hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/graphite trilayers are fabricated, and single- and double-gate devices made from the trilayers are realized and characterized. The InSb nanosheets employed in the trilayer devices are epitaxially grown, free-standing, zincblende crystals and are in micrometer lateral sizes. The hBN and graphite flakes are obtained by exfoliation. Each trilayer is made by successively stacking an InSb nanosheet on an hBN flake and on a graphite flake using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer setup. The fabricated single- and double-gate devices are characterized by electrical and/or magnetotransport measurements. In all these devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are employed as the bottom gates and the gate dielectrics. The measurements of a fabricated single bottom-gate field-effect device show that the InSb nanosheet in the device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~ 7300 cm2 V-1 s-1 and a low gate hysteresis of ~ 0.05 V at 1.9 K. The measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar device show that both the top and the bottom gate exhibit strong capacitive couplings to the InSb nanosheet channel and can thus tune the nanosheet channel conduction effectively. The electron Hall mobility in the InSb nanosheet of the Hall-bar device is extracted to be larger than 1.1 × 104 cm2 V-1 s-1 at a sheet electron density of ~ 6.1 × 1011 cm-2 and 1.9 K and, thus, the device exhibits well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. Keywords: InSb nanosheet, hexagonal boron nitride, field-effect device, double-gate device, Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations 2 1. Introduction Because of their small electron effective mass, strong spin-orbit interaction (SOI), and large Landé g-factor, low-dimensional InSb nanostructures are attractive candidates for applications in high-speed electronics , spintronics , quantum electronics , and topological quantum computation . To date, epitaxially grown InSb nanowires have been extensively investigated and have been employed as emerging platforms for realizing field-effect transistors (FETs) , quantum dot devices , and semiconductor-superconductor hybrid quantum devices . Recently, high-quality two-dimensional (2D) InSb quantum structures, such as InSb quantum wells (QWs) and free-standing nanosheets , have been achieved via epitaxial growth, opening up new possibilities for fabricating planar, integrated, complex quantum devices. Due to advances in material engineering, these heterostructured InSb QWs have been demonstrated to exhibit high electron mobilities and large mean free paths, and have been successfully employed to make good quantum point contacts (QPCs) in which well-defined conductance quantization has been observed . In comparison, an advantage of using free-standing InSb nanosheets to prepare devices is that Ohmic or superconducting contacts can be made by directly depositing suitable metals on their surfaces. Currently, InSb nanosheets have been used for fabricating Hall-bar devices , QPCs , Josephson junctions (JJs) , quantum dot devices , and dual-gate field-effect devices . However, most of these devices are fabricated on SiO2/Si substrates, and scattering by charge traps and defects in the SiO2 dielectrics and at the interfaces between the InSb nanosheets and the SiO2 dielectrics have limited the device performance and led to a difficulty in achieving high-quality quantum devices. One possible solution to the above problem is to adopt a new layered, charge-trap free material with an atomically flat surface as a dielectric and a thin graphite as a gate electrode . In the past few years, hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) has been proven to be such an excellent dielectric . With their ultra-clean surfaces, fresh exfoliated hBN layers have been assembled, together with a variety of one-dimensional (1D) and 2D materials, such as graphene , transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) , black phosphorus , and InSb nanowires , into functional devices. In these devices, carrier mobilities have been significantly increased, when compared to their counterpart devices fabricated directly on SiO2/Si substrates, and quantum oscillations and ballistic transport at low magnetic fields have been observed. Therefore, it is desirable to transfer InSb nanosheets onto hBN/graphite bilayers to construct devices with hBN as a dielectric and graphite as a gate electrode on SiO2/Si substrates 3 in order to suppress the influence of charge traps and defects at the surfaces of and inside the SiO2 dielectrics. In this article, a method of fabrication of free-standing micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayers is described, and realization of single- and double-gate devices from the trilayers on SiO2/Si substrates is demonstrated. As a key step of the method, the positions of almost optically invisible InSb nanosheets are determined with use of duplicated patterns on the transparent stacking/transfer stamps and thus tiny InSb nanosheets can be optically aligned to and stacked on exfoliated hBN flakes and then on exfoliated graphite flakes. In the fabricated single- and double-gate devices, the graphite and hBN flakes are used as the bottom gates and the gate dielectrics. The devices are characterized by electrical and/or magnetotransport measurements. In this work, typical results obtained only from the gate-transfer characteristic measurements of a single-gate field-effect device [as shown in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)] and from the electrical and magnetotransport measurements of a double-gate Hall-bar device [as shown in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c)] will be presented. The gate transfer characteristic measurements of the single-gate field-effect device yield an electron field-effect mobility of ~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1 in the InSb nanosheet and a low hysteresis of ~0.05 V in gate voltage at low temperatures. The electrical and magnetotransport measurements of the double-gate Hall-bar device show that the two gates exhibit strong capacitive couplings to the InSb nanosheet channel and the electron Hall mobility of the InSb nanosheet becomes more than 1.1 × 104 cm2 V-1 s-1 at a sheet electron density of ~ 6.1 × 1011 cm-2 and 1.9 K, leading to observation of well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. 2. Experimental details The InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures used in the single-gate field-effect InSb nanosheet device and the double-gate InSb nanosheet Hall-bar devices studied in this work are obtained by mechanical alignment/transfer technique. The details about the trilayer heterostructure fabrication is given in Supplementary Information. Here, taken as an example, only a brief description about the fabrication of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure shown in Fig. 1(d) is presented. The InSb nanosheet used in the fabrication of the trilayer heterostructure was grown in a free-standing form on InAs nanowire stems via molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on a p-type Si(111) substrate and was transferred from the growth substrate to a SiO2/Si substrate with predefined Ti/Au metal markers (referred to as sample substrate A). Figure 1(a) displays an SEM image of the InSb nanosheet and Ti/Au markers on sample substrate A. Here, the InSb nanosheet is located at the upper side of marker ‘8’, as 4 indicated by a black dashed square. The nanosheet had a length of ~ 1 μm and a width of ~ 0.5 μm. The inset of Fig. 1(a) shows a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image of a typical MBE-grown InSb nanosheet taken from the same growth substrate and the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern (graph in the lower-right corner of the inset). Here, it is shown that the nanosheet was a zinc-blende crystal, and free from stacking faults and twin defects. The hBN and graphite flakes were mechanically exfoliated from commercially available bulk hBN and graphite materials using Scotch tapes and were transferred onto two other marker-prepared SiO2/Si substrates (referred to as sample substrates B and C). sample at different fabrication stages. (a) SEM image of an InSb nanosheet and Ti/Au markers on a SiO2/Si substrate. The nanosheet is located in the region indicated by a black dashed square. Inset: HRTEM image of a typical MBE-grown InSb nanosheet and the corresponding FFT pattern (graph in the lower-right corner of the inset). (b) Optical image of the PPC surface of the stamp, on which the same InSb nanosheet as in (a) and the duplicated patterns of the substrate markers are seen. The InSb nanosheet is in the region indicated by a white dashed square. (c) Optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer after a hBN flake being picked up. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a black dashed square. The light blue region marked by a red dotted line and the white region marked by a black dotted line are the pieces of thin and thick hBN. (d) Optical image of the finally fabricated InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a black dashed square. The thick hBN, thin hBN, and graphite regions are marked by purple, red, and green dotted lines, respectively. 5 To fabricate the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure, the InSb nanosheet was first picked up from substrate A and was then stacked on the hBN flake on substrate B to form an InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer using a home-made alignment stacking/transfer setup mounted with a polypropylene carbonate (PPC) film coated polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamp . The InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer was then picked up by lifting the stamp from substrate B. Here, it is important to note that to align the almost optically invisible, micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet with the hBN flake, a pattern of the optically visible metal markers on substrate A was duplicated on the PPC film during the nanosheet capture and was used for the material alignment. It should also be noted that before the stamp was lifted, the stamp was pressed hard against substrate B, in order for the InSb nanosheet and the hBN flake to form a tightly attached bilayer on the PPC film of the stamp. Figure 1(b) shows an optical image of the same InSb nanosheet as in Fig. 1(a) after being captured on the PPC film, on which the duplicated pattern is also clearly seen. The InSb nanosheet lay at the upper side of duplicated pattern ‘8’, as indicated by a white dashed square. Figure 1(c) shows an optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the PPC surface after the bilayer was picked up. Here, it is seen that the entire hBN flake is not in the same thickness and the regions corresponding to the pieces of thick hBN and thin hBN are marked by black and red dotted lines, respectively. The InSb nanosheet as seen in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b) is now found below the thinner portion of the hBN flake as indicated by a black dashed square. Next, the InSb nanosheet/hBN bilayer on the stamp was aligned and stacked on the graphite flake on substrate C. After pressing hard the stamp against substrate C, the stamp was released by heating up sample substrate C, leaving the PPC film coated InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer on sample substrate C. Finally, the PPC film was removed from the trilayer by dipping sample C into acetone. Figure 1(d) shows an optical image of the finally achieved trilayer heterostructure on sample substrate C, where the InSb nanosheet is located on top of the hBN/graphite bilayer in a region marked by a black dashed square. For further details about the procedure of making such an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure, please refer to Supplementary Information. The single-gate field-effect device as shown in Fig. 2(b) and the double-gate Hall-bar device as shown in Fig. 3(b) are made, respectively, from an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure as shown in Fig. 2(a) and an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure as shown in Fig. 3(a), obtained in the process described above. In both devices, the graphite flake and the hBN flake were employed as the bottom gate and the gate dielectric, respectively. In fabrication of the single-gate device, the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure was first 6 located relative to the predefined markers on the substrate (substrate C) by an optical microscope and some smaller markers were fabricated around the InSb nanosheet by electron-beam process. Subsequently, the InSb nanosheet was located relative to these small markers by SEM, and source and drain contact electrodes and gate electrodes were fabricated on the InSb nanosheet and on the graphite flake via EBL, EBE of Ti/Au (10/100 nm in thickness), and lift-off. It should be noted that before the metal evaporation, exposed areas on the InSb nanosheet were chemically etched in a de-ionized water-diluted (NH4)2Sx solution to remove the surface oxide. In fabrication of the double-gate Hall-bar device, a top gate was made on an otherwise completed single bottom-gate device. This was done first by depositing a dielectric layer of HfO2 (20 nm in thickness) on the sample by atomic layer deposition and then by fabricating a Ti/Au (5/120 nm in thickness) metal gate on top via the combined process of EBL, EBE, and lift-off. schematic for the layer structure of the device and the electrical measurement circuit setup. The gate-transfer characteristics of the device were measured in a two-probe configuration by applying a fixed DC voltage (VVds) of 0.4 mV to source and drain electrodes (i.e., contacts 2 and 3) and detecting the channel current (IIds) as a function of bottom-gate voltage VVBG. Figure 3(b) shows an SEM image of the double-gate Hall-bar device and the magnetotransport measurement circuit setup. Figure 3(c) shows a schematic view of the layer structure of the device and the circuit setup for application of the top and bottom gate voltages. The magnetotransport measurements of the device were carried out using a standard current-biased lock-in technique, in which a 17-Hz AC current (II) of 50 nA was supplied between the source and drain electrodes (i.e., contact electrodes 1 and 6), and the voltage drop VVx between probe electrodes 2 and 3 and the voltage drop VVy between probe electrodes 5 and 3 were recorded. The longitudinal and Hall resistances were then obtained numerically from RRxx = VVx/IIxx and RRyx = VVy/IIxx . All the measurements were carried out in a physical property measurement system cryostat equipped with a uniaxial magnet and, in the magnetotransport measurements for the double-gate Hall-bar device, the magnetic field was applied perpendicular to the InSb nanosheet plane. 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Gate-transfer characteristic measurements of the single-gate field-effect device 2(a) and 2(b) show an optical image of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure (before fabricating small markers) and an SEM image of the single bottom-gate field-effect 7 device made from the trilayer heterostructure [see Fig. 2(c) for a cross-sectional view of the layer structure of the device]. Note that in preparation of this trilayer heterostructure, hBN flakes were successively picked up twice. This is because, due to misalignment, the target InSb nanosheet was not stacked on the hBN flake picked up at the first time. Thus, in Fig. 2(a), two portions of thick hBN, a big piece of thin hBN (with a thickness of tt~30 nm), and a piece of graphite are found and are marked by purple, green, and red dotted lines, respectively. The area where the InSb nanosheet is located is indicated by a white square. The InSb nanosheet in the single-gate field-effect device has a width of WW~800 nm and a thickness of ~20 nm (estimated based on the calibrated contrast in the SEM image). Note that an InSb nanosheet with a relatively thin thickness was chosen here because it is expected that this thickness would be smaller than the Fermi wavelength of the electron and thus the electron transport in the nanosheet is of a 2D nature. The InSb nanosheet was contacted by four Ti/Au electrodes, as shown in Fig. 2(b), where the distance between the two inner contact electrodes is LL~600 nm. the gate voltage VVBG measured at Vds=0.4 mV and TT = 1.9 K (black curve) by sweeping VVBG upward [cf. the measurement circuit setup shown in Fig. 2(c)]. The measurements show that the device is an n-type transistor and the InSb conduction channel is in a pinch-off state at VVBG = 0 V and can be switched on by applying a positive VVBG. The channel conductance GGs is related to the charge carrier mobility μμ via GGs = μμ LL2 CCg(VVBG − VVth), (1) where VVth is the threshold voltage at which the channel current is cut off, and CCg is the gate-to-channel capacitance which can be estimated from CCg = εε0εεr LLLL tt with εε0 being the permittivity of vacuum, εεr = 2.9 the relative dielectric constant of hBN, and tt = 30 nm the thickness of hBN. The measured resistance GG−1 is composed of two terms, the channel resistance GGS −1 and the contact resistance RRc , and is given by, GG−1 = GGS −1 + RRc. (2) The field-effect carrier mobility μμ, contact resistance RRc, and threshold voltage VVth of the device at T = 1.9 K can be extracted by fit of the measured on-state transfer characteristic curve shown in Fig. 2(d) to Eqs. (1) and (2). The red curve in Fig. 2(d) shows the result of the fit. The fit yields the values of μμ~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1, RRc~580 Ω, and VVth~0.88 V. Note that the extracted mobility value in the nanosheet is much smaller than the values measured in InSb QWs (51000 cm2 V-1 s-1 at 300 K, and 248000 cm2 V-1 s-1 at 4.5 K) . This could be attributed to several factors. The 8 most important one is due to scattering by charge traps and defects at the surfaces and in the native oxidized layers of the nanosheet. Another one is that the extracted value of μμ for the nanosheet is the field-effect mobility which represents an average value over a range of the gate voltages (or carrier densities) and could be much smaller than the Hall mobility values obtained at high carrier densities. Optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite heterostructure used for fabrication of the device. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a white square. Purple, green and red dotted lines mark the thick hBN, thin hBN, and graphite regions in the sample, respectively. (b) False-colored SEM image of the device. The nanosheet has a width of ~800 nm and a thickness of ~20 nm. The separation between the two inner electrodes is ~600 nm. (c) Schematic for the layer structure of the device and the electrical measurement circuit setup. (d) Measured conductance GG = IIdddd/VVdddd (black curve) as a function of gate voltage VVBG (gate-transfer characteristics) for the device at Vds=0.4 mV and TT = 1.9 K by sweeping VVBG upward. The red curve shows the fit of the on-state portion of the measured gate-transfer characteristic curve to Eqs. (1) and (2). The inset shows the measured gate-transfer characteristics of the device in a logarithmic scale. The black and red curves represent results of the measurements by sweeping VVBG upward and downward, respectively. (e) Gate-transfer characteristics measured at different temperatures T. (f) Extracted field-effect mobility μμ as a function of TT. The orange solid line is the fit of the mobility data at different T to Eq. (3). The black dashed line is the fit of the high-temperature mobility data by a power law μμ~TT−γγ with a value of γγ~2.11. 9 With use of the extracted value of VVth, the electron density in the InSb nanosheet at a given value of VBG can be estimated from nn = CCgs × VVBG−VVth ee , where CCgs = εε0εεr tt is the unit area capacitance of the graphite gate to the InSb nanosheet and ee is the elementary charge. For example, an electron density of nn = 1.6 × 1012 cm−2 in the InSb nanosheet can be obtained at VVBG = 4 V. By normalizing the thickness of InSb nanosheet, a three-dimensional (3D) electron density of nn3DD = 8 × 1017 cm−3 can be obtained, yielding a Fermi wavelength λλFF = 2( ππ 3nn3DD) 1 3 ≈ 22 nm at VVBG = 4 V. This normalized bulk Fermi wavelength is larger than the nanosheet thickness (~20 nm) and thus the electron transport in the InSb nanosheet is of a 2D nature as it is assumed above. The electron mean free path in the nanosheet can be obtained from LLe = ħμμ ee √2ππnn, where ħ is the reduced Planck constant. At VVBG = 4 V, LLe~ 152 nm is obtained, which is several times smaller than the channel length (L~600 nm) and thus the carrier transport in the InSb nanosheet is in the diffusive regime. The inset of Fig. 2(d) shows a logarithmic scale plot of the GG − VVBG curves at TT = 1.9 K. The black and red curves in the inset represent the results measured by sweeping VVBG upward and downward, respectively, showing a clear ambipolar transport characteristic. The device exhibits a gate hysteresis of ~ 0.05 V at a sweeping rate of 0.08 V/s, which outperforms the previous devices made from free-standing InSb nanosheets directly on a SiO2/Si substrate . The smaller hysteresis seen here indicates that the influence of the charge traps in the SiO2 dielectric has been effectively screened out by the graphite bottom-gate electrode and there are a significantly less amount of trapped charges in the hBN dielectric layer . Again, it should be noted that a noticeably large gate hysteresis was observed at elevated temperatures (see Supplementary Information). For example, a gate hysteresis of ~0.56 V at 100 K and a gate hysteresis of ~1.16 V at 250 K were observed in the device at the same sweeping rate of 0.08 V/s. This increase in gate hysteresis at a high temperature is believed to originate dominantly from charge trapping and de-trapping in the bottom native oxidized layer of the InSb nanosheet . temperatures. Here, no conductance quantization is observed in these measurements, which is simply due to the fact that the InSb nanosheet in the device is in the diffusive regime as it was shown above. Nevertheless, it is seen that at high temperatures (above ~100 K), the threshold voltage moves toward negative values with increasing temperature. This is consistent with the fact that the carrier density in the InSb nanosheet channel becomes higher due to thermal excitation at a higher temperature. However, the on-state conductance (taken at a positive VVBG of 10 above ~1 V) of the device is seen to decrease with increasing temperature at temperatures of above ~100 K. This is because of an increase in phonon scattering with increasing temperature. measurements of the device at different temperatures. It is seen that the mobility tends to saturate at low temperatures (below ~77 K), in good agreement with the results obtained from InSb QWs , but decreases exponentially with increasing temperature at high temperatures (above ~100 K). In the considered temperature range, the temperature-dependent mobility μ(T) in the InSb nanosheet can be approximately expressed as, 1 μμ(TT) = 1 μμimp + 1 μμph(TT). (3) Here, term 1/μμimp describes contributions from all scattering events due to imperfections, such as impurities, defects, charge traps, surface/interface roughness etc., in the nanosheet, its surface native oxides and the dielectrics . This term is, to the lowest order approximation, temperature independent. Term 1/ μμph describes temperature-dependent contributions from acoustic and optical phonon scattering events. The mobility data extracted at different temperatures shown in Fig. 2(f) were fitted using Eq. (3) and the result of the fit is presented by the orange solid line in Fig. 2(f). The fit yields a value of μμimp~7900 cm2 V-1 s-1 at the low temperature limit. At high temperatures (above ~100 K), the mobility is well fitted by a power law μμ~TT−γγ with γγ~2.11 as indicated by the black dashed line in Fig. 2(f). This power-law fit confirms that optical phonon scattering was the dominant factor for the limitation of the electron mobility in the nanosheet at the high temperatures . Note that acoustic phonon scattering would yield a μ~TT−1 temperature dependence , which is not the case seen in Fig. 2(f). 3.2. Electrical and magnetotransport measurements of the double-gate Hall-bar device 3(a) and 3(b) show an optical image of an InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructure (before fabricating small markers) and an SEM image of the double-gate Hall-bar device made from the trilayer heterostructure, while Fig. 3(c) shows a schematic view of the layer structure of the device and the circuit setup for the application of top and bottom gate voltages VTG and VBG. In Fig. 3(a), two small, thick hBN pieces (marked by two black dotted lines), a large thin hBN piece (marked by a white dotted line), and a large graphite piece (marked by a purple dotted line) are seen. The thin hBN piece has a thickness of t~30 nm and has a large portion stacked on the graphite layer. The InSb nanosheet is seen to locate in the area marked by a black square on top of the stacked thin hBN/graphite bilayer. This InSb nanosheet has a width of WW~ 900 nm and a thickness of ~30 nm (estimated based on the calibrated contrast in the SEM image) and is 11 contacted by six Ti/Au electrodes as shown in Fig. 3(b). The source and drain electrodes 1 and 6 are ~1.7 μm apart, while the separations between probe electrodes 2 and 3 and between probe electrodes 3 and 5 are LL23~850 nm and WW35~500 nm, respectively. Note that the top gate and top gate dielectric cover almost the entire range of Fig. 3(b). K. (a) Optical image of the InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer used for fabrication of the device. The InSb nanosheet is located in the area indicated by a black square. White, black, and purple dotted lines mark the thin hBN, thick hBN, and graphite regions in the sample, respectively. (b) False-colored SEM image of the device and magnetotransport measurement circuit setup. The nanosheet has a width of ~900 nm and a thickness of ~30 nm. The distance between electrodes 1 and 6 is ~1.7 μm, while separation between probe electrodes 2 and 3 is ~850 nm and that between probe electrodes 3 and 5 is ~500 nm. (c) Schematic view of the layer structure of the device and the circuit setup for the application of gate voltages VTG and VBG. (d) Gate-transfer characteristics of the device measured in a two-terminal configuration by applying a DC voltage of Vds=2 mV to electrodes 1 and 6 and recording the current through the InSb nanosheet channel Ids (with the conductance obtained through GG = IIds/VVds) as a function of VTG and VBG. (e) Measured GG of the device as a function of VVBG at VVTG = 0 V (black curve). The red curve shows the fit of the on-state part of the measured data to Eqs. (1) and (2). (f) Measured RRxx (red) and RRyx (black) of the device as a function of magnetic field B at VVBG=0.5 V and VVTG=0.5 V, i.e., a point marked by a black dot in (d). The measurements show well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. The arrows mark the magnetic field positions for a few even values of filling factor νν. 12 two-terminal configuration by applying a DC voltage (VVds) of 2 mV to the source and drain electrodes (electrodes 1 and 6), i.e., the source-drain current IIds as a function of the voltages applied to the bottom and top gates VVBG and VVTG [see the circuit setup for VVBG and VVTG in Fig. 3(c)]. Owing to the short distances of the top and bottom gates to the InSb nanosheet, both gates show strong capacitive coupling to the nanosheet conduction channel. Figure 3(e) shows the measured two-terminal conductance GG = IIds/VVds of the InSb nanosheet as a function of VVBG at VVTG = 0 V (black curve). The red curve in Fig. 3(e) shows the result of the fit of the measured on-state transfer characteristic data to Eqs. (1) and (2). With use of the channel length LL = 1.7 μm, the channel width WW = 900 nm, and the hBN thickness tt = 30 nm, a field-effect mobility of μμFE~7200 cm2 V-1 s-1 can be extracted for the InSb nanosheet from the fit. Note that the extracted bottom-gate threshold voltage from the fit is slightly negative, which is different from the extracted value for the single bottom gate device as shown in Fig. 2(d). This difference is most likely due to the fact that the nanosheet in the double-gate Hall-bar device is about 50% thicker than the nanosheet in the single bottom-gate device and thus the conduction band in the nanosheet of the double gate device is less pushed up in energy by quantum confinement and the fact that the top gate voltage has been set to zero giving a heterostructure band alignment favorable for conduction channel opening at zero bottom-gate voltage. BB with both top and bottom gate voltages set at 0.5 V [i.e., at a point indicated by a black dot in Fig. 3(d)]. From the measured RRyx − BB curve at low magnetic fields, the Hall coefficient RRH~1030 Ω/T and the sheet electron density nnsheet~ 6.1 × 1011 cm−2 in the InSb nanosheet can be obtained. The electron Hall mobility μμHall in the nanosheet can be estimated from the measured longitudinal resistance RRxx at zero magnetic field and the sheet electron density nnsheet via, μμHall = LL23 LL 1 RRxxnnsheetee. (4) Using LL23~850 nm, WW~ 900 nm, the zero-field value of RRxx~850 Ω, and the sheet electron density nnsheet~ 6.1 × 1011 cm−2, a Hall mobility value of μμHall~ 1.1×104 cm2 V-1 s-1 is obtained. Note that if WW35~500 nm is used instead of WW~ 900 nm in the calculation, a higher value of μμHall~ 2.0×104 cm2 V-1 s-1 would be obtained. The actual sheet Hall mobility at VVBG=0.5 V and VVTG=0.5 V would be a value in between the two above values. The measured Hall resistance RRyx at high fields displays step-like structures, indicating appearance of the quantum Hall effect 13 as a result of the formation of the Landau levels (LLs). In the same time, the longitudinal resistance RRxx at high fields displays several pronounced peaks and valleys, i.e., well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations. The Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation peaks appear at the magnetic fields where the LLs coincide with the Fermi energy. Because each spin-split LL is highly degenerate with a unit area degeneracy of eeBB/h (where h is the Planck constant), the filling factor (FF), i.e., the number of spin-split LLs filled by electrons at each oscillation valley is given by νν = nnddheeeetth/eeBB. The black arrows in Fig. 3(f) mark the magnetic field positions in the Shubnikov-de Haas oscillation valleys at which the filling factors νν at a few even values can be identified. 4. Conclusions In conclusion, a method of fabrication of micrometer-sized InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures has been developed, and single- and double-gate devices have been made from the fabricated trilayer heterostructures on SiO2/Si substrates. The method employs duplicated patterns on the transparent stacking/transfer stamps for position determination of hardly visible InSb nanosheets under the optical microscope and, thus, enables stacking of micrometer or smaller InSb nanosheets on exfoliated hBN flakes and on exfoliated graphite flakes. Based on the fabricated InSb nanosheet/hBN/graphite trilayer heterostructures, a single-gate InSb nanosheet field-effect device and a double-gate InSb nanosheet Hall-bar device are fabricated on SiO2/Si substrates, where the hBN flakes are used as the bottom gate dielectrics and the graphite flakes as bottom gates. The fabricated devices are characterized by electrical and magnetotransport measurements. The measurements show that the InSb nanosheet in the single-gate field-effect device has an electron field-effect mobility of ~7300 cm2 V-1 s-1 and a low gate hysteresis of ~0.05 V at 1.9 K, demonstrating an effective screening of charge traps in the SiO2 dielectrics by the graphite gate. The double-gate Hall-bar device exhibits strong capacitive couplings of the two gates to the InSb nanosheet channel, and a Hall mobility of larger than 1.1 × 104 cm2 V-1 s-1 as well as well-defined Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations at the sheet electron density of 6.1 × 1011 cm-2 and 1.9 K. The fabrication method established in this work should have the potential to be widely used in assembling heterostructures from many tiny sized planar materials for applications in nanoelectronics, spintronics, and quantum electronics. Acknowledgments This work has been supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China through the 14 National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant Nos. 2017YFA0303304 and 2017YFA0204901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 92165208, 92065106, 61974138, 11874071, 91221202, and 91421303), and the Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences (Grant No. Y18G22). D. P. also acknowledges support from the Youth Innovation Promotion Association, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2017156). Data availability statement All data that support the findings of this study are included within the article and its Supplementary Information. 15