Catlas: an automated framework for catalyst discovery demonstrated for direct syngas conversion Brook Wander,† Kirby Broderick,† and Zachary W. Ulissi∗,‡,† †Department of Chemical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University ‡Scott Institute for Energy Innovation, Carnegie Mellon University E-mail: zulissi@andrew.cmu.edu Abstract Catalyst discovery is paramount to support access to energy and key chemical feedstocks in a post fossil fuel era. Exhaustive computational searches of large material design spaces using ab-initio methods like density functional theory (DFT) are infeasible. We seek to explore large design spaces at relatively low computational cost by leveraging large, generalized, graph- based machine learning (ML) models, which are pretrained and therefore require no upfront data collection or training. We present catlas, a framework that distributes and automates the generation of adsorbate-surface configurations and ML inference of DFT energies to achieve this goal. Catlas is open source, making ML assisted catalyst screenings easy and available to all. To demonstrate its efficacy, we use catlas to explore catalyst candidates for the direct conversion of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. For this case study, we explore 947 stable/ metastable binary, transition metal intermetallics as possible catalyst candidates. On this subset of materials, we are able to predict the adsorption energy of key descriptors, *CO and *OH, with near-DFT accuracy (0.16, 0.14 eV MAE, respectively). Using the projected selectivity towards C2+ oxygenates from an existing microkinetic model, we identified 144 candidate materials. For 10 promising candidates, DFT calculations reveal a good correlation with our assessment using ML. Among the top elemental combinations were Pt-Ti, Pd-V, Ni-Nb, and Ti-Zn, all of which appear unexplored experimentally. Keywords syngas, ML, screening, high-throughput, catlas Introduction As we look to recast our energy infrastructure, we need to discover novel catalysts to support our new vision. Catalysts will allow access to key chemical feedstocks we have come to rely on today, but from renewable resources. One method of accessing carbon feedstocks is con- version of synthesis gas (syngas). Synthesis gas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. It may be accessed from renewable biomass feedstocks1 or through electrochemical reduc- tion of carbon dioxide and water.2 The conver- sion of syngas may be done directly, which could prove to be an attractive approach due to its relative simplicity. Still, controlling the prod- uct distribution and selectivity is an important outstanding challenge. There is particular in- terest in selectively accessing multi-carbon oxy- genates because of their utility and high market value.3 Development of catalysts for the direct con- 1 arXiv:2208.12717v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 26 Aug 2022 version of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates has primarily been focused on 4 classes of ma- terials: Rh-based, Mo-based, modified Fischer- Tropsch, and modified methanol synthesis cata- lysts.1,4 Despite being the subject of investiga- tion for nearly a century, no economically vi- able catalysts have been identified to pursue commercial implementation.1 The only elemen- tal catalyst that has shown some selectivity to- wards multi-carbon oxygenates is Rh.1,5,6 Ex- perimental and theoretical studies had shown that under-coordinated surfaces have low selec- tivity towards C2+ oxygenates6 and that less active terrace sites have some selectivity to- wards the desired products.7 A more recent work has shown that the previous treatment of adsorbate-adsorbate interactions on Rh (111) surfaces was inadequate and arrived at the op- posite conclusion for Rh,8 so the understand- ing of this chemistry is still evolving. To form multi-carbon oxygenates, the catalyst must be simultaneously good at disassociating *CO to form *CHx intermediates on the surface and able to maintain *CO such that it may be in- serted into the *CHx intermediates.4,9,10 Strik- ing a balance between these two competing re- actions makes finding a catalyst for this chem- istry difficult. Copper cobalt binary inter- metallics have been studied. Cobalt based cat- alysts are industrially used for Fischer-Tropsch (FT) synthesis.1 They efficiently form *CHx intermediates and facilitate C-C coupling to form hydrocarbon products. It has been sug- gested that CuCo materials work synergistically to make multi-carbon oxygenates.9 Cobalt sites disassociate *CO, while copper sites maintain *CO, thereby allowing it to be inserted into the *CHx intermediates. We are interested in bi- nary intermetallics because they have not been thoroughly explored for this chemistry. To run a screening, a clear objective is nec- essary (i.e. to achieve high selectivity and/or activity). The computational approach to cat- alyst discovery necessitates the observation of many different sites, on many different surfaces, for every material in order to understand how it might behave as a catalyst and therefore as- sess it against the objective. One binary ma- terial would require hundreds of DFT calcula- The acetaldehyde selectivity as a function of *CO and *OH adsorption energies as solved by Schumann et al.7 which also con- sidered methanol, methane, and ethanol as al- ternate products. (bottom) Reproduced with permission from ref. 7 Copyright 2018, ACS tions to fully uncover its behavior as a cata- lyst. Observation of adsorbed intermediate and transition state energies allow an understanding of the overall rate and overall selectivity to be developed through microkinetic modeling. Mi- crokinetic models (MKMs) are well established for determining trends.11 This is done in prac- tice,12–14 but is very costly to scale. When considering many materials, it is tractable to use descriptor-based objectives where just a few adsorption energies are assigned target val- ues.15–18 Because dense site exploration of large design spaces with DFT is not feasible, ML has been of interest to accelerate this process. Most efforts have required the generation of domain specific datasets and bespoke ML models15,19,20 to accomplish this. Without ML, screenings fo- 2 cus on specific classes of materials such a single atom catalysts,12 dual-atom catalysts,18 or 2D materials17 where the design space can be more well-bounded and brute force is more feasible. Both of these approaches are computationally intensive. Here, we used off-the-shelf pretrained graph neural network models, which required no up- front DFT data collection or model training, to explore 947 binary intermetallics as catalyst candidates. Looking at facets with miller in- dices not exceeding 1, we considered 16k sur- faces, which yield 1 million adsorbate-surface configurations. To facilitate this process we de- veloped and introduce a software package, cat- las, which automates the process of generat- ing slabs from bulk structures, placing adsor- bates on the slabs, and performing inference on the adsorbate-surface configurations. Cat- las orchestrates the distribution of these triv- ially parallelizable tasks so that many GPUs and/or CPUs may be used to accelerate the process. We then used an existing microkinetic model to project the selectivity as a function of two descriptor adsorption energies. The inter- mediate and transition state energies were cor- related with the energies of *CO and *OH on the (111) surfaces of Face-centered cubic (FCC) pure metals to project the selectivity across a complex reaction network. The resulting selec- tivity heatmap (Figure 1), reveals that materi- als which adsorb *OH with adsorption energies in the range of 0: -0.75 eV and adsorb *CO with energies in the range of -1.25: -1.75 eV may show selectivity towards multi-carbon oxy- genates. We use this conclusion for the (111) surface of pure metals and extrapolate to (111)- like surfaces of binary intermetallics. ML mod- els were used to predict the adsorption energies of *OH and *CO for 947 binary intermetallics from the Materials Project21 with an energy above hull not exceeding 0.1 eV/atom. The predicted adsorption energies were used to clas- sify whether the materials could be interesting as potential catalyst candidates. We found 144 promising materials which have been ranked in our analysis. Methods Model Selection All models considered were graph neural net- works trained on the OC20 dataset.22 Graph neural networks are well-suited for learning chemical properties because they capture con- nectivity of atoms within their architecture without the need for specially engineered fea- tures.23 Atoms are represented as nodes in the graphs and edges represent interactions between atoms. The OC20 dataset contains unary, binary, and ternary materials made up of 55 different elements. The dataset contains many transition metal systems, but it also con- tains non-metals, metalloids, post-transition, alkali, and alkali earth metals. It covers 82 different adsorbates comprised of C, H, O, and N, with 1-12 atoms. The OC20 dataset was not catered to materials discovery for the direct conversion of syngas. *CO does not even appear in the training set, so the mod- els have not even seen an example of *CO on a surface. There is opportunity to ap- ply this method to broader classes of materi- als and other chemistries using the same mod- els. Of the graph neural network architectures that have been trained on the OC20 dataset, we considered GemNet24 models because they are currently state-of-the-art amongst models with pretrained weights publicly available ac- cording to the Open Catalyst Project leader- board. GemNet leverages directed edge em- beddings and edge-based message passing to achieve predictions which are invariant to trans- lation and equivariant to rotation as atomic forces and energies should be. Model selection comes with a trade-off: lower mean absolute error (MAE) between model pre- dicted values and DFT calculated values often requires higher computational cost. Inference where the adsorption energy is directly pre- dicted from the initial structure (initial struc- ture to relaxed energy - IS2RE - direct) is sub- stantially cheaper than using ML to iteratively optimize the structure and predict the energy from the relaxed structure (structure to en- ergy and forces - S2EF). These two schemes are 3 generation and ML inference. Details show the options for distributing work, the workflow for enumerating adsorbate-surface configurations and performing inference, run outputs, and how user specified configurations interact with the architecture. 4 shown in Figure 3. *OH has been included in the training data, and binary, transition metal (TM) intermetallics make up a large portion of the training data. For these reasons, direct ap- proaches give reasonable performance for *OH for this use case. The best performing model is a GemNet-dT model that was initially trained to perform iterative relaxation steps, and was finetuned to directly predict the relaxed en- ergy25 (GemNet-dT FT). This data was used as an initial filtering step. For any surface where the ML predicted *OH adsorption energy fell in the range [-1.2,-0.5] eV, the *OH ML infer- ence was repeated using lower error relaxation model (GemNet-dT).24 This domain comfort- ably bounds the domain of interest from the selectivity heatmap. Inference was also per- formed on this subset of surfaces for *CO us- ing the exact same GemNet-dT24 pretrained model. For *CO, 65 relaxation steps was se- lected because it minimized the MAE with re- spect to DFT validation data. For the relaxed *OH inference, 136 steps was similarly selected. Candidate Classification Catlas was used to enumerate adsorbate-surface configurations for all surfaces with miller in- dices not exceeding one. Any relaxations with adsorbate desorption, adsorbate dissociation, or surface reconstruction were discarded. For each of the enumerated surfaces, once dense inference had been performed, the minimum binding energies for each descriptor (*CO and *OH) were computed and taken to be the rep- resentative energy for that surface. Analysis was performed on a per surface basis. No sur- face energy calculations were performed so it is not guaranteed that surfaces with good de- scriptor energies will appear experimentally or that their properties will dominate observed be- havior. Because the MKM was developed for face-centered cubic (FCC) (111) surfaces, sur- faces were discarded if they were not (111)-like (close packed). The selectivity information was determined by resolving the microkinetic model presented by Schumann et al. There were small differences in the selectivity map solved for this work, but the overall domain of interest was the same. The potential candidacy of binary transition metal combinations was considered using two criteria: (1) the minimum distance of any surface to the maximum observed selec- tivity towards acetaldehyde. The distance from the maximum selectivity was calculated for all surfaces. For each elemental combination, the minimum distance across all surfaces was cal- culated and was taken to represent the compo- sition. (2) We counted the number of surfaces which lie in a descriptor space containing a pro- jected selectivity greater than or equal to 0.1. If any part of the descriptor space bounded by an ellipse with radii equal to twice the mean ab- solute error (MAE) of the ML models has a se- lectivity greater than 0.1, then that surface was considered to be a candidate. This is repeated for all surfaces and the number of candidates for each metal combination was calculated. MAE was used as a proxy for uncertainty because un- certainty information is not available from the models. Catlas The architecture of catlas is summarized in Fig- ure 2. The workflow starts by filtering which bulk materials and adsorbates should be con- sidered. Adsorbates are simply filtered by their SMILES strings. Bulks may be filtered by many criteria: Pourbaix stability, elemental composition, number of unique elements, ma- terial identifier, energy above hull, band gap, and bulk size. Certain elements may be spec- ified as required to, for example, look at ni- trides. Additionally, the paradigm of active- host materials may be selected for. From the materials of interest, slabs are enumerated us- ing pymatgen.26 The slabs may be filtered by their size and a maximum miller index if de- sired. Next, adsorbate-surface configurations are enumerated using CatKit.27 Both slab and adsorbate-slab enumerations rely on the data generation infrastructure that was created for the OC20 dataset22 and therefore create OC20- like adsorbate-surface configurations which may aptly be used with ML models trained on the dataset. Finally, ML inference is performed on each of the adsorbate-surface configurations. 5 and *OH on binary, transition metal intermetallics, respectively. DFT calculations were performed with identical functional, psuedopotentials, and settings as the model training data. (c) *CO and *OH on the (111) surface of unary transition metals. The DFT calculations, taken from Schumann et al., were used to build scaling relations for the MKM considered.7 (d-e) Model details for *CO and *OH inference, respectively. 6 Three important outputs are generated in a catlas run: a summary of results (pandas dataframe), Sankey diagram, and parity plots. The summary dataframe memorializes all of the key information from the run: the bulk, the ad- sorbate, the information that uniquely defines each surface (miller indices, shift, top of the slab or bottom), which model was used, the inferred energies, etcetera. The Sankey diagram sum- marizes the enumeration and inference process by showing what survives filtering steps and how many objects are created at enumeration steps. The parity plots inform model perfor- mance on a per adsorbate basis for the types of material considered. Catlas uses dask28 to distribute its infer- ence workflow. Dask-distributed has backends for parallelization on local machines, standard HPC clusters, and kubernetes clusters, as well as support for GPU workloads. In this work, we successfully scaled CPU workloads across 20 nodes with 600 cores and GPU workloads to 2 Nodes with 8 GPUs, but this is not a limit. A run of calculations commences simply by specifying the design space to be explored in an input yaml file and executing the repos- itory’s main file. By default, the adsorbates and materials that may be considered are those contained within the OC20 dataset,22 but this is configurable if additional bulk database and adsorbate database files are added. The OC20 dataset sampled a subset of materials from the Materials Project21 which contain 3 or fewer unique elements (unary, binary, ternary) and only contain a specific set of elements. The time required to complete calculations is depen- dent on the materials. For our case study, using GemNet-dT to relax adsorbate-surface systems, approximately 50 surfaces (1,200 adsorbate- surface configurations) may be considered per hour using 1 GPU. Using GemNet-dT FT to di- rectly predict the adsorption energies, approxi- mately 10 surfaces (200 adsorbate-surface con- figurations) may be considered per hour using one 4-core worker. This means that at scale, it took just 10 hours to complete direct calcu- lations on 16k surfaces (500k calculations) and 16 hours to calculate 6k surfaces (150k calcula- tions). Results and Discussion Parity plots comparing the GemNet ML pre- dicted energies and DFT energies are shown in using the direct GemNet-dT FT model was 0.21 eV. The domain specific MAE for *CO and *OH using the GemNet-dT model were 0.16 eV and 0.14 eV, respectively. There is good cov- erage of binary intermetallic benchmark data over the range of adsorption energies considered for the MKM (-2.45: 0.25 eV for *CO and - 0.75: 1.50 eV for *OH). The annotation of twice the MAE reveals its utility in our candidate classification approach. The majority (roughly 90%) of data lies within these bounds. Fig- ure 3a-c only considers the difference between the GemNet model and corresponding (RPBE) DFT calculations. There are still two important sources of error to consider: (1) differences between the actual intermediate and transition state energies and those propagated via scaling relations implic- itly in the MKM and (2) differences between the DFT approach employed in the data used to train the GemNet models and the approach used to collect data for the MKM. Differences between the actual intermediate and transition state energies and those propagated via scal- ing relations implicitly in the MKM are relevant here because we are extrapolating the MKM to binary intermetallics with similar facets despite it being developed for unary surfaces. Although this approach will not perfectly treat all pos- sibilities, it should treat the majority of cases well, and therefore is a useful tool for broad ex- ploration. ences caused by the difference in functionals employed. OC20 data was calculated using the RPBE functional, while the MKM data used BEEF-vdW. These two functionals have been shown to have similar performance for short range chemisorption energy interactions29 like those considered in this work. Overall, there is good agreement between the OC20 trained, GemNet-dT predicted energies and the MKM DFT data (Fig 3e). The GemNet-dT predicted energies in Figure 3d-e are the minimum en- 7 this work. (right) Grid summarizing element combinations of interest or the direct conversion of syngas to C2+ oxygenates. The lower wedge shows the number of surfaces per combination that were classified as hits by proximity to a selectivity greater than 0.1 (approach 2) and the upper wedge shows the minimum distance to the maximum selectivity for each combination (approach 1). ergies per surface, where many heuristically placed sites were considered per surface. For the MKM DFT data, specific sites were con- sidered. All calculations were performed on bridge sites for *OH and most calculations were performed at hollow sites for *CO. Figure 3d compares the minimum energy per surface pre- dicted by GemNet-dT and the minimum energy per surface calculated by BEEF-vdW DFT for this work. There is good agreement for *CO. There is also a good correlation for *OH, but there is an offset of about 0.2 eV, which was not observed in Fig. 3e. We suspect this offset was not observed in Figure 3d because of a cancel- lation of errors. Likely, this is primarily caused by the *OH BEEF-vdW DFT values being sys- tematically lower than the RPBE DFT values, but the MKM considers higher energy bridge sites. Because there is good agreement between the unary MKM data and the GemNet-dT pre- dicted energies, we did not perform any correc- tions to our inferred energies. Still, we consid- ered the implications of systematic biases in our data by applying an offset and observing differ- ences in the outcome of our analysis (Table 1). If we had applied a correction of -0.2 eV to the *OH values, 81% of our classifications would be retained and we would have missed just 16 can- didate surfaces (88% would have been found by our approach). In general, our analysis is rela- tively insensitive to biases in *OH energies, and relatively sensitive to biases in *CO energies. The results of assessing candidates by the minimum distance to the maximum selectivity and the number of surfaces near high selectiv- ity are summarized in Figure 4. Enumeration 8 the MKM acetaldehyde selectivity heatmap developed by Schumann et al.7 and resolved for this work. Surfaces are shown as pie charts which have proportions representing the bulk composition. Elements have been colored according to whether they lie in the weak binding regime for both descriptors (grey), weak binding for *OH only (purple), or tight binding for both (yellow). Inset shows detailed location of the top surfaces per composition near the peak selectivity. The top 10 surfaces are pictured to the right. yields 1 million unique structures to be consid- ered to elucidate possible catalysts among bi- nary TMs. By filtering on (111)-likeness, just 7% of the surfaces remain. Just 1% of the orig- inal pool is near the domain of interest and (111)-like. The 10 closest element combina- 9 Applied error Correctly classified False negative False positive N % N % N % *OH + 0.1 eV 151 100 0 0 0 0 *OH + 0.2 eV 151 100 0 0 0 0 *OH - 0.1 eV 133 88 11 8 18 12 *OH - 0.2 eV 123 81 16 12 28 19 *CO + 0.1 eV 150 99 55 27 1 1 *CO + 0.2 eV 146 97 92 39 5 3 *CO - 0.1 eV 103 68 6 6 48 32 *CO - 0.2 eV 71 47 10 12 80 53 Nuclearities All surfaces (111)-like (111)-like, candidate N % N % N % monomer, other 43.2 680 59.3 119 78.8 dimer, other 8.7 7 0.6 0 0.0 trimer, other 748 4.7 7 0.6 0 0.5 4+, other 6.3 1 0.1 0 0.5 infinite, 0 6.6 213 18.6 13 8.6 both semi-finite 20.9 203 17.7 17 11.3 non-finite (other) 10.1 41 3.6 2 1.3 all 151 tions to the maximum selectivity projected by the MKM have been noted with stars in Fig- ure 4. Similarly, elemental combinations with 4 or more surfaces that were classified as hits are noted with stars. White stars have been used where combinations satisfied both of these cri- teria, while grey stars have been used where one was satisfied. The ten combinations with min- imum descriptor energies closest to the maxi- mum (Re-Pd, Pt-Ti, Pt-Mn, Pt-Mo, Ti-Zn, Pt- Hf, Pd-V, Nb-Ni, Re-Pt, Pt-Zr) are previously unexplored as potential catalyst candidates re- ported in literature. It is difficult to make comparisons between the results here and the best known materi- als because materials reported are highly mod- ified.1,4,30 For example, top Rh-based catalysts are promoted with Mn, Li, and Fe. The in- tricacy of engineered supports and modifica- tions are beyond the scope of what may be captured here. Mo-based catalysts are cova- lent materials (Mo-S, Mo-C, Mo-O, or Mo-P), which were outside of the scope of this screen- ing as well. Modified methanol synthesis and Fischer-Tropsch catalyst both use known cata- lysts for those chemistries as a starting place, but are highly modified from there.1 Even the simple modified-FT example (Cu-Co or Cu- Fe) may not be compared because there are no CuCo or CuFe materials in the Materials Project database21 that meet the stability cri- teria of less than 0.1 eV/atom above the con- vex hull. A descriptor-space view may be seen in Figure 5. The paradigm of tight and weak binding is expressed by coloring elements by their binding characteristics (grey - weak bind- ing for both descriptors, purple - tight binding for *CO and weak binding for *OH, yellow - tight binding both). The dotted lines show the bounds of *OH values which were discarded in the initial course screening step using the less accurate GemNet-dT FT model. Most of the best surfaces are an elemental mixture of one pure metal that weakly binds *OH and one that tightly binds *OH, as would be expected by a simple tie-line analysis. Of the ten surfaces clos- 10 fied, shown here on surfaces that have also been categorized as (111)-like. est to the maximum, all except those that are Re containing are a tight-weak binding mixture. The minimum energies of 111-like surfaces for the materials considered sparsely populate the domain of interest where acetaldehyde selectiv- ity is projected to be high. Pure iron is not shown here because its descriptor energies are very tight binding (*OH: -2.4 eV , *CO: -3.6 eV), but alloy surfaces containing it are appro- priately colored with very dark yellow. The proportions of slab surface motifs for the 16,000 surfaces considered here are shown in ing up these motifs may be seen in Figure 6. Those with nuclearities of three or more may have different surface connectivities (i.e. lin- ear or triangular for three). The nuclearity types were calculated using the graph based algorithm developed by Sharma et al.31 Sur- faces where one element type has no neigh- bors of the same element (monomers) are 43.2% of those enumerated. Once filtered by 111- likeness, monomers make up a majority of the data (59.3%), and filtering by candidate classi- fication makes this majority stronger (78.8%). All of the ten surfaces closest to the maximum show this nuclearity. Despite making up 20% of the data, there were no dimer+ candidates. In- finite nuclearity in one element and zero in an- other indicates that the top layer only contains a single unique element. Semi-finite is infinite in one direction. These two nuclearities make up essentially the rest of the candidate pool. Non- finite (other) captures all other surfaces with non-integer nuclearities for both elements. Conclusion Exploring large design spaces for novel catalysts using DFT is infeasible. DFT surrogates have historically required the construction of expen- sive domain-specific DFT training data sets. Here, we show that off-the-shelf models pre- trained on the OC2022 dataset have achieved near DFT accuracy for a broad domain of ma- terials captured in the dataset. We present cat- las, an open source framework to parallelize and automate the process of evaluating materials as catalysts based upon descriptors. We demon- strate its efficacy by considering the direct con- version of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. With the well-posed objective for *OH and *CO descriptor energies from Schumann et al., we were able to screen 947 stable and meta-stable materials and discover a subset which may be well positioned for this chemistry. With the design space narrowed by our approach, can- didates may be prioritized and tractably as- sessed using more detailed studies with DFT or by experimental investigation. The utility of catlas is underscored by the evolving under- standing of the kinetics for the direct conversion of syngas to multi-carbon oxygenates. When an improved descriptor-based kinetic model is available, catlas may be used to assess potential catalyst candidates with ease. The generalized framework of catlas, makes it extensible. With clear objective descriptors, catlas may be used to discover catalysts for any arbitrary chem- istry. Acknowledgement Acknowledgment is made to the Donors of the American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund for support (or partial support) of this research. Kirby 11 Broderick acknowledges research support by the Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Sciences, Data Science for Knowledge Discovery for Chemical and Ma- terials Research program, under award DE- We would like to acknowledge Janice Lan from Meta AI Research for running and processing the OC20-like *CO data that was used here to make Figure 3a and assess model performance on *CO. 12