Fano Interference in a Single-Molecule Junction Yiping Ouyang1,5,#, Rui Wang1,#, Deping Guo2,#, Yang-Yang Ju3,#, Danfeng Pan4, Xuecou Tu4, Lin Kang4, Jian Chen4, Peiheng Wu4, Xuefeng Wang4, Jianguo Wan1,5, Minhao Zhang1,5,*, Wei Ji2,*, Yuan-Zhi Tan3,*, Su-Yuan Xie3 and Fengqi Song1,5,*. 1National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, and School of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. 2Beijing Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Functional Materials and Micro-Nano Devices, and Department of Physics, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China. 3State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. 4School of Electronic Science and Engineering and Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China. 5Atom Manufacturing Institute (AMI), Nanjing 211805, China. #These authors contributed equally: Yiping Ouyang, Rui Wang, Deping Guo, Yang-Yang Ju. *Corresponding authors. Email: M.Z.(zhangminhao@nju.edu.cn), W.J.(wji@ruc.edu.cn), Y.T.(yuanzhi_tan@xmu.edu.cn), and F.S.(songfengqi@nju.edu.cn) Abstract Trends of miniaturized devices and quantum interference electronics lead to the long desire of Fano interference in single-molecule junctions, here, which is successfully demonstrated using the 2,7-di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene molecule with a long backbone group and a short side group. Experimentally, the two electrically coupled groups are found to contribute to two blurred degenerate points in the differential conductance mapping. This forms a characteristic non-centrosymmetric double-crossing feature, with distinct temperature response for each crossing. Theoretically, we describe the practical in-junction electron transmission using a new two-tunnelling-channel coupling model and obtain a working formula with a Fano term and a Breit-Wigner term. The formula is shown to provide a good fit for all the mapping data and their temperature dependence in three dimensions, identifying the Fano component. Our work thus forms a complete set of evidence of the Fano interference in a single-molecule junction induced by two-tunnelling-channel coupling transport. Density functional theory calculations are used to corroborate this new physics. KEYWORD: Fano interference, quantum interference, single-molecule junctions, a two-tunnelling-channel coupling model, noncentrosymmetrical double-crossing feature, differential conductance mapping Introduction The question of quantum interference (QI) in single-molecule junctions (SMJs) has attracted considerable attention in terms of the theoretical values of the interference physics at the smallest scale, and its practical utility in microelectronics.1-5 The control of QI has been demonstrated in various SMJs through the design of molecular structures6-21, contact configurations10-12, or electrical gating12-18. The molecular structure determines the paths of electron transport, forming the basis of QI in an SMJ. The electrode contact configuration influences the phase difference among electron paths, which is crucial for the effect of QI. The electrical field introduced by a gate can be used to tune the energy levels of molecular states, bringing with it the possibility of changing the status of QI. Fano interference is a specific and essential type of QI that occurs between a discrete state and a continuous state22, and is remarkable for the characteristic asymmetrical resonant profile and for the drastic destructive-constructive switching. Having been realized in many mesoscopic electronics devices23-32, it is now highly sought after in molecular electronics due to its characteristic features2,5,17-21,32-40. However, systematic evidence of Fano interference in SMJs is still rare due to both experimental and theoretical challenges. Experimentally, the molecule is difficult to be designed, and be placed perfectly in a practical junction with a complicated environment40-42. Theoretically, attempts to distinguish the Fano interference from other types of QIs in SMJs have been made by some pioneers38,39, but random molecular locations and contact configurations induce a complicated in-junction environment with unexpected interference in some paths, making it extremely hard to describe and identify the characteristics of Fano interference. We tackle the problems in both experimental and theoretical aspects. We use a 2,7- di(4-pyridyl)-9,9'-spirobifluorene (DPSBF) molecule consisting of a long backbone group and a short side group, where the nitrogen anchoring sites help control the in- junction configuration. We constructed a two-tunnelling-channel coupling model to describe the electronic transmission in practical. We fabricated the field effect transistor devices based on the DPSBF molecule, obtain a characteristic noncentrosymmetrical double-crossing feature (NCDCF) in the differential conductance mapping, and fit the data with their temperature dependence in three dimensions, thus giving a complete set of evidence for the onset of the Fano interference in the SMJ. From density functional theory (DFT), we confirm information about interfered continuous-discrete states from the backbone and the side groups, corroborating the two-tunnelling-channel coupling physics. Results and Discussions Fano interference induced by a two-tunnelling-channel coupling model The identification of Fano interference relies on a practical model. In a proposed ideal model2,17-21,34-36,38 (Figure 1(a)), the side group of the molecule is coupled only to the backbone group and does not contribute to a tunnelling channel, leading to Fano interference between the side quasi-bond state and the backbone tunnelling state. However, in a real SMJ where the nanogap is rather small, the tunnelling channels through other groups should also exist even in the simplest structure. Therefore, we propose a more practical two-tunnelling-channel coupling model as shown in Fig. 1(b). In this case, the tunnelling channels through the backbone and the side groups coexist, and the side-backbone coupling u leads to the interference between the two channels. The side group has much weaker couplings to the electrodes (t’L and t’R) than the backbone group (tL and tR), leading to a discrete tunnelling state to join the Fano interference with a much more continuous backbone tunnelling state. We describe the electron transmission as a linear superposition of an asymmetrical Fano resonant term, a symmetrical BW resonant term, and an off-resonant term: τ(E) = AF ΓF +q) 2 ΓF ) 2 +1 + ABW 1 (2(E-εBW) ΓBW ) 2 +1 + Aoff (1) where q is the asymmetry factor of the Fano resonance; AF, ABW, and Aoff are the amplitudes of the three terms; the Fano and BW resonant levels are respectively equal to the effective energy level of the side and backbone groups, i.e., εF = εp and εBW = εb; the Fano and BW resonant widths are equal to the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the density of states (DOS) of the side and backbone groups, i.e., ΓF = Γp , ΓBW = Γb. This form is temperature-independent (when kBT ≪ Γp, Γb, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature). Details are given in Supplementary Information S1. This model considers more factors than the ideal one, describing the inevitable side channel and the interference between channels, but its transmission form is born to distinguish the Fano interference from other types of QI. The Fano and BW resonant terms contribute to a noncentrosymmetrical and a centrosymmetrical crossing patterns in the differential conductance results respectively. This noncentrosymmetrical double- crossing feature (NCDCF) is the characteristic fingerprint for identifying the two- tunnelling-channel coupling induced signal. Moreover, the temperature response of the differential conductance should follow a square law (when kBT ≪ ΓF, ΓBW). Details are found in Supplementary Information S2. A NCDCF and its temperature dependence provide direct evidence of two- tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference We designed and synthesized the DPSBF molecule consisting of a long 2,7- di(pyrldin-4-yl)-9H-fluoren backbone and a short 9H-fluoren side group to fabricate the field effect transistor devices (Figure. 2(a)). As shown in Fig. 2(b), the nitrogen atoms ensure a robust connection between the backbone group, rather than the side group, and the gold electrodes. This configuration is in accordance with the model. The variation of the junction conductance (Gsd) is recorded during a feedback-controlled electromigration break junction (FCEBJ) process43,44 as shown in Fig. 2(c). Further details of the molecular synthesis and device fabrication are provided in the Methods section. The obvious modulation of the Coulomb blockade region in the source-drain current (Isd) by the gate voltage (Vg) indicates the effectiveness of the gating on the molecular energy levels (Fig. 2(d)). Moreover, the differential conductance (dIsd / dVsd) shows several peaks as a function of Vg at the bias voltage Vsd = 0 mV (Fig. 2(e)). Each peak is related to a degenerate point, namely the condition when the level of a resonant component in the transmission spectrum aligns with the chemical potential of the source and drain electrodes. In Figure 3, we show the characteristic NCDCF as key evidence of the two- tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference. Fig. 3(a) shows the mapping of dIsd / dVsd against Vg and Vsd which exhibits an anomalous global noncentrosymmetrical pattern and two adjacent blurred degenerate points at 3 K. The two adjacent degenerate points may result from two coupled tunnelling channels, and the noncentrosymmetry may reflect Fano interference. These features thus provide preliminary evidence of two- tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference. According to our model, εF and εBW are related to the energy levels of the molecular groups and can be tuned by Vg. The parameters q, ΓF, ΓBW, AF, ABW, and Aoff are energy- independent and hence they can be obtained via fitting. Hence we apply our model to fit the data (see Eq. (S24) in Supplementary Information) near the degenerate points. As shown in Fig. 3(b), the fitted dIsd / dVsd mapping agrees well with the experimental values, and the signal is attributed to the superposition of a centrosymmetrical BW crossing and a noncentrosymmetrical Fano crossing. This is precisely the characteristic NCDCF as the fingerprint for identifying the two-tunnelling-channel coupling induced signal (Details of individual crossing are provided in Supplementary Information S2, when εF (εBW) aligns with the source and drain chemical potentials i.e., the exact locations of the double-crossing in Figs. 3a and b. The fitted parameters are α = 0.0103 (where eαVg is the change in the electrochemical potential caused by the gate electrode and e is the electron charge), q = 0.374, ΓBW = 11.91 meV, ΓF = 6.79, εF − εBW = 8.04 meV. The asymmetry factor q = 0.374 implies that the Fano term behaves more like a dip, rather than a peak of the BW term. To provide a clearer illustration of this NCDCF, we plot dIsd / dVsd - Vg curves for different Vsd. under a vertical offset. Figs. 3(c–f) show the experimental curves, the fitting curves with all the components, the BW component from the fitting, and the Fano component from the fitting at different values of Vsd. The experimental and total fitted data show similar profiles for all Vsd values. The BW curves show mirror symmetry, for example, the BW curve at Vsd = +10 mV is mirror symmetrical to the curve at Vsd = −10 mV in Fig. 3(e) (plotted in the same colour). In contrast, the Fano curves in Fig. 3(f) show no symmetry and demonstrate the profile of a clear dip with an inconspicuous peak at Vsd = 0 mV. Thus, we show the distinct difference between the symmetries of the Fano and BW components. Our model also indicates that the signals of the Fano and BW components will become more unobvious as the temperature increases, reflecting the blunting and widening of peak and dip due to the change of Fermi distribution function while transmission spectrum remains unchanged. There is a linear relation between the dIsd / dVsd values and square of the temperature (T2). When increasing the temperature, the variation tendency of the dIsd / dVsd values is positive near the Fano crossing (as for the dip-like Fano term when q = 0.374), and is negative near the BW crossing. All these laws are in the condition that T ≪ ΓF / kB ≈ 50 K. Further details of temperature response are provided in Supplementary Information S2, Figures S4 and S5. In Figure 4, we show the temperature-dependent behaviours by constructing the measurements at three different temperatures: 3, 9, and 12K those are much smaller than 50 K. By subtracting the experimental and fitted dIsd / dVsd data against Vg and Vsd at 3 K from that at 12 K as plotted in Figs. 4(a) and (b). The black (white) auxiliary lines show that the Fano (BW) component brings a positive (negative) response, in good agreement with the theoretical model. To obtain more specific details of the temperature response, we compare the experimental dIsd / dVsd - Vg curves for zero bias at 3, 9, and 12 K under a vertical offset in Fig. 4c. As the temperature increases, there are different responses in the BW (peak) and the Fano (dip) regions. In these two regions, for illustrative purposes we defined two obvious points on the curve as point J at Vg = 2.85 V and point X at Vg = 2.00 V. Point J is near the peak position of the curve, while X is near the dip position on the right side of J. XTemp. and JTemp. are the values of dIsd / dVsd expressed in units of e2/h unit at 3, 9, and 12 K. The temperature dependence of XTemp. and JTemp. shows an opposite trend (Fig. 4(g)), and presents a linear relationship with T2. Figs. 4d-f show fitted results with total and individual contributions of the BW and Fano terms at three different temperatures. The tendencies of XTemp. and JTemp. in Fig. 4(h) collected from the fitted data in Fig. 4(d) agree well with the experimental results in Fig .4(g), while Figs. 4(i) and (j) show the two distinct tendencies corresponding to the contribution of the BW peak and the Fano dip, respectively. As described above, our data show the characteristic NCDCF in the dIsd / dVsd mapping, with each crossing showing a distinct temperature responses but both following a square law. All of these agree well with our model in three dimensions, forming the complete set of evidence of the two-tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference. This level of agreement demonstrates that the two-tunnelling- channel coupling model is effective in describing the practical in-junction environment, and distinguish the Fano interference. This model has been extended to studies on Fano interference in device 2, provided in Supplementary Information S3, and Figure S7. Density functional theory calculations corroborate the two-tunnelling-channel coupling model Our model pays particular attention to the spatial configurations of the SMJ. The side and backbone channels should respectively lead to discrete and continuous states in the Fano interference. Information on the positions and widths of the states are reflected in the results of dIsd / dVsd. The position of related state levels should be distributed in an appropriate range to be accessed by gating. All these features are confirmed by our DFT calculations based on the structure illustrated in Figure 5a. Due to the high differential conductance that we measured (~10-1 e2/h near the maximum dIsd / dVsd), we consider the backbone group to be highly overlapped with electrodes and to lie across the nanogap, while the side group hangs between it. Further details of the calculations are provided in Methods section. The DOS profile of DFT calculations (Fig. 5d) corresponding to the fitted zero- bias dIsd / dVsd - αeVg curves (Fig. 5e) is observed around the Fermi level (Ef). The reason why the energy range is not exactly at the Fermi level may be the difference of gold electrodes between the theoretical model and the experimental environment, such as the surface relaxation and the adsorption of adatom. Both the DOS of the backbone and the side groups have a central peak separated in energy and are labelled as P1 and P2 respectively. The partial charge densities at P1 and P2 are shown in Figs. 5(b) and (c), presenting distinctly different distributions of the wave functions in the SMJ. The FWHM of P1 and P2 are Γb = 12.07 meV and Γp = 6.41 meV, while the corresponding fitted results give ΓBW = 11.91 meV ≈ Γb and ΓF = 6.79 meV ≈ Γp. Furthermore, the distance between P1 and P2 is εp − εb = 8.70 meV, which is in good agreement with the distance between the BW and Fano resonant levels in the fitted results εF − εBW = 8.04 meV. Note that εp, εb, Γp, and Γb all relate to the states after considering the side- backbone interaction but not simply to the original discrete and continuous tunnelling states, i.e. Γp is not much smaller than Γb because the final side state is broadened not only by t’L and t’R but also by u. Thus the DFT results give a corroboration of the physics of two-tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference Conclusions In summary, we have obtained the systematic evidence of Fano interference in an SMJ via both theoretical and experimental approaches. Theoretically, we proposed a practical two-tunnelling-channel coupling model to describe and identify the signal of Fano interference in SMJs. Experimentally, we fabricated field effect transistor devices based on the DPSBF molecule to obtain the characteristic NCDCF in the dIsd / dVsd mapping, noting that the temperature dependence follows a square law. The DFT calculations also corroborate the physics. All these results demonstrate the existence of two-tunnelling-channel coupling induced Fano interference in an SMJ. Our model and methods of identification could be extended into further studies of Fano interference in SMJs, and promote the realization of practical QI in single-molecule electronics. Methods Molecule preparation and characterization mmol), 4-pyridinylboronic acid (368 mg, 3.0 mmol) and K2CO3 (690 mg, 5.0 mmol) in the mixture of tetrahydrofuran (10 mL) and water (2 mL) was stirred in Argon atmosphere at 75 °C for 36 h. After cooling it to room temperature, the reaction mixture was concentrated under a reduced pressure and purified using silica gel column chromatography with petroleum ether/ethyl acetate (v/v, 3:1) as the eluent to afford DPSBF (249 mg, 53%) as a white solid. We performed the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements for molecular characterization, and all details are shown in Supplementary information S3. Device Preparation The gold nanowires (about 50-nm-width) were deposited via electron beam evaporation on top of a silicon gate electrode that has previously been added a SiO2 gate dielectric layer (about 30-nm-thick) via atomic layer deposition. The external circuits and SiO2 layer were patterned using an ultra-violet lithography procedure, but the nanowire was defined by electron-beam lithography. The array were cleaned further using oxygen plasma after the gold nanowires were prepared. Then the device containing DPSBF molecules was cooled to 1.6 K, and a nanogap was produced using the FCEBJ method43,44. The current was monitored while the source-drain voltage was increased. The voltage was decreased to 10 mV as soon as the current dropped by 1%. The cycle is repeated until the conductance was < 0.025 e2/h for the voltage of 20 mV. Density functional theory calculations Our DFT calculations were performed using the generalized gradient approximation and the projector augmented wave method45,46 as implemented in the Vienna ab-initio simulation package47. The kinetic energy cut-off was set to 400 eV. The Γ point was used to sample the first Brillouin zone in all calculations. All atoms of the molecule were allowed to relax until the residual force on each atom was less than 0.01 eV Å–1. The Grimme’s D3 form van der Waals (vdW) correction was considered with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange functional (PBE-D3).48,49 The Dual-Slab Model50 was adopted, consisting of five layers of Au atoms for each slab and separated by a vacuum region. The molecule on the Au (111) interface was located between two slabs with mirror symmetry. All the vacuum layer adopted (> 10 Å) is sufficient to appreciably reduce the image interactions. Conflicts of interest The authors declare no conflicts of interests. Acknowledgements We are most grateful to Professor Mark Reed for inspiring this work, and for many years of cooperation, and we acknowledge the financial support of the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFA0303203 and No. 2018YFE0202700), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 92161201, 12104221, 11974422), the Strategic Priority Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDB30000000), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (Grant Nos. BK20200312, BK20200310, and BK20190286), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 020414380192), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the Research Funds of Renmin University of China (Grant Nos. 22XNKJ30 and 21XNH090). Contributions M.Z. and F.S. conceived the research, W.J., and Y.-Z.T. co-supervised the project. D.G. and W.J. performed and analysed the density functional theory calculations. Y.O. fabricated the devices and performed the SMJ measurements. R.W. proposed the theoretical model. Y.-Z.T. participated in the preparation of the molecular materials. Y.- Y.J. prepared the molecular materials. X.T. and D.P. assisted in the device fabrication. Y.O., R.W., D.G., M.Z., F.S., and W.J. wrote the paper. L.K., J.C., P.W., X.W., J.W. and S.-Y.X. participated in discussions on this manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.