1 Nanoscale three-dimensional magnetic sensing with a probabilistic nanomagnet driven by spin-orbit torque Shuai Zhang1†, Shihao Li1†, Zhe Guo1, Yan Xu1, Ruofan Li1, Zhenjiang Chen1, Min Song2, Xiaofei Yang1, Liang Li3, Jeongmin Hong1, Xuecheng Zou1, Long You1,3* Affiliations: 1School of Optical and Electronic Information & Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology; Wuhan, 430074, China 2Faculty of Physics and Electronic Science, Hubei University; Wuhan, 430062, China 3Wuhan National High Magnetic Field Center, Huazhong University of Science and Technology; Wuhan, 430074, China *Corresponding author. Email: lyou@hust.edu.cn †These authors contributed equally to this work. Abstract: Detection of vector magnetic fields at nanoscale dimensions is critical in applications ranging from basic material science, to medical diagnostic. Meanwhile, an all-electric operation is of great significance for achieving a simple and compact sensing system. Here, we propose and experimentally demonstrate a simple approach to sensing a vector magnetic field at nanoscale dimensions, by monitoring a probabilistic nanomagnet’s transition probability from a metastable state, excited by a driving current due to SOT, to a settled state. We achieve sensitivities for Hx, Hy, and Hz of 1.02%/Oe, 1.09%/Oe and 3.43%/Oe, respectively, with a 200×200 nm2 nanomagnet. The minimum detectable field is dependent on the driving pulse events N, and is expected to be as low as 1 μT if N = 3 × 106. 2 Main Text: Sensitive physical measurements have played a pivotal role in the development of modern science and technology. In particular, detection of vectorial magnetic fields with high sensitivity and nanoscale spatial resolution is critical important in fundamental studies ranging from physics and material sciences to biology, as well as in the development of new applications in spintronics and quantum technology (1, 2). Consequently, over the past few decades, various advanced magnetic field sensors have been developed, including scanning Hall probe microscopy (3), nanoscale superconducting interference devices (4, 5), magnetic resonance force microscopy (6, 7), giant magnetoresistance, tunnelling magnetoresistance (TMR) (8-10), and nitrogen vacancy (NV) center in single-crystal diamond (11-13) to achieve nanometer resolution. Unfortunately, such technologies can solely measure the magnitude of the component of magnetic field that lies along its sensitive axis. One conventional method for measuring a vector field is to use three magnetic sensors (or NV ensembles) with their sensing directions along the three coordinate axes (x, y, and z), which degrades the spatial resolution (14-16). Recently, single NV have been proposed as a magnetic vectorial detecting system to provide the nanoscale spatial resolution, but such a system requires precisely fabricating a single crystal diamond with an NV center as well as additional lasers and microwave excitation, which limit the practical applications and scalability of the approach (17, 18). On the other hand, a single spintronic device can implement the detection of three-dimensional (3D) magnetic field by the spin-orbit torque (SOT), which offers advantages such as excellent magnetic sensitivity, fast measurement, complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) process compatibility, and all- electric operating environment at room temperature (19, 20). However, the device size cannot be unrestricted scaled down to maintain the multidomain structure. Therefore, there is a need for a single spin-dependent device that can detect a vectoral magnetic field with extremely high spatial resolution. Meanwhile, if a nanomagnet, composed of heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) heterostructure such as Ta/CoFeB/MgO, has perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA), SOT induced by an in- plane (IP) current flowing in the HM (Ta) layer can drive the magnetization of nanomagnet to probabilistically switch, and the switching probability is dependent on the applied IP magnetic fields (21, 22). These results indicate it may be feasible to detect a 2D and even 3D magnetic field, through monitoring the switching probability of the nanomagnet. To be specific, under a current pulse, the magnetization of the nanomagnet (such as CoFeB) can be excited from a stable state 3 (‘up’ or ‘down’ state, named Mz = ±1) to a metastable state (in-plane state, named Mz = 0) via SOT (22-24). When the magnetization relaxes to a stable state once the current pulse is turned off, the transition probability from Mz = 0 to Mz = ±1 differs depending on the Zeeman splitting of Mz = ±1, under an external or effective magnetic field along the out-of-plane (z) direction (25-27). The IP (x or y) components of the magnetic field together with the collinear current can generate and modulate the z-direction effective field due to SOT, and the sign of this field depends on the current polarity (24). This phenomenon enables the IP and OOP components to be distinguished with alternating current pulse directions (±x or ±y) (19). In this work, we demonstrate that such a compact and simple approach is indeed possible for nanoscale vector magnetic field detecting, with a probabilistic nanomagnet composed of HM/FM heterostructure, driven by SOT. Sensing principle and experimental setup A single domain nanomagnet with PMA sitting immediately on a Ta layer is the basic field probing element of the proposed sensor, as illustrated in Fig.1A. In this configuration, the anomalous Hall resistance RAHE is proportional to the out-of-plane magnetization, according to the anomalous Hall effect (AHE), and thus one can probe the magnetization state by measuring the RAHE. As a result of the spin Hall effect of Ta or Rashba effect in the Ta/CoFeB/MgO heterostructure, the magnetization of nanomagnet can be controlled by charge current flowing in the HM layer via SOT (28, 29). The in-plane torque, if strong enough, can bring nanomagnet’s magnetization to the metastable state (Mz = 0) at an energy level of Eb (energy barrier) (22-24). Additionally, after relax, from a macrospin perspective, the magnetization state will be found in the lower energy state with higher probability, where the probability of being in a state with energy E is proportional to exp(−E/kBT) with kB the Boltzmann constant and T the temperature, as given by Boltzmann statistics (30, 31) or deduced by the Arrhenius-Néel law (25) (see Supplementary Section 1 for more details). Note that the degenerated energy level of stable state (Mz = ±1) is assumed to be ground state (E = 0) without any effective magnetic field (Fig. 1B). 4 Fig. 1. Schematic visualization of the bilayer nanomagnet sensing principle. (A) Device structure along with the schematic of the measurement setup (top) and the SEM image of the nanomagnet (bottom). The current is applied along the x-direction while the Hall voltage is detected in the y-direction. (B) Energy level structure of the bistate nanomagnet with PMA under zero field. The energies for being in the upward and downward magnetized states (Mz = ±1) are the same (E = 0). If the magnet is stimulated by a driving current, then the magnetization will be excited from the stable state to the metastable state (Mz = 0) with an energy level of Eb. Once the current is turned off (Jx = 0), the magnetization will return to the up or down state with equal probability. (C) Energy level structure of the nanomagnet under a field of +Hz. The energies of the up and down states are split by Ez and −Ez, respectively. After the driving current is turned off, the magnetization will be more likely to relax to the state with lower energy, resulting in Pup > Pdn. (D and E) Hz,eff produced by SOT when the current and the colinear field are along x-direction (D) and y-direction (E). (F) Diagram of the approach for sensing an OOP field. Under a certain OOP magnetic field, a batch of current pulses are applied to the device along the x-direction to count the state numbers and thus calculate the corresponding probability (Pup). During each current pulse event, a high driving current is followed by a small reading current to drive the magnet to the metastable state and detect the relaxed magnetization state. However, the energy landscape would be modified by an magnetic field (H) through the Zeeman energy splitting of the two stable ground states, which is expressed as −μ0VMs(M•H), where μ0 is the permeability of free space, V is the volume of an individual magnetic entity, Ms is the saturation magnetization, and M is the unit vector of the magnetization (32). Considering an external field H 5 along the +z-direction, +Hz, the Zeeman energy is Ez = −μ0VMsHz, and thus, the energies of the Mz = +1 and −1 states shift by +Ez and −Ez, respectively, as shown in Fig. 1C. Unless otherwise stated, a positive/negative sign represents the up/down direction, respectively, for both Hz and Mz. Therefore, upon removal of the driving current, the magnetization relaxes to Mz = +1 with a probability of Pup ∝ exp(−Ez/kBT), while the probability of orienting in the down state Pdn is proportional to exp(+Ez/kBT), under the +Hz. Since Pup + Pdn =1, it is inferred that z B z B z B z B 2 up up up dn ( ) ( ) 1 (1 ) − − E k T E k T E k T E k T P = P P + P = e e +e = +e . Note that, once the exponent |2Ez/kBT| < 1, according to the piecewise linear approximation (33), Pup can be deduced as: 0 s z up z B B + 0.5 = + 0.5 2 2  − μ VM E P H k T k T , (1) which is a linear function of Hz. This linear relationship between Pup and Hz enables the detection of Hz by monitoring the probability of a relaxed state. Simply, according to equation (1), without H, the magnet would reorient itself to either ‘up’ or ‘down’ state with the equal probability of 50%. This stochastic switching feature has been confirmed and used for nanomagnetic logic and true random number generators in previous work (22, 23). Besides Hz, a z-component effective field Hz,eff generated by the IP current with a collinear magnetic field through SOT can also determine Pup, making it feasible to detect an IP field with the proposed sensor. Hz,eff is written as a function of the current density along the x- (or y-) direction Jx(y) and the normalized magnetization mx(y) caused by its corresponding collinear magnetic field Hx(y) (19, 24): z,eff SH x(y) x(y) 0 S ћ H = θ J m 2eμ M t , (2) where ħ is the reduced Planck constant, e is the electron charge, t is the thickness of the CoFeB layer and θSH is the spin Hall angle of the Ta layer. The IP field Hx (Hy) is utilized to orient the magnetization to achieve an IP component mx(y) and then generate Hz,eff, as depicted in Fig. 1D (Fig. 1E). Thus, for IP field detection, based on equation (2), two conclusions can be drawn. First, for a given amplitude of Jx (Jy), Hz,eff depends on Hx (Hy), whereas the direction of Hz,eff is determined by the current polarity. Therefore, Pup would vary with Hx (Hy) under a given collinear IP current through the generated Hz,eff, and the variation tendencies are opposite for different current polarities. Second, Hx (or Hy) cannot produce Hz,eff if there is solely the transverse current 6 Jy (or Jx). This indicates that Pup is invariable with the IP field under a transverse current. On the other hand, for OOP field sensing, an IP current can only excite the magnet into metastable state (high energy level) without changing the Zeeman energy, and thus Pup/dn would vary linearly with Hz under the applied IP current, where the variation tendency is independent of current polarity. We carried out the proof-of-principle experiments with a nanomagnet comprised of Ta (10 feasibility of vector magnetic field sensing based on probabilistic nanomagnet and evaluate the performance (detectable field and resolution limit) of such a sensor. The detailed magnetic and transport properties of the device are shown in Supplementary Section 2. The CoFeB with PMA can be driven to Mz = 0 state if an IP current flowing through a resistive bar made of tantalum that can exert strong SOT. The measurement sequence is illustrated in Fig. 1F. Here, the magnitude and the duration of the driving current are 12 MA/cm2 and 0.2s, respectively. After relaxation, a reading current of 0.5 MA/cm2 is used to measure the RAHE and thus detect the magnetization state. The state probability is collected by repeating this measurement. For example, if we count the number of up states as Nup in N pulse event cycles, then Pup is equal to Nup/N. Therefore, our method can detect not only DC fields but also AC fields. The maximum frequency of a detectable AC field is expected to be inversely proportional to the total measurement time and could reach over 1 kHz (Supplementary Section 3). One-dimensional magnetic field sensing 7 Fig. 2. One-dimensional magnetic field sensing. (A to C) Probability of the settled state being the up when a driving current pulse of 12 MA/cm2/200 ms is applied along the ±x-direction. (D to F) Pup as a applied along the ±y-direction. The dashed lines are the linear fits to the experimental data. Each displayed measurement data point is a statistical result from 500 pulse events. For experimental implementation of vector magnetic field sensing, we start from the detection of a one-dimensional magnetic field. Here, we apply a driving current pulse 500 times to count the up-state probability (Pup) at a given magnetic field. When the current pulse is applied along the x- direction (Jx), whether positive or negative, as discussed above, Pup linearly increases with increasing Hz from −19 to 8 Oe (or from −8 to 19 Oe), and the two cases have almost the same slope for the Pup-Hz curves (Fig. 2A). In contrast, Pup shows the opposite variation tendencies with Hx for different polarities of Jx (Fig. 2B). Under Jx = −12 MA/cm2, Pup linearly decreases with Hx within the range of −60 to +20 Oe, while under Jx = +12 MA/cm2, Pup linearly increases with Hx. Moreover, Pup remains constant with Hy varying from −20 to 20 Oe under Jx, regardless of the polarity, as no Hz,eff is induced by Hy, which cannot tilt the magnetization towards the x-direction (Fig. 2C). It is worth noting that settled up/down probabilities is unequal at H = 0 Oe, and thereby existing an asymmetric linear range for Pup vs. H(x, y, or z), which may be associated with the presence of a bias field in the above unoptimized experimental devices (Supplementary Section 4). Such nonequality and asymmetry could be improved or corrected in real applications by 8 optimizing film deposition and device fabrication, or introducing a magnetic field to balance the bias field, or calibrating the sensor system. Overall, Pup is found to be sensitive to Hx and Hz, but insensitive to Hy when Jx is applied. Similarly, Pup is sensitive to Hy and Hz, but insensitive to Hx when Jy is applied (Figs. 2D-F). These experimental results not only show the operation principle of one-dimensional magnetic field sensing, but also further verify the theoretical expectations described in the previous section that there are different relations between the variation tendency of the relaxed state probability and the current polarity. Next, we will investigate whether these differences enable distinction of the contributions of the IP and OOP fields. In other words, we aim to determine whether three components (Hx, Hy and Hz) of the magnetic field can be detected by characterizing the relaxed state probability variation, for reconstructing vector magnetic field with one single nanomagnet. Three-dimensional magnetic field sensing Fig. 3. Net probability contributed by Hz, Hx and Hy. (A) Net probability P(Hz) as a function of Hz, where processed with an addition operation to obtain P(Hz). (B) Net probability P(Hx) as a function of Hx from −60 to 20 Oe, as obtained by a subtraction operation to eliminate the contribution of Hz. (C) The net probability component P(Hy) as a function of Hy in the range of −40 to +28 Oe, as obtained by a subtraction operation corresponding experimental data points. If a 3D magnetic field H = (Hx, Hy, Hz) is applied to the device, then two Pup values under positive and negative Jx can be measured: Pup(+Jx) and Pup(−Jx). According to the different current- direction-dependent tendencies of the Pup–Hz curves shown in Fig. 2, the two collected Pup values can be processed with an addition operation to eliminate the Hx contribution. Therefore, the net probability contributed only by the Hz component is shown in Fig. 3A and is expressed as: 9 up x up x z (+ ) ( ) ( ) 2 − P J +P J P H = . (3) By performing a subtraction operation to eliminate the Hz contribution, we can obtain the net probability contributed only by Hx (Fig. 3B): up x up x x (+ ) ( ) ( ) 0 5 2 − − + P J P J P H = . . (4) Here, we add a compensation value of 0.5 to the subtraction result to ensure that Pup(Hx) is in the range from 0 to 1. Likewise, if the driving current is applied along the y-direction, then the net probability contributed only by Hy can be evaluated as (Fig. 3C): up y up y y (+ ) ( ) ( ) 0 5 2 − − + P J P J P H = . . (5) Note that P(Hz) can also be calculated as: up y up y z (+ ) ( ) ( ) 2 − P J +P J P H = , (6) and the P(Hz) values calculated from equations (3) and (6) are expected to be the same. Therefore, the relationships between the net probability (P(Hx), P(Hy), and P(Hz)) and the corresponding magnetic field components (Hx, Hy, and Hz) can be identified from 1D measurements, which is similar as our previous work (19). Once the net probability components are obtained using equations from (2) to (5), the magnitude of the corresponding magnetic field components can be read out according to Figs. 3A-C, and thus implementing 3D magnetic field sensing. The linear range of the magnetic field sensor is approximately −8 to +8 Oe for Hz, −60 to +20 Oe for Hx, and −40 to +28 Oe for Hy, as shown in Fig. 3. General speaking, the maximum detectable field for Hz is related to the saturated field of the nanomagnet with the assistance by SOT. In contrast, the maximum detectable IP field is expected to be determined by the field required to induce deterministic switching, corresponding to 100% one-state probability, under the driving current through SOT. Performance of the sensor 10 Fig. 4. Effect of the number of pulse events on the linearity of Pup-Hx curves under Jx = +12 MA/cm2. the best fit to the experimental data points. (D) Linearity (cyan circles) as a function of pulse event number along with the 1 N curve (soft red line). Next, based on the results shown in Fig. 3, we evaluate the performances of the demonstrated nanoscale 3D magnetic field sensor, such as sensitivity, linearity, field resolution, and spatial resolution. Sensitivity is the response of the device to the field change and is given by the relation S = ΔP/ΔH. Here, the sensitivities are calculated to be 1.02%/Oe, 1.09%/Oe and 3.43%/Oe for Hx, Hy, and Hz, respectively. Other specification of the sensor, to measure the maximum deviation of the sensor output from the fitted straight line, is the linearity error (ΔPmax). Normally, it is expressed as a percentage of the full-scale value: ΔPmax/PFS × 100%, where PFS is the full-scale output within the linear range (19). According to the results shown in Fig. 3, the linearity errors of our sensor within the linear range is 4.9%, 4.9% and 4.7% for Hx, Hy and Hz, respectively. Here, ΔPmax, along with the sensitivity, is also used to evaluate the minimum detectable field (δHmin = ΔPmax/S) for Hx, Hy, and Hz, given by 3.9, 3.4, and 0.7 Oe, respectively. Furthermore, the linearity error can be further improved by increasing the number of pulse events. Figs. 4 show Pup as a function of Hx under different numbers of pulse events (N = 200, 500 and 1000) with Jx = +12 11 MA/cm2. ΔPmax and the linearity error decrease with increasing number of pulse events and reach 2.37% and 3.1%, respectively, when N = 1000 (Fig. 4C). Generally, for all trials, the distribution of the actual Pup after N pulsing events, at a given field with expected up-state probability E up P , would obey binomial distribution (BD) with the standard deviation E E up up 1 = − σ NP P N ( ) (34). It indicates that Pup is extremely likely (~95.4%) to fall into E up 2 P   , and hence the utmost of sensor linearity error can be roughly estimated as 2σ, which reaches maximum 1 N when E up P = 0 5 . for a fixed N, but decreases with the increase of N. Fig. 4D plots ΔPmax as a function of N and the fitting with the 1 N curve (soft red line). It is seen that ΔPmax is closed to 1 N , though the former is less than the latter when N is greater than 800. Consequently, the minimum detectable magnetic field δHmin would be max 1 P S= S N . Accordingly, δHmin is expected to be as low as 1 μT, which is the magnitude of the magnetic field produced by the spin of a single electron at a distance of 10 nm, when N = 7.5 × 107, 5.6 × 107, and 0.3 × 107 for the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively. Especially, the N for the z-direction is on the same order as the number of pulse events used in NV measurements (13). Furthermore, inspired by the NV based sensors (12, 13), we deduce the field resolution η as the product of δHmin and the square root of measurement time, i.e. 0 min 0 δ  = μ H NT , where T0 is the time of each current cycle. The long cycle period (T0 = 0.3 s) used in our conceptual experiments leads to a large η (4.8, 4.2, and 0.8 mT Hz for the x-, y-, and z-directions, respectively, at N = 500). T0 could reach 30 ns for real applications (35, 36), and consequently, the resolution would theoretically be improved to 1.5, 1.3, and 0.3 μT Hz . Additionally, we expect that the spatial resolution can be developed by further scaling down the nanomagnet size. Although a smaller magnetic body volume V will decrease the energy barrier, it has been demonstrated to tune the switching probability of low-barrier nanomagnets, such as Δ = KuV/kBT ≈ 9, where Ku is magnetic anisotropy constant, by both OOP magnetic fields and IP fields (27, 37). In other words, the proposed sensor could keep working even with such low-barrier magnets for detecting both OOP fields and IP fields, giving us an opportunity to promote the spatial resolution of the sensor to less than 10 nm (see Supplementary Section 2 more details). Also, scaling down the size of the nanomagnet would reduce the driving current and thus power 12 consumption. It indicates this sensing technique is to allow the sensor to be scalable, which is crucial for nanoscale magnetic detection and imaging with high spatial resolution. For future real application, the proposed sensor with Hall bar structure could be developed into a magnetic tunnel junction (MTJ) structure that would have more advantages, for example, a larger readable resistance ratio due to the TMR effect (38). In future, to implement simultaneous magnetic imaging over a wide field of view such as μm or mm order, an MTJ array could be designed with a shared common driving path to enhance the efficiency in imaging the spatial magnetic field (39). Although individual MTJs are separated from each other, it would be possible to obtain continuous spatial field imaging with two layers of interleaved sensors, by making use of the advanced technique of 3D stacking of MTJs (Supplementary Section 5). The field resolution and spatial resolution of our sensor are comparable to the quantum vector magnetometers such as single NV based sensors (17, 18), if the promoted read/write speed and size of our device are utilized (see Supplementary Section 6 for more details). More importantly, our technique has advantages such as one single device structures with all-electric operations. These properties will allow us to develop a simple and compact sensor system for detecting vector magnetic fields at nanoscale dimension. Discussion and outlook It is expected that the driving and reading of our proposed sensor device could be carried out in the same way as already used in SOT-magnetoresistive random-access memory technology (40). Moreover, nanomagnet chips can be integrated with not only electronics but also microfluidics for biomedical engineering applications (41). Finally, with the same nanomagnet, the demonstrated possibility of sensing nanoscale magnetic fields or electrical current in combination with the observed memory and stochastic or probabilistic computing capabilities (21-23) opens a bright new world of nanospintronics for integrated sensing, memory and computing functions.