1 Rough diamond anvils: Steady microstructure, yield surface, and transformation kinetics in Zr Feng Lin1*, Valery I. Levitas1, 2, 3*, K. K. Pandey4, Sorb Yesudhas1, and Changyong Park5 1Department of Aerospace Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 3Ames Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 4 High Pressure & Synchrotron Radiation Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai 400085, India 5 HPCAT, X-ray Science Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA *Corresponding authors. Email: flin1@iastate.edu and vlevitas@iastate.edu Abstract: Study of the plastic flow and strain-induced phase transformations (PTs) under high pressure with diamond anvils is important for material and geophysics. We introduce rough diamond anvils and apply them to Zr, which drastically change the plastic flow, microstructure, and PTs. Multiple steady microstructures independent of pressure, plastic strain, and strain path are reached. Maximum friction equal to the yield strength in shear is achieved. This allows determination of the pressure-dependence of the yield strength and proves that ω-Zr behaves like perfectly plastic, isotropic, and strain path-independent immediately after PT. Record minimum pressure for α-ω PT was identified. Kinetics of strain-induced PT depends on plastic strain and time. Crystallite size and dislocation density in ω-Zr during PT depend solely on the volume fraction of ω-Zr. One-Sentence Summary: Cell with rough diamond anvils allowed us to determine laws of plastic flow, microstructure, and phase transformations under pressure. 2 Processes that involve large plastic deformation and PTs under high pressure are common in various manufacturing applications, materials synthesis technologies, and geophysics-related problems. Plastic strain may drastically reduce the PT pressure by one (1-3) and even two orders of magnitude (4), lead to new phases, and substitute time-controlled kinetics with fast plastic strain-controlled kinetics (5-8). Four-scale theory and simulations (5, 6) are developed to explain these strain-induced PTs (which are completely different from the traditional pressure or stress- induced PTs). However, it is still in its infancy, and new experimental and theoretical approaches and breakthrough results are very important. The main problem in studying plasticity, plastic strain-induced PTs, and structural changes is that they depend on five components of the plastic strain tensor εp and its entire path εp path, making an unspecifiable number of combinations of independent parameters. In particular, the yield surface in the 5D deviatoric stress s space f(s, εp, εp path) = σy(p) depends on the pressure p, εp, and εp path, demonstrating strain hardening/softening and strain-induced anisotropy (Fig. 1A); here σy is the yield strength in compression. This complexity makes it practically impossible to determine the complete evolution of the yield surface, even at small strains at ambient pressure. At high pressure, all methods (9-11) present the yield surface as f(s) = σy(p), i.e., like for perfectly plastic material (for which the yield surface is independent of εpand εp path, i.e., is fixed in the 5D stress space), and dependence on εp and εp path is neglected and merged in pressure, which causes large error in the determination of the yield strength under high pressure. One of the methods to determine the yield strength in shear τy = σy/√3 in DAC is based on the application of the simplified equilibrium equation dP̅ dr = − 2τf h , assuming the contact friction stress τf between anvil and sample reaches its maximum value τy (10-12). Here, P̅ is the pressure averaged over the sample thickness h. However, the results are systematically lower than other methods at ambient and high pressure (7, 9) due to the low friction coefficient of diamond leading to τf < τy. Coupled simulations and experiments show that τf = τy only in a small region even above 100 GPa (13). To resolve the above problems, we introduce rough diamond anvils (rough-DA), whose culet is roughly polished to increase friction (Fig. S1). We demonstrated that τf = τy for rough-DA, which allowed us to robustly determine σy(p). The rough-DA allowed us to solve several other basic problems and brought up discoveries described below. It was hypothesized in (12) that, above some level of accumulated plastic strain q in monotonous straining (straining path without sharp changes in directions), the initially isotropic polycrystalline materials deform as perfectly plastic and isotropic with a strain path-independent surface of the perfect plasticity φ(s) = σy(p) (Fig. 1A). This statement means that the effect of εp and εp path is excluded under the above conditions. Some qualitative supportive arguments for the perfect plastic behavior are presented in (12), but quantitative experimental proof is lacking for any material. Here, we heavily pre-deformed commercial Zr by multiple rolling until saturation of its hardness. We show that after the α-ω PT, for four different compression stages (i.e., for very different εp and εp path), all pressure distributions in the studied range from 2 to 11 GPa are described by single function σy = 1.24 + 0.0965p (GPa). This is possible only if the material behaves like perfectly plastic, isotropic, and independent of εp and εp path. The perfectly plastic state is related here to reaching a steady microstructure, determined here by in situ synchrotron X-ray diffraction in terms of crystallite (grain) size d and dislocation density ρ, which do not change under successive plastic straining. For rough-DA at the beginning of α-ω 3 PT, dα is smaller and ρα is larger than those from smooth anvils, i.e., rough-DA produces different, more refined steady microstructure. This is also confirmed by the fact that the minimum pressure for plastic strain-induced α-ω PT, pε d, was reduced from 1.36 GPa in smooth DAC to 0.67 GPa with rough DAC, which is the record low PT pressure for Zr. For both smooth and rough anvils, the pε d, dω, and ρω in ω-Zr are shown to be independent of εp and εp path. Surprisingly, dω and ρω evolution in ω-Zr during α-ω PT depends solely on the volume fraction c of ω-Zr and is independent of εp, εp path, p, initial dα, and anvil asperities. Similarly, there are unique functions dα(c) and ρα(c) for rough-DA (with some scatter for 0.38<c<0.52, which is discussed in supplementary materials), independent of εp, εp path, and p. Thus, for strongly pre- deformed material, εpand εp pathare excluded from the governing parameters; this is the main completely unexpected rule for plastic flow, microstructure evolution, and PT under pressure. reaction) with smooth anvils, while dc/dq is independent of c (zero-order reaction) with rough- DA; (b) In contrast to instantaneous process from conventional view on the strain-induced PTs, c here varies not only with growing plastic strain q, but also with time t. Pressure dependence of the yield strength. Radial pressure distributions in each phase in five successive compression steps, marked by the peak pressure at the culet center, are shown in Fig. 1B. Corresponding sample thicknesses are collected in Table. S2. Due to the large asperities of the rough-DA, when they penetrate Zr surface, contact sliding occurs in a thin layer of Zr, leading to τf = τy. Assuming von Mises yield condition with the yield strength σy = σy 0 + bp, and taking non-hydrostatic stress and heterogeneity along thickness into consideration, the equilibrium equation averaged over thickness is advanced to (see supplementary materials): dP̅ dr = −A σy0+bP̅ h → P̅ = (P0 + σy0 b ) exp (−A b r−r0 h ) − σy0 b ; A = √3(1−0.262b), (1) where P0 is the pressure at the point r0. Fig. 1C shows that after α-ω PT and for four different compression stages, all pressure distributions overlap and are described by Eq. (1) with single dependence σy = 1.24 + 0.0965p (GPa). Note that σy 0 = 1.24 GPa is converted from the hardness of ω-Zr from (2), H=3.72 GPa, based on the known relationship σy 0 = H/3, proving that τy is reached. Finite element simulations of the processes in DAC (13, 14) demonstrate that for different positions and compression stages, εp, εp path, and material rotations are very different. Consequently, the ability to describe all four curves with single function σy(p) demonstrates strict proof that for the monotonous loading with rough-DA, ω-Zr deforms as perfectly plastic and isotropic material with εp and εp path independent surface of perfect plasticity. Additional point is that the perfectly plastic state is found almost immediately after completing α-ω PT, i.e., it is inherited from α-Zr. We found that for smooth anvils up to 15 GPa, the ratio τf/τy = 0.39-0.46 away from the center characterizes underestimate in the σy(p) in previous works. We connect perfectly plastic behavior with reaching steady microstructure. After completing PT, dω, and ρω for 6, 10, and 14 GPa steps are practically independent of radius (Figs. 2B and 3B). Since εp, εp path, and p strongly vary with radius and increasing load, this indicates that steady microstructure, which is independent of pressure, εp, and εp path, is reached. 4 Fig. 1. Determination of the surface of perfect plasticity for ω-Zr. (A) Schematic of the evolution of the yield surface f(s, εp, εp deviatoric stresses s at fixed p. The initial yield surface and φ(s) = σy(p) are isotropic (circles). Two other yield surfaces depend on εp and εp path, and acquire strain-induced anisotropy, namely shifted centers O1 and O2 (back stress) and ellipsoidal shape due to texture. When the yield surface reaches φ(s) = σy(p), the material deforms as perfectly plastic, isotropic with the fixed surface of perfect plasticity. (B) Pressure distributions for different deformation steps with rough-DA. (C) Pressure in single-phase ω-Zr vs. r/h. Solid lines correspond to Eq. (1) for σy 0 = 1.24 GPa and b=0.0965. Eq. (1) is not valid around culet center. Dash line shows the position where data is truncated. The unified curve for all loadings (necessary to use data from all four compression stages as a single data set) is obtained by shifting each curve (which is allowed by differential Eq. (1), see supplementary materials) along the horizontal axis by an appropriate distance. Shifts are shown in parenthesis. Since for different points from different curves εp, εp path, and material rotations are very different, the obtained results prove the perfectly plastic and isotropic material response with εp and εp path independent surface φ(s) = σy(p). (D) Distribution of volume fraction of α-Zr and pressure in α-Zr. Starting from the 6 GPa step, α -Zr is fully transformed to ω-Zr along the radius. Note that errors from the Rietveld refinement of the x-ray patterns for pressure, the volume fraction of phases (as well as dislocation density and crystallite size) are smaller than the symbols in the plots. 5 Fig. 2 Crystallite size distribution and evolution. Radial distributions of the crystallite size obtained with rough- DA at (A) 2 and 3 GPa steps and (B) 6, 10, and 14 GPa steps. Since εp, εp path, and p strongly vary with radius and increasing load, this indicates that steady microstructure in terms of crystallite size, which is independent of pressure, εp, and εp path, is reached almost immediately after PT. (C) Crystallite size of α-Zr versus steady volume fraction of ω-Zr from 2 and 3 GPa steps with rough-DA and with smooth anvils. Blue cross represents the first appearance of ω-Zr with rough-DA at 0.67 GPa. For rough-DA at the beginning of α-ω PT, the crystallite size is smaller than that from smooth anvils, i.e., rough-DA produces different, more refined steady microstructure. With exception of region 0.38<c<0.52, where some scatter is observed, the crystallite size of α-Zr during α-ω PT is the unique function of c, almost constant for c<0.6, which is independent of pressure, plastic strain, and strain path. (D) Crystallite size of ω-Zr versus steady volume fraction of ω-Zr from 2 and 3 GPa steps with rough-DA, and with smooth anvils. For rough-DA, points from 2 and 3 GPa steps overlap within dash lines. Results in (D) represent surprising rule for ω-Zr for both rough and smooth anvils: existence of the unique curve for the crystallite size solely depending on c for both pressure steps during α-ω PT independent of pressure, εp and εp path. 6 Fig. 3. Dislocation density distribution. Radial distribution of dislocation density at (A) 2 and 3 GPa steps, and (B) 6, 10, and 14 GPa steps. Since εp, εp path, and p strongly vary with radius and increasing load, this indicates that steady microstructure in terms of dislocation density, which is independent of pressure, εp, and εp path, is reached almost immediately after PT. (C) Dislocation density in α-Zr versus volume fraction of ω-Zr from 2 and 3 GPa steps with rough-DA, and with smooth anvils. Blue cross represents the first appearance of ω-Zr with rough-DA at 0.67 GPa. Since for rough-DA at the beginning of α-ω PT, the dislocation density is larger than from smooth anvils, the rough-DA produces different, more defected steady microstructure. With exception in region 0.38<c<0.52, where some scatter is observed, the dislocation density in α-Zr during α-ω PT is the unique function of c, almost constant for c<0.6, which is independent of pressure, plastic strain, and strain path. (D) dislocation density in ω-Zr versus volume fraction of ω-Zr from 2 and 3 GPa steps with rough-DA, and with smooth anvils. For rough-DA, points from 2 and 3 GPa steps overlap within dash lines. Results in (D) represent unexpected law for ω-Zr for both rough and smooth anvils: existence of the unique curve for the dislocation density solely depending on c for both pressure steps during α-ω PT independent of pressure, εp and εp path. For small c, ρα =ρω, indicating that small nuclei directly inherit the dislocation structure from α-Zr during strain-induced PT. Minimum pressure for initiation of strain-induced PT pε d. ω-Zr diffraction peaks started being observed at pε d =0.67 GPa at the sample center (Figs. 4A and S2). This is a record low pressure for α-ω Zr PT, which is 9.0 times lower than that under hydrostatic loading (ph d =6.0 GPa), 5.1 times lower than the phase equilibrium pressure of 3.4 GPa (15), and 2 times lower than pε d =1.36 GPa obtained with smooth anvils. At the culet edge at 2 GPa step, c=0.05 at 0.74 GPa (Fig. 1D), which means pε d at the edge is practically identical to that at the center. This indicates that for strongly pre-deformed α-Zr, pε d is independent of εp, εp path and pressure-strain 7 path since they are very different at center and edge. The same is true for smooth diamonds (Fig. S3), for which, due to higher PT pressure, we have more points with p= pε d. At the initiation of PT with rough-DA, dα ≈46 nm (Fig. 3C) and ρα= 1.68×1015/m2 (Fig. 4C), while with smooth anvils, dα≈66 nm (Fig. 3C) and ρα= 1.22×1015/m2 (Fig. 4C), both independent of radii and, consequently, εp, εp pathand pressure-strain path. Thus, smooth and rough anvils produce different steady microstructures in α-Zr, which results in different pε d. For steady microstructure of pre-deformed α-Zr, d≈74 nm and ρ = 9.94×1014/m2 at ambient condition, which is one more steady microstructure. Since for annealed α-Zr with micron grains, pε d = 2.3 GPa (7), a general trend is that pε d reduces with reduction in dα (opposite to the initial theoretical prediction in (5)) and increase in ρα. PT and microstructure evolution kinetics. Distributions of pressure in phases and volume fraction c of ω-Zr at 2 and 3 GPa steps are presented in Fig. 1D. Strain-induced PT kinetic equation derived based on nanoscale mechanisms (5) with neglected reverse PT is: dc dq = k B(1−c)a B(1−c)+c ( pα(q)−pεd ph d−pεd ) for pα > pε d. (2) Here pα(q) is the pressure in α-Zr - q loading path; B = ( σyω σyα) l ; k and l are material parameters. For smooth anvils, a=1, k=11.65, and B=1.35 (Fig. S4). Although plastic strain tensor at arbitrary r is unknown in experiments, material near the symmetry axis undergoes uniaxial compression and q = ln(h0/h). Through numerical integration of Eq. (2), c can be expressed as a function of I = ∫ (pα(q) − pε d) q q0 dq, where q0 is the accumulated plastic strain at pε d. In addition to steady- state data (after long relaxation time), data instantly after compression and transient data between instant and steady states are shown in Fig. 4B. Such an unexpected time dependence of PT kinetics confronts the conventional view that strain-induced PTs do not occur without plastic strain increment, time is not an essential parameter, and plastic strain serves as time-like parameter (like in Eq. (2)) (5, 6, 8). Note that since the thickness of the sample does not change between instant and steady states, creep as a reason for the time dependence of the strain-induced PT is excluded. It appears that rough-DA allows us not only to reveal the time-dependent part of the growth for strain-induced PT, but also to change the plastic strain-dependent part. Surprisingly, c-I curve is linear for steady state and instant state before relaxation at 2 GPa step (I < 0.5) and after relaxation, with practically the same slope (Fig. 4B). Thus, the rate of PT in Eq. (2) is independent of c, which results in a=l=0, B=1, and dc dq = k pα(q)−pεd ph d−pεd (3) Value a=1 corresponds to multiple nucleation within the parent phase, while a=0 is typical for propagation from a limited number of nuclei without their interaction, like for thickening of PT band. Eq. (3) should be used for each fast-loading increment and for steady state, with different k. Time-dependent contribution to the kinetics that reproduces Eq. (3) for the instant kinetics at t = 0 and steady-state kinetics for t = ∞ and describes transient data at 2 GPa step is: t (4) with a characteristic time of 43.13 min. Here, c(q)t=0 and c(q)t=∞ are the volume fractions after instant compression and in the steady state. The surprising rule is found in Figs. 2D and 3D for ω-Zr: the unique curves dω(c) and ρω(c) for both pressure steps during α-ω PT independent of 8 pressure, εp and εp path; for dω(c), it is also independent of processing with rough and smooth anvils. There is similar, but weaker regularity for dα(c) and ρα(c) (Figs. 2C and 3C): with exception in region 0.38<c<0.52, where some scatter is observed (see supplementary material), the crystallite size and dislocation density in α-Zr during α-ω PT is the unique function of c, almost constant for c<0.6, which is independent of pressure, plastic strain, and strain path. For small c, ρα =ρω, indicating that small nuclei directly inherit the dislocation structure from α-Zr during strain-induced PT. Fig. 4 First appearance of ω-Zr at the sample center and strain and time-dependent kinetics of α-ω PT in Zr. (A) Pure α-Zr diffraction peaks (blue) at p= 0.49 GPa and appearance of ω-Zr peaks at pε d = 0.67 GPa (red). (B) The volume fraction of ω-Zr vs. plastic strain and time. Green diamonds represent diffraction data after instant compression; red circles designate results after reaching steady state; orange squares show intermediate data vs. relaxation time; time labels show time from the beginning of the first measurement; q-values are shown near symbols. Revealed linear strain-dependent kinetics and time dependence of the kinetics of strain-induced PT were not observed in the literature. The current results not only present the main and very nontrivial rules of plastic yielding, strain-induced PT, and microstructure evolution during and after PT under high pressure but also open new windows for utilizing rough-DA and finding similar laws for multiple material systems in a broad pressure range. In particular, one can determine the pressure dependence of the yield strength for important multiphase material systems (e.g., mantle rocks and composites). Discovered time-dependence of the kinetics of strain-induced PTs opens unexplored field of the simultaneous strain- and stress-induced PTs under pressure. By optimizing anvil asperity, desirable plastic flow, minimum grain size, and minimum PT pressure can be reached. Also, instead of severe plastic straining at high pressure, e.g., by high-pressure torsion, one can reach one of the steady microstructures by severe straining at normal pressure (e.g., by rolling, ball milling, or equal channel extrusion) and then produce PT and reach steady microstructure with smaller grain size at relatively small plastic strain and low pressure by compression or high- pressure torsion. Holding at a constant load to utilize the time-dependent PT component may also be useful. For small volume fraction of ω-Zr, crystallite size is much smaller, and dislocation density is larger than for the steady state. This gives an idea of designing α-ω Zr composites with increased strength due to strong ultrafine-grained ω-Zr and sufficient plasticity due to α-Zr. During intense loading, an increase in volume fraction of ω-Zr leads to energy absorption and an increase in strength. All these may result in the economic plastic strain- induced synthesis of nanostructured high-strength high-pressure phases at low pressures. In addition, rough-DA eliminates the problem of describing contact friction required for modeling 9 deformational and PT processes in DAC (13, 14, 16). For traditional high-pressure torsion with ceramic/metallic anvils, friction reaches the maximum possible level due to large asperities. Utilizing rough-DA in rotational DAC (1, 4, 6) will allow in situ studies of high-pressure torsion. Also, to increase the maximum possible pressure in DAC, toroidal grooves are used, which increase friction (17). This can be done with rough-DA more uniformly throughout the culet and with smaller stress concentrators. Note that the above plethora of results was obtained in a single experiment, thus transforming the main challenge—strongly heterogeneous fields—into a great opportunity.