1 A Polymeric Planarization Strategy for Versatile Multi- terminal Electrical Transport Studies on Small, Bulk Quantum Materials Huandong Chen1, Amir Avishai2, Jayakanth Ravichandran1,2,3* 1Mork Family of Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 2Core Center for Excellence in Nano Imaging, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA 3Ming Hsieh Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA *e-mail: j.ravichandran@usc.edu 2 Abstract We report a device fabrication strategy of making multi-terminal electrical contacts on small (< 1 mm) bulk quantum materials using lithography-based techniques for electrical transport studies. The crystals are embedded in a polymeric medium to planarize the top surface, and then standard lithography and microfabrication techniques are directly applied to form electrodes with various geometries. This approach overcomes the limitations of crystal thickness and lateral dimensions on establishing electrical contacts. We use low stress polymers to minimize the extrinsic thermal strain effect at low temperatures, which allow reliable transport measurements on quantum materials that are sensitive to strain. The crystal surface planarization method has enabled electronic transport studies such as in-plane anisotropy, Hall measurements on small, bulk BaTiS3 (BTS) crystals, and provides unique opportunities for two-dimensional (2D) heterogeneous strategy is general for many small, non-exfoliable crystals of newly synthesized quantum materials and paves the way for performing versatile transport studies on those novel materials. 3 Introduction Electrical transport measurements on quantum materials not only play an important role in understanding the nature of electronic phases2-4 and identifying phase transitions5-7, but also provide supporting experimental evidence for phenomena such as symmetry breaking8-10. For many decades, epitaxial semiconductor thin films and heterostructures such as GaAs/AlGaAs two- dimensional electron gas (2DEG) systems were the only few material platforms available for electrical transport studies, especially quantum transport,11, 12 before low-dimensional nanomaterials such as carbon nanotube13, graphene14, 15 and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD)16, 17 emerged. Recent advancements in nanomaterials synthesis, mechanical exfoliation and lithography techniques over the past few decades have successfully expanded transport studies to a large class of nano-scale and exfoliable layered materials13-17. On the other hand, there are also a large variety of newly synthesized or theoretically predicted quantum materials that are not easily exfoliable down to lithographically compatible thicknesses such as many quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) and 3D crystals18-20, and hence, multi-terminal electrical transport studies are limited on those materials. Manual bonding is still the most widely adopted method for making electrical contacts to those bulk crystals20-22 , where thin metal wires such as gold, platinum, or indium are directly bonded onto the crystal using conductive epoxy or self-melting methods. Sometimes a pre- sputtered Au layer through a shadowing mask is also applied to further reduce the contact resistance23. To make a four-probe measurement contact geometry, this manual bonding method would usually require at least mm-scale crystal size and significant user skills21. However, newly synthesized crystals of quantum materials from either chemical vapor transport (CVT) or flux growth methods are typically small and in a range of a few hundred micrometers. Extensive growth 4 condition optimizations are required to achieve crystals larger than a millimeter in lateral dimensions24, 25. Even for quasi-1D morphology crystals that are long enough for standard four- probe geometry, achieving more complicated electrode designs such as Hall bar geometry and angular-dependent electrodes is still challenging due to geometrical limitations on other directions22. Another option is to use a prefabricated SiNx shadowing mask26, 27, but electrode patterning accuracy, alignment, and crystal handling remain critical limitations. Currently, most of the advanced multi-terminal electrical transport studies on bulk single crystals rely on sophisticated sample preparation procedures such as focused ion beam (FIB) micro-patterning, where a lamella with a few micrometers thick is typically lifted out from a bulk crystal and then carved into desired patterns, such as Hall bar geometry, in order to study its charge transport behavior28-33. Using this technique, a number of intriguing quantum systems, including iron pnictides28, 29, semimetals30, 31, and heavy-fermion superconductors32, 33, have been fabricated into a variety of microstructures for transport studies, whereas only a few research groups mastered and frequently used it. The complexity of the lamella lift-out procedure, which requires extensive TEM sample preparation experiences, is the primary factor limiting the extensive applications of this method. On the other hand, the simple idea of crystal embedding using epoxy resin has been applied to handle small bulk samples in situations such as microtome sectioning34, 35 and crystal surface polishing for chemical analysis36, but its applications towards electronic devices fabrication or electrical transport measurements have not been explored extensively. Recently, Kang et al reported the fabrication of lithography-defined GaAs photoelectrodes37 by embedding freestanding microcells (500 μm in lateral dimension and 4-5 μm thick) in UV-curable epoxy NOA. However, these epoxies typically exhibit relatively large CTE (coefficient of thermal expansion, 5 ~ 80 ppm/K for NOA 61), and a significant amount of thermal strain (~ 1.6% at 100 K for NOA) could be introduced at low temperatures. To obtain reliable and reproducible transport measurements on quantum material systems that typically have strong electron-lattice interactions and are sensitive to strain fields, low-stress embedding medium is needed. In this article, we adopt the polymeric embedding approach and demonstrate a simple crystal planarization strategy that uses a low-stress polymer as the embedding medium, which allows reliable lithography-compatible multi-terminal electrical transport studies on small, bulk single crystals. We have chosen the quasi-1D hexagonal chalcogenide BaTiS3 as a model non- exfoliable quantum material system for this demonstration. Recently, a subset of the authors reported two unique electronic phase transitions and charge density wave (CDW) ordering in BTS at low temperatures using this approach38. By adopting the planarization strategy, we characterize in-plane conductivity anisotropy of BaTiS3 from orientation-resolved four-probe measurements. We also demonstrate the direct microstructural patterning of Hall bars on pre-embedded crystals using plasma ion milling, and present detailed Hall measurements on micro-patterned Hall bar device. In addition, by integrating transferred electrodes on bulk crystals, we show that the planarized platform provides unique opportunities towards 2D/3D integration, which may lead to a completely new region of rich physics and device applications. Our method is generally applicable to many other non-exfoliable quantum systems and paves the way for advanced transport measurements on those novel systems that were previously impractical. Results and Discussion Crystal planarization using polyimide as an embedding medium 6 Single crystals of BTS were synthesized using a chemical vapor transport method39, and as grown 001-oriented platelet crystals with 5-20 μm thick40 and 100-200 μm wide were selected for the studies discussed here. Such sizes are typical for early-stage bulk quantum materials synthesis using CVT or flux growth, particularly before extensive optimization efforts on the growth conditions are applied24, 25. Unlike many 2D materials assembled by weak van der Waals interactions, the interchain ionic bonding between TiS6 octahedra chains and Ba chains of BTS makes it difficult to achieve atomically thin flakes with large lateral dimensions by mechanical exfoliation39. Hence, direct application of lithography techniques is challenging due to the medium. b, Schematic illustration of PI peeling off step with 5 × 5 crystals array processed at the same time. c, Surface profile scans of an as-grown BaTiS3 platelet crystal placed on a PDMS stamp and the same crystal after polymeric embedding. d, Optical micrographs of BaTiS3 crystal after crystal embedding (top left), surface cleaning (bottom left), metallization with (top right) and without (bottom right) thin PI dielectric on channel region. e, Photographic image of multiple BTS devices fabricated for transport studies. 7 substantial thicknesses of the crystals. Moreover, because of the limited bulk crystal lateral sizes, conventional contacting methods such as manual bonding are challenging for BTS, too. bulk BTS crystal in a low-CTE polyimide (~ 3 ppm/K) medium for electrical transport measurements. We first place the as-grown crystal on a flat Si wafer using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer stamp attached to a standard transfer stage. To temporarily bond the crystal to the substrate, a thin layer of uncured polyimide (PI) is used as an adhesive, followed by a partial curing step to fix the crystal position before moving on to the next crystal. Multiple crystals can be processed on the same wafer by repeating crystal transfer and releasing steps, as shown in the crystals. A typical polyimide film thickness of about 60 μm provides sufficient mechanical support and is suitable for crystals with thicknesses below 30 μm. For thicker crystals, the conformal coating of PI may become an issue and lead to a lower yield. Freestanding PI films are cut and peeled off from the Si substate, leaving the top surface of BTS crystal planarized. After that, the PI chip is flipped and attached to a sapphire substrate with thermally conductive epoxy or tape. Surface planarization is critical in enabling successful application of lithography techniques on sub-mm bulk crystals. Here, we take advantage of the controllable adhesion strengths between PI film and the flat silicon wafer, which serves as the crystal’s temporary molding surface. The step height of the crystal-substrate boundary is reduced from the as-grown crystal thickness (5 – 20 μm) to less than 200 nm after embedding, as shown by the surface profile scans in Figure 1c. Hence, lithography and thin film metal deposition can be readily performed on those bulk crystals. Moreover, compared to the conventional contacting method involving manual 8 bonding, which restricts the choice of metals and electrode geometry, the lithography-compatible microfabrication method offers complete flexibility for contact optimization, which is particularly crucial for semimetals and semiconductors41, 42. The fabrication procedures can be designed and optimized based on the specific physical properties of the crystal, and the processing is largely identical to that of handling large single crystalline wafers or 2D materials-on-substrate systems. 1e shows a photographic image of multiple devices fabricated for transport studies. In-plane conductivity anisotropy from orientation-resolved four-probe measurements One of the biggest advantages of this planarization strategy is its compatibility with lithography and other standard microfabrication techniques. For instance, versatile electrode geometries and experiments as required can be designed to probe the underlying charge transport behavior of those non-exfoliable bulk systems with limited sizes. We have previously The transport data was collected from the same BaTiS3 device with linear four-probe electrodes along different crystal orientations, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2b. b, Temperature dependence of the in-plane conductivity anisotropy (defined as Ra/Rc). The anisotropy value is between 3 to 4 throughout the measurement range with anomaly showing near transitions. 100 150 200 250 300 103 104 105 Temperature (K) Resistance (Ohm) 102 106 c-axis cooling c-axis warming a-axis cooling a-axis cooling a b 100 μm 100 150 200 250 300 5 10 15 Temperature (K) In-plane Anisotropy 0 20 c a Transition I Transition II 9 demonstrated the observation of multiple phase transitions in BTS from transport measurements along the chain axis (c-axis) using the same PI embedding method, and we have confirmed its validity and reliability by comparing the transport behavior with that from conventional manual bonding method and between repeated measurement scans, respectively38. Here, we further characterize the in-plane anisotropic transport behavior of BTS from orientation-resolved four- probe measurements, where a total of 8 electrodes were used. Electrical conductivity anisotropy, a direct measure of crystal structural anisotropy and electronic anisotropy, is one of the most important characteristics of quantum materials23, 43 such as BTS, and it can be useful in understanding the underlying physics behind CDW transitions and for developing novel anisotropic electronic and optoelectronic devices44, 45. Figure 2a plots the temperature dependent resistance of a BTS platelet along both c- and a-axes, and the microscopic image of the device is shown as the inset of Figure 2b. The in-plane conductivity anisotropy of BTS is obtained by directly calculating the ratio of resistance along a- and c directions (Ra /Rc) and assuming the sample thickness is uniform. At room temperature, this value is close to 3, which is not very large compared with many other conventional quasi-1D CDW systems. Upon cooling, the resistance along both directions increases and BTS undergoes a CDW transition near 240 K that we refer to as Transition II. Upon further cooling, BTS undergoes another phase transition at 150 K (Transition I) with a sharp drop of resistance along the c-axis that is consistent with the reported transport behavior on a needle-like crystal along c-axis38, while the resistance measured along a-axis reveals a more gradual transition into the low-temperature phase, which could be associated with the unique CDW ordering observed in the a-b plane. The anisotropy value varies from 3 to 4 across the entire measurement temperature range, with marked anomalies at the 10 transitions. Hence, the polymeric planarization strategy has enabled direct and accurate in-plane electrical anisotropy determination even on small bulk crystals. Hall bar structure patterning from pre-embedded crystal using PFIB milling Multi-terminal Hall bar structure is usually preferred in magneto-transport measurements to accurately and simultaneously determine transport properties such as carrier concentration, mobility, and magnetoresistance16. Hall bar structures are usually formed by lithography and dry etching for thin film or flakes of 2D materials16, 46, whereas the processing is much harder for sub- mm sized bulk single crystals. FIB microstructure patterning is one of the most well-established and advanced routes to handle those non-exfoliable bulk crystals as stated earlier29, 30. However, the lamella preparation for milling is complicated and has limited wide applications of this method, whereas the milling process on the lamella itself is relatively straightforward and quick. As shown in Figure 3a, we demonstrate a one-step fabrication procedure for forming multi-terminal Hall bar microstructures of BTS directly from a prefabricated device with desired metal contacts, using plasma FIB (PFIB). The pre-patterned metal contacts not only help in mitigating the electron beam pre-embedded BaTiS3 crystals with metal contacts for magneto-transport measurements. b-c, Temperature dependent resistance and carrier concentration of BTS devices with and without PFIB microstructure patterning. Part of the data of ‘without PFIB’ condition was reproduced from Ref 38. a b 100 150 200 250 300 103 104 105 Temperature (K) Resistance (Ohm) without PFIB with PFIB 100 150 200 250 300 1016 1018 Temperature (K) Crrier concentration (cm-3) 1014 without PFIB with PFIB c 50 μm c a 50 μm c a 11 charging issues during processing, but also provide unique opportunities to investigate the effects of microstructures and ion implantations on transport behavior by comparing measurements taken before and after patterning. The Xe plasma milling process was performed to form the desired geometry, followed by a fine polishing step to clean up the damaged crystal surface. To ensure the electrical connection and maximize the contact area, an additional layer of Tungsten (W) was directly deposited on top of the contact region by PFIB. Hall measurements from PFIB-fabricated devices are shown in Figure 3b and 3c. Compared with the measurements on devices without FIB micropatterning, the resistance level is lower, whereas both phase transitions are maintained. The reduced resistance is mainly attributed to the increased carrier concentrations in the system, which potentially comes from the FIB- induced damage on the channel crystals during the milling processes. If the damage is from the surface layer, a final surface polishing step with a lower milling voltage could help reduce any extrinsic surface contributions to transport. Integration of transferred electrodes on BaTiS3 bulk crystal In addition to the intrinsic physical properties of the quantum material itself, heterogeneous integration with other interesting systems opens new opportunities for studying rich physics from proximity effects47. The emergence of heterostructures of 2D materials, including the twistronics, has offered unique platform and great flexibility for studying interesting physics such as superconductivity46, 48 and correlated insulating states49, 50. In principle, the crystal surface planarization strategy presented here also provides opportunities for heterogeneous integration of 2D materials such as graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides on various bulk quantum materials using regular transfer techniques. Here, we use 50 nm thick Au electrodes as an example 12 and show their integration on BTS crystal using the transfer processes modified from the procedures previously reported42, 51. Au electrodes with desired geometries were prepared on a clean silicon wafer using standard photolithography and ebeam evaporation. We use photoresist/PPC/PDMS stack to pick up and transfer the electrodes onto planarized BTS crystals, as illustrated in Figure 4a. Two-terminal I-V characterization was shown in Figure 2b, which indicates a conformal contact between Au electrodes and BTS crystal surface and sheds light on future integration of various 2D materials on bulk crystals. Conclusions In conclusion, we have demonstrated a simple and general crystal surface planarization strategy for making multi-terminal electrical contacts on small, bulk samples with standard lithography techniques, which can be readily used for multi-terminal transport measurements including anisotropy, magneto-transport, photocurrent, etc. The planarization strategy also provides unique opportunities for integrating 2D materials onto bulk quantum systems. The PI- based processing conditions presented here are optimal for strain-sensitive quantum materials and work best for crystals with thicknesses up to 30 μm. The lateral size is limited only by the integration. b, current-voltage characteristics of a BTS device contacted by 50 nm transferred Au electrodes. -100 -50 0 50 100 -5 5 10 V (mV) I (μA) -10 0 transferred Au - BTS a b 100 μm 100 μm After planarization After transferred contact integration 13 lithography technique to be used; hence, bulk crystals with lateral dimensions even below 100 μm can be easily handled. Moreover, we anticipate this method will be broadly useful for transport studies of in situ strain engineering as well, where the freestanding PI film with embedded crystal (3D/quasi-1D, or even 2D) and pre-patterned electrodes is mechanically stretched. The on-chip integration of metal wire strain gauge becomes possible and can further accurately determine the strain applied onto the material. Author contributions H.C. conceived the idea and designed the experiments. J.R. supervised the project. H.C. fabricated the devices and performed electrical transport measurements. A.A. and H.C. fabricated the Hall bar microstructure using PFIB. H.C. and J.R. wrote the manuscript with input from all other authors. Notes The authors declare no competing financial interests. Acknowledgements This work was supported by an ARO MURI with award number W911NF-21-1-0327, an ARO grant with award number W911NF-19-1-0137 and an NSF grant with award number DMR- 2122071. The authors gratefully acknowledge the use of facilities at John O’Brien Nanofabrication Laboratory and Core Center for Excellence in Nano Imaging at University of Southern California for the results reported in this manuscript. 14