1 Spin crossover self-assembled monolayer of a Co(II) terpyridine derivative functionalized with carboxylic acid groups Víctor García-López, Niccolò Giaconi, Lorenzo Poggini, Amelie Juhin, Brunetto Cortigiani, Javier Herrero-Martín, Matteo Mannini,* Miguel Clemente-León* and Eugenio Coronado Víctor García-López, Miguel Clemente-León* and Eugenio Coronado Instituto de Ciencia MolecularUniversidad de ValenciaCatedrático José Beltrán 2, Paterna 46980, Spain E-mail: miguel.clemente@uv.es Víctor García-López, Niccolò Giaconi, Brunetto Cortigiani, Matteo Mannini* Department of Chemistry “Ugo Schiff” and INSTM Research Unit, University of Florence, Via della Lastruccia 3–13, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Italy) E-mail: matteo.mannini@unifi.it Lorenzo Poggini Istituto di Chimica dei Composti Organometallici (ICCOM), CNR Via Madonna del Piano, 10, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino (Italy) Amélie Juhin Sorbonne Université, UMR CNRS 7590, MNHN, Institut de Minéralogie, de Physique des Matériaux et de Cosmochimie, IMPMC, 75005, Paris, France Javier Herrero-Martín ALBA Synchrotron, Carrer de la Llum 2-26, 08290 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain Abstract The deposition of a monolayer by direct self-assembly from solution of an active spin- crossover (SCO) complex via chemisorption has been achieved starting from the perchlorate spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) confirm the presence of an intact monolayer of SCO molecules grafted through carboxylate groups to the Ag surface. Three different spectroscopic techniques (Raman, XPS and X-ray Absorption spectroscopy, XAS) evidence a thermal spin transition of such monolayer of molecules. To our knowledge, this is the first example of an active SCO assembly in direct contact with a surface obtained by wet chemistry. 2 1. Introduction Being able to control bistable nanostructures at the molecular level assures a breakthrough in memory and data storage devices. In this regard, spin-crossover (SCO) complexes showing magnetic bistability, also at room temperature,[2–4] have attracted lots of attention since both, low spin (LS) and high-spin (HS) states are reachable through external stimuli such us temperature, pressure or light.[5–7] Deposition of the complexes on solid surfaces is a mandatory step for applications such as electrical switches[8–10] or mechanical actuators. Over the past ten years, the preferred method for depositing this type of systems has been sublimation in ultrahigh vacuum of neutral complexes.[12–16] Actually, it has been proven that nanostructured assemblies achieved in ultra-high vacuum of SCO systems can maintain switchability even down to the (sub)monolayer regime.[17–19] However, this has restricted this deposition method to a few families of vacuum evaporable molecules. An interesting alternative to expand the number of deposited complexes is self-assembly of properly functionalized molecules from solution. However, the preparation of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of SCO molecules have remained almost unexplored, excluding some earlier reports regarding chemisorption of such molecules in a junction-like gold nanoparticle array. This soft and cost-effective deposition method is a general simple grafting method that only requires molecules (neutral or not) functionalized with suitable anchoring groups capable of specifically interact with the surface. This approach has been already employed with SCO complexes to be part of an interfacial device, or with valence-tautomerism switching molecules. While previous attempts to form SAMs of Fe(II) SCO systems were unsuccessful,[25–27] the Co(II)-based SCO complex chosen in this work have been preferred due to its robustness against oxidation compared to the Fe(II)-based. Spin transition in six- coordinated Co(II) compounds (d7) involves a spin conversion from a S = 1/2 (t2g6eg1) LS state to a S = 3/2 (t2g5eg2) HS state. Many bis-chelated Co(II) SCO complexes based on tridentate ligands of 2,2’:6’,2’’-terpyridine (terpy) derivatives have been reported. Among them, those containing substituents at the C(4′) position are of special interest. Indeed, it has been shown that different substituents allow diverse magnetic properties ranging from abrupt spin transitions to unique SCO behaviors such as reverse spin transitions. Furthermore, the use of specific substituents has enabled to combine SCO with other properties such as porosity, liquid crystal behavior,[32–35] ferroelectricity or gas sensing. In this work, we have taken profit of its ability to carry additional features while maintaining SCO by using a Co(II) complex based on terpy derivative bearing a carboxylic 3 acid group (4 ́-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2’:6’,2’’-terpyridine, HL), see Figure 1. Hereby, we intend to take advantage of the anchoring capabilities of the carboxylic acid group on noble- metal surfaces to form SAMs from solution of a Co(II) SCO complex. The structure of the Co(II) neutral complex with the deprotonated ligand L, [Co(L)2]·5H2O, was reported in the literature by Yang et. al., but the magnetic properties were not studied. In this work, we have prepared the complex of the protonated ligand in order to optimize its processability for deposition on surfaces. Thus, we prepared the [Co(LH)2]·(ClO4)2·4DMA (1) compound, which has been structurally and magnetically characterized in the solid state, and we studied its behavior upon surface deposition. The morphology, stability, and composition of deposited monolayers of 1 on top of Ag (1·SAM) were studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM), matrix assisted laser desorption ionization - time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and Raman spectroscopy. SCO properties were further investigated by means of X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). XPS, Raman and XAS confirm that the spin state of the Co(II) complexes on top of Ag displayed gradual and reversible changes with temperature. Therefore, it represents, as far as we are aware, the first example of an active SCO SAM from solution in direct contact with the surface. 2. Results and discussion 2.1 Solid state 2.1.1. Synthesis 1 was obtained by slow diffusion of diethyl ether into solutions of Co(ClO4)2·xH2O and HL in a 1:2 molar ratio in dimethylacetamide (DMA). After a few weeks, big prismatic dark- 4 orange crystals suitable for single crystal diffraction were obtained. Purity and stability of the complex was checked with elemental analysis and powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD, Figure S.1 and associated text in the Supporting Information). 2.1.2. Structure The crystal structure of 1 was solved by single-crystal X-ray diffraction at 120 K, 300 K and 340 K in the non-centrosymmetric P-1 space group. The asymmetric units is composed of one [Co(LH)2]2+ cation, two ClO4- anions and four DMA solvent molecules (Figure 2a and SI for more information). The metal center is coordinated to the six N of the two terpy moieties giving rise to a distorted octahedral geometry. Co-N bond lengths display a subtle increase in bond lengths with temperature (see Table S.1 in the Supporting Information). This indicates that the number of molecules in the HS state is increasing with temperature, as it has been already seen in other compounds, and agrees with magnetic properties (see below). Neighboring [Co(LH)2]2+ cations in the structure are weakly interacting through π···π and CH···π interactions (see Figure S.2 in the Supporting Information), while hydrogen bonds with the DMA solvent molecules avoid the formation of 1D chains of hydrogen-bonded substituted pyridine derivatives. are omitted for clarity, hydrogen bonds are represented with dashed blue lines. b) χMT vs temperature for 1 in contact with mother liquor (grey circles), filtered (blue empty circles) and after desolvation (filled blue circles). 5 2.1.3. Magnetic properties The temperature dependence of χMT for 1 in contact with mother liquors presents a gradual increase from typical LS values below 150 K (0.48 cm3·K·mol-1) to 1.85 cm3·K·mol-1 at 350 K suggesting an incomplete and non-cooperative SCO transition (Figure 2b). Magnetic measurements on the filtered sample before and after heating to 400 K shows a similar behavior with a more incomplete SCO transition reaching a maximum value of 1.72 cm3·K·mol-1 at 400K. This value corresponds to around 60% of molecules in the HS state, taking ca. 2.5 cm3·K·mol-1 as the value for pure Co(II) in HS state. In contrast, the Co(II) neutral complex with the deprotonated ligand L, [Co(L)2]·5H2O, shows an abrupt thermal spin transition upon dehydration (see Figure S.3 and associated text in the Supporting Information). This suggests that the absence of strong intermolecular interactions between complexes in 1, probably due to the presence of ClO4- counteranions and DMA solvent molecules in the structure, could induce the gradual spin transition of 1. On the other hand, the absence of these molecules in the dehydrated [Co(L)2] compound would involve closer contacts between complexes leading to a cooperative and abrupt SCO. A similar effect occurs in the Co(II) SCO complex based on the terpyridine derivative without the 1,4-phenylene spacer between the tpy and the carboxylic acid, the more compact structure obtained upon dehydration leads to a more abrupt SCO. 2.2. Deposition 2.2.1 Monolayer preparation 1·SAMs were prepared by immersing evaporated silver substrates, after hydrogen flame clean-annealing (see Supporting Information for further details), for 6 h in a 1 mM anhydrous DMA solution of 1. After that, they were washed and rinsed throroughly with clean DMA to remove any physiosorbed material and dried under N2 stream. Silver was chosen due to the possibility to form SAMs through the carboxylate moiety and because it has been reported that large domains of well-ordered 2D molecular arrays can be promoted through this kind of interaction at room temperature within a short time. 2.2.2. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) Topographic images of 1·SAM confirmed the absence of aggregates or multilayers (see carboxylate group bonds selectively the first layer of molecules to the silver surface and additional physisorbed layers can be removed with the washing steps. 6 2.2.3. Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization – Time-Of-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) Integrity of the molecules in 1·SAM was checked with MALDI-TOF MS. A comparative analysis between bulk and SAM is shown in Figure 3. Peaks of m/z corresponding to [Co(LH)2]+ are present in bulk and monolayer spectra (764.16 m/z). Proof of the formation of a bond between only one carboxylate group of the molecules and the surface is supported by the presence of signals originated from a silver atom that is extracted together with molecular these signals are not present in the bulk sample (see Figure 3). distribution pattern for each fragment is reported as black lines. Peaks coming from the matrix used for calibration are marked with an asterisk and are also observed in bare Ag. CHCA is abbreviation for α-cyano-4- hydroxycinnamic acid and is present in the matrix used for MALDI-TOF MS measurements (see Experimental Section). This result has also been observed previously in other systems assembled on Au, where a molecule-substrate bonding is expected and suggests that deprotonation of the carboxylic acid group takes place upon contact with the surface. Additionally, the lack of molecular 7 fragments in the monolayer sample with the counteranion, such us [Co(LH)(ClO4)]+, that are present in the bulk sample, also confirms the absence of aggregates or any physiosorbed multilayers in agreement with AFM measurements (for further information go to Table S.3 in the Supporting Information). 2.2.4. Raman and SERS spectroscopy It was possible to study the deposits with Raman spectroscopy on top of a mechanically roughened silver substrate. The nature of the imposed silver defects and their small separation leads to a plasmon absorbance, which is resonant with the 532 nm light used to excite the samples. Therefore, the Raman spectrum of the deposits is expected to be magnified in the “hot-spots” by the SERS effect. The structural integrity of the molecules in 1·SAM is evident from the fact that SERS spectra of the monolayer and conventional Raman spectra of the bulk are found to be very similar (Figure 4). 100K. Inset of the 700-900 cm-1 region. The most important difference between both samples is the replacement of the band at 783 cm-1 in the bulk for another one at 814 cm-1 in the monolayer. This band is assigned to the deformation vibration of carboxylate groups and is sensitive to the protonation/deprotonation state. Such band is also present in the spectra of the complex [Co(L)2]·5H2O (Figure 4) and in the spectra of a monolayer of the ligand (L·SAM, see Figure S.7 in the Supporting Information), both measured as references. Deprotonation of the carboxylic acid group in contact with the surface was expected, as it has been already observed in literature experiments performed with similar ligands on Ag. However, the protonation- 8 deprotonation state of the carboxylic acid group non-interacting with the surface is not straightforward. Thus, the presence of only one band is indicative that both carboxylic acid groups of the deposited complexes are deprotonated, which is consistent with the absence of ClO4- counteranions observed in XPS experiments performed on 1·SAM (see below). Additionally temperature dependent Raman spectroscopy experiments have been used to monitor the spin state variation of the Co(II). In the bulk sample, changes in intensity ratios and Raman shifts are observed at the same temperature range of the spin transition, especially in the coordinative terpy modes (1200-1700 cm-1, Figure S.6a). Nevertheless, the most notably feature is the increase of intensity of the peak located at 1020 cm-1 observed when increasing temperature. This peak is assigned to the pyridine ring breathing mode, which is strongly coupled to the Co-N stretch and, in consequence, to the spin state. Similar Raman spectral changes of this peak accompanying spin transition are observed in a related Co(II) complex reported in the literature. To get a more quantitative insight, the normalized intensity of such feature (integrated against the weak temperature-dependent mode of the 4- substituted position of the pyridine ring at 1365 cm-1) is plotted against temperature (Figure S.6b). It displays a curve in excellent agreement with the bulk data extracted from conventional magnetometry measurements. Therefore, these Raman spectral changes can be attributed to a spin transition and used to monitor the spin state. SERS spectra of 1·SAM display similar changes with temperature (Figure 5a, for more temperatures go to Figure S.7 in the Supporting Information). These changes are not observed in L·SAM (Figure S.8). Therefore, we can conclude that the spin state of 1·SAM changes with temperature. A comparison of the spin transition of the bulk with that of the monolayers of 1 and L, using the same spin state-dependent marker, suggests that 1 and 1·SAM undergo spin transition in the same temperature range (150-300 K), while L·SAM does not display any changes (Figure S.8). The fraction of HS molecules seems to be higher in 1·SAM. These results are confirmed by XPS and XAS measurements, which enables a more accurate estimation of the LS/HS fraction (see below). To prove stability and reproducibility of the spin transition, after the first set of measurements, the sample was stored in air for one week and two more cooling and warming cycles were performed (see Figure 5c and d). They confirm that the spin transition in the monolayer is reversible in the temperature range 100 – 360 K. Further increase in temperature leads to irreversible changes in the spectra and blocking of the spin state (see text) suggesting that the irreversibility of the spin transition at temperatures above 360 K is 9 related to structural changes of the SAMs. Indeed, the irreversibility of the spin transition when heating the SAMs above 360 K was confirmed by XAS (see below). intensity of the 1020 cm-1 features for 1 (blue squares), 1·SAM (green circles) and L·SAM (orange circles) for each temperature. c) Temperature dependent Raman spectra of the same sample after being stored in air for one week in the 900-1800 cm-1 range. d) Values of the normalized intensity of the 1020 cm-1 feature at each temperature for the subsequent cooling and warming cycles. The lines are a guide to the eye. Error bars have been calculated from the median absolute deviation. 2.2.5. X-ray Photoelectron spectroscopy C1s, N1s, Cl2p and Co2p XPS regions of 1 and 1·SAM have been analyzed (see Figure S.11 and Table S.4 in the Supporting Information). Line shape of the C1s band features three main components for each sample; two at lower energies at 285.0 and c.a. 286.5 eV corresponding to C–N/C=N and C–C/C=C species, respectively; and the third one, assigned to O–C=O carbon atoms, that suffers a shift from 288.9 to 288.1 eV from the bulk to the monolayer. The red-shifted peak is consistent with the presence of carboxylate species in the deposited molecules and is also present in L·SAM (see Table S.4 in the Supporting Information). N1s regions show only one component at 399.7 eV assigned to the coordinated nitrogen atoms of 10 the pyridine rings for both samples. Cl2p spectrum of 1 features the typical shape of the perchlorate anion centered at 208 eV, while 1·SAM does not display such signal (Figure 6). This is further experimental evidence of the absence of physiosorbed molecules on the surface and of the deprotonation of the carboxylic acid groups upon deposition that compensates the +2 charge of the complexes. This result is in agreement with the conclusion drawn from C1s region, MALDI-TOF MS, Raman spectroscopy and with the literature. The Co2p3/2 region of the bulk and monolayer display the expected line shape of a Co(II) photoemission spectra (see Figure 6). In order to get qualitative information about the SCO properties, it was fitted with a similar procedure previously reported for HS/LS-Co(II), where the intensity of the satellites is directly correlated to the paramagnetism, i.e. to the spin state of the metal ion. In our approach, the line shapes have been reproduced with five Co2p3/2 components (A−E) along with the corresponding Co2p1/2 spin−orbit (SO) coupled contributions (A′−E′) weighted by the expected 2:1 ratio (see Figure 6). 1 and 1·SAM Co2p3/2 components are composed by a main peak A at 780.4 eV for the bulk and 780.9 eV for the monolayer, integrating about 23.7 and 21.7 % of the overall signal at 170 K and 18.7 and 17.6 % at 300 K, respectively, (for satellite peak positions and contributions see Table S.5 in the Supporting Information). Else, a sixth component (F) appears at low binding energies for both samples ca. 777 eV. We attribute this to the L3M23M45 (1P) Auger peak with a negligible contribution of less than 6%. Semiquantitative analysis and elemental stoichiometric ratios (see Table S.5 and Table S.6 in the Supporting Information) are in good agreement with the expected values. This suggests that most of the molecules covering the surface retain the molecular structure found in the bulk. XPS was also used to get an insight on the electron level population and thus of the spin state. On one hand, experimental results confirm that SO splitting increases with the number of unpaired 3d-electrons, being closer to 15 eV for LS-Co(II) and 16 eV for HS-Co(II) species, respectively. Indeed, a change in ΔSO upon spin transition is expected due to different orbital populations in the two spin states, being larger for the HS-Co(II) than for the LS- Co(II). Therefore, the occurrence of SCO can be followed by SO shift. On the other hand, the percentage of the different components is also indicative of the spin state, an increase in the number of unpaired atomic electrons causes an increase in the satellite intensity in XPS. Therefore, the ratio of the integrated area (ƩIsat/ICo2p3/2) is directly related to the intensity of the satellites and has been selected as the most sensitive parameter to follow the spin transition. Co2p3/2 XPS region was measured at 170 and 300 K to analyze the 11 differences between low and high temperature species. A ΔSO of 0.1 has been observed in both samples (from 15.1 to 15.2 in the bulk and from 15.2 to 15.3 in the monolayer) upon increasing the temperature (see Table S.5). To confirm the spin transition, together with the high-energy shift of the metal lines, a satellite magnification is also expected. Indeed, the increment in ƩIsat/ICo2p3/2 values (from 1.70 to 2.42 in 1 and from 1.91 to 2.66 in 1·SAM at 170 and 300 K, respectively) indicates that the complexes undergo thermal spin transition, confirming the stability of the SCO properties under X-ray irradiation in high vacuum conditions. A higher HS-Co(II) fraction seems to be present in the monolayer, which is in agreement with Raman and confirmed by XAS measurements (see below). It must be taken into consideration that the higher intensity of the main peak in 1·SAM compare to 1 could be indicative of a small fraction of Co(III) molecules present in the sample, also seen in XAS (see below). Therefore, the higher HS fraction of molecules observed in XPS may be underrated. of the peaks and corresponding best fitting lines. 2.2.6. X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopy XAS spectra were recorded at Co the L3-edge of 1 and 1·SAM at different temperatures. For the bulk, the spectrum measured at 100K (Figure S.12a) which, according to magnetic properties, is consistent with all Co(II) centers in the LS state, is in agreement with the spectra 12 calculated in the Ligand Field Multiplet (LFM) approach for two references of LS-Co(II) in distorted octahedral environment (¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.), namely C o(II)-imide and Co(II)-phtalocyanine. The spectrum measured at 370K is not the signature of pure HS Co(II) but is actually a mixture of HS and LS Co(II). A 0.4 fraction of the LS spectrum (i.e., the fraction determined from magnetic measurements) was therefore subtracted, yielding an experimental HS contribution (see Figure S.12b) that is consistent with the Co(II) HS theoretical spectrum (¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.) a nd with previously published data. We note a minor fraction (approx. 3%) of LS octahedral Co(III) (peak at approx. 781.4 eV), a feature that increases both with time and higher photon flux (see Figure S.14). range recorded with a minimized photon flux. Evolution of the signal under soft X-ray irradiation was initially excluded at all temperatures (see Figure S.15). However, comparison with the bulk spectra shows a pronounced peak at 781.4 eV arising from Co(III) (see Figure S.16). This shows that a fraction of molecules was oxidized during the deposition procedure, which will be quantified below (see Table S.7). with the sum of the three components. b) HS Co(II)molar fraction thermal distribution obtained from magnetic measurements of the bulk (blue dots) and from the XAS fitting of 1·SAM in the first (green dots) and second (purple dots) warming cycles. To provide a quantitative insight on the temperature-dependence of the Co spin and valence states, the Co L3 XAS spectra of 1·SAM were fitted using the LFM simulated HS-Co(II) and 13 LS-Co(III) contributions (¡Error! No se encuentra el origen de la referencia.) and the e xperimental LS-Co(II) spectrum of the bulk (Figure S.12). The latter was preferred in front of the LFM simulated LS-Co(II) spectrum because the fine structure is strongly dependent on the crystal field distortion parameters used in the calculation, which are currently unknown for 1·SAM. The results (see Figure S.17 and Figure S.18 in the Supporting Information for all the fitted curves) evidence a fraction of oxidized Co(III) molecules, while the rest (Co(II) molecules) undergo a spin transition (see Figure 7b, green dots). Two warming cycles were performed to confirm reversibility of the spin transition in the monolayer (Figure 7b, purple dots). If we do not consider this Co(III) fraction, and normalize the HS-Co(II) contribution to the total (HS + LS) Co(II) contribution, our results indicate that the monolayer features a higher HS content than the bulk for all the temperatures considered, in good agreement with Raman and XPS experiments. More precisely, the HS fraction increases from ca. 61(3) to 91(3) % (see Table S.8) for the monolayer and from ca. 0 to 30 % for the bulk when warming the sample over the whole temperature range. These results confirm that the thermal spin transition converts approx. 30 % of molecules both in the SAM and in the bulk, but a significant fraction of molecules (ca. 60%) remain in the HS state at 125K on the monolayer, which is not the case for the bulk (ca. 0%). However, reversibility breaks down when warming 1·SAM at 370 K. The XAS spectrum at 370K is consistent with the Co(II)-HS state extracted from the bulk (see Figure S.19a) but the subsequent cooling does not affect the spin state and the molecules remain blocked in the HS state (see Figure S.19b). This result is also in agreement with Raman spectroscopy. 3. Conclusion Herein, we report the synthesis and characterization of a new Co(II) SCO complex based on 4 ́-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2’:6’,2’’-terpyridine ligand. The chemical functionalization of the system provided by the versatile anchoring point and the processability enabled by the higher solubility of the salt, allowed us to prepare SAMs of intact molecules from a diluted solution within a short period of time. AFM, MALDI-TOF MS, Raman spectroscopy and XPS evidences the formation of the deprotonated specie upon surface deposition and confirms the absence of physiosorbed material. Thermal SCO properties of the monolayer have been confirmed with a total of three different techniques: Raman spectroscopy, XPS and XAS pointing to a gradual SCO behavior similar to that observed in the solid state for the protonated complex, which suggests the absence of a cooperative spin transition on the 14 surface as observed previously for monolayers of evaporated SCO complexes. This represents, as far as we are aware, the first example of a SAM of active SCO complexes anchored to a metallic substrate. Finally, our contribution paves the way to the realization of SCO nanostructure-based devices through soft methodologies compared to the high-cost conventional ultra-high vacuum techniques largely employed for this purpose up to now. Further improvements such as a more abrupt SCO and higher stability could be achieved by expanding the aromaticity of the ligand to enhance the intermolecular interactions between the deposited molecules. Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the author. [CCDC 2191823-2191825 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for this paper. These data can be obtained free of charge from The Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre via www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/data_request/cif.] Acknowledgements We acknowledge the financial support from the European Union (COST Action MOLSPIN CA15128), the Spanish MICINN (MAT2017-89993-R, RTI2018-098568-A-I and EQC2018- 004888-P co-financed by FEDER and Excellence Unit “María de Maeztu”, CEX2019- 000919-M), and the Generalitat Valenciana (PO FEDER Program, ref. IDIFEDER/2018/061). Proteomic measurements were performed in the proteomics facility of SCSIE University of Valencia. This proteomics laboratory is a member of Proteored. The authors thank J. M. Martínez, G. Agustí and A. López from the University of Valencia for their help with magnetic measurements, temperature-variable Raman measurements and XAS measurements. XAS experiments were performed at BL29-BOREAS beamline at ALBA Synchrotron with the collaboration of ALBA staff.