Distinguishing the EH1 and S1 defects in n-type 4H-SiC by Laplace DLTS Tihomir Knežević1, Tomislav Brodar1, Vladimir Radulović2, Luka Snoj2, Takahiro Makino3, and Ivana Capan1* 1Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička 54, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia 2Jožef Stefan Institute, Jamova 31, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia 3National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, 1233 Watanuki, Takasaki Abstract: We report on the low-energy electron and fast neutron irradiated 4H-SiCstudied by deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS) and Laplace DLTS. Irradiations introduced two defects, Ec-0.4eV and Ec-0.7eV. They were previously assigned to carbon interstitial (Ci) labeled as EH1/3 and silicon-vacancy (VSi) labeled as S1/2, for the low-energy electron and fast neutron irradiation, respectively. This work demonstrates how Laplace DLTS can be used as a useful tool for distinguishing the EH1 and S1 defects. We show that EH1 consists of a single emission line arising from the Ci(h), while S1 has two emission lines arising from the VSi(h) and VSi(k) lattice sites. Keywords: silicon carbide, defects, DLTS, radiation Electrically active radiation-induced defects in 4H-SiC have been extensively studied for decades. A whole variety of electrically active defects introduced by different radiation sources such as protons, electrons, neutrons, and ions have been revealed. Among them, two electrically active defects with deep levels at Ec-0.4eV and Ec-0.7eV in n-type 4H-SiC material have captivated special attention in the SiC community. They are peculiar as they always occur together, and independently of the radiation source.1-12) Not until recently, they were commonly assigned to the same defect. However, the origin of these two radiation-induced defects has finally been elucidated. Alfieri and Mihaela3) reported the isothermal annealing study of the low energy (116 keV) electron radiation-induced defects in n-type 4H-SiC. They demonstrated beyond doubt that EH1 (Ec-0.4eV) and EH3 (Ec-0.7eV) are two different charge states of the same defect, and whose origin is related to a carbon interstitial (Ci). Moreover, they highlighted that EH1/3 are not the same as S1 (Ec-0.4eV) and S2 (Ec-0.4eV). The EH1/3 radiation-induced defects are introduced exclusively in the case of low-energy electron irradiation (<200 keV), since the silicon atoms cannot be displaced under such conditions.3) Outstanding progress in understanding S1 and S2 defects in proton-irradiated 4H-SiC was made state transitions by combining photoluminescence (PL), DLTS, and hybrid density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Although the origin of the EH1/S1 (Ec-0.4eV) and EH3/S2 (Ec-0.7eV) defects has now been resolved, they still cause some confusion in the analysis of DLTS data. The reason for this is the following: DLTS signals arising from the EH1 and S1, as well as signals from the EH3 and S2, are identical in the DLTS spectra and cannot be resolved. Since its first demonstration in 1974, DLTS has proven to be the most sensitive technique for measuring electrically active defects in semiconductors, as it can detect defects at concentrations of about 1010 cm-3. 13,14) The main shortcoming lies in energy resolution. Two closely spaced deep energy levels cannot be resolved. However, Laplace DLTS, an isothermal technique that provides a spectral plot of a processed capacitance signal as a function of emission rate rather than temperature, gives an order of magnitude better energy resolution. Laplace DLTS has already proven to be a very useful technique for resolving the overlapping DLTS signals in 4H-SiC material. Here we will briefly describe the most significant examples. Alfieri and Kimoto15) have successfully applied Laplace DLTS to resolve the overlapping emission rates of the EH6 and EH7, which constitute the EH6/7 peak in the DLTS spectrum. Following the results presented by Hemingsson et al.16), in their pioneering work on Z1/2, Capan et al.17) have provided conclusive evidence that the most dominant DLTS peak, known as Z1/2, consists of two emission lines, Z1 and Z2. These are assigned to the -h and -k configurations of the carbon vacancy (VC). 17, 18) A more recent example is the work of Bathen et al.12) on proton irradiated 4H-SiC and S1/S2 defects. Using Laplace DLTS, they resolved two emission lines arising from the S1 and assigned them to the h and k configurations of the Vsi(-3/=). The main aim of this work is to demonstrate how Laplace DLTS can be used for distinguishing electrons and fast neutrons. We used n-type nitrogen-doped 4H-SiC epitaxial layers, 25 μm thick. The SiC epilayers were grown on an 8° off-cut silicon face of a 350 μm thick 4H-SiC (0001) wafer without a buffer layer.19) The Schottky barrier diodes (SBDs) were formed by thermal evaporation of nickel through a metal mask (100 nm), while the Ohmic contacts were formed on the backside of the SiC substrate by nickel sintering at 950 °C in an Ar atmosphere. All irradiations were performed after the SBDs fabrication, through the nickel contact and at room temperature (RT). Electron irradiation was performed at Nissin Electric Group (NEG), Kyoto, Japan. The electron energy was 150 keV, and the total fluence was 1×1015 cm-2. Neutron irradiation was performed at the Jozef Stefan Institute (JSI) TRIGA Mark II reactor, Ljubljana, Slovenia. The neutron fluence was 1×1013 cm-2. Thermal neutrons with energy less than 0.55 eV were filtered by a cadmium box with a wall thickness of 1 mm. More details on neutron irradiation are given elsewhere.20, 21) the as-grown n-type 4H-SiC material. This is a widely known Z1/2, with the activation energy for electron emission of 0.67 eV. It is the scrutinized defect in 4H-SiC, earlier assigned to the carbon vacancy (VC).22,23) 150 200 250 300 350 DLTS signal (pF) Temperature (K) Z1/2 and fast neutrons. neutrons. detected in irradiated 4H-SiC samples. As previously described in the text, these traps were assigned to the Ci-related defects (EH1 in the low energy electron irradiated samples) and Vsi (S1 in the fast neutron irradiated samples). An interesting feature has been observed in Figure 2. While the ratio between EH1:EH3 is 1:1, introduction rates for S1 and S2 significantly differ. This brings us to the main objective of this work. How can we distinguish the Ec-0.4eV level in the low energy electron (EH1) or fast neutron (S1) irradiated 4H-SiC samples? Following the examples of successful application of Laplace DLTS technique, we have applied Laplace DLTS to make further progress in understanding EH1 and S1 defects. electron irradiated 4H-SiC sample. irradiated 4H-SiC. Laplace DLTS measurements of EH1 reveal a single emission line (Figure 3). The estimated activation energy is 0.40 eV. As already proposed by Alfieri and Mihaela3) EH1 is assigned to Ci related defect. Recently, Coutinho et al.24) have assigned the metastable defect, known as M-center25, 26), to carbon interstitials. Combining the DFT calculations and isothermal DLTS measurements, they show that M1 (Ec-0.42eV), one of four defects arising from the M-center, is Ci located at the hexagonal lattice site, Ci(h). Knezevic et al.27) have applied DLTS and Laplace DLTS for studying the metastable defects in low-energy electron irradiated 4H-SiC and concluded that M1 is in fact identical to EH1. We, therefore, assign EH1 (shown in Figure 3) to Ci(h). irradiated 4H-SiC. measurements reveal that S1 consists of two emission lines, with activation energies of 0.40 and 0.41 eV. They are assigned to VSi at -h and -k lattice sites. This is consistent with the previously published work done by Bathen et al.12) The difference between the results obtained by Bathen in the proton irradiated 4H-SiC samples, and those presented here (fast neutron irradiated) is in the ratio between two emission lines arising from the S1. While in the proton irradiated samples the ratio is close to 1:1, in our case the ratio is around 1:6. The ratio shows the occupancy of the -h and -k lattice sites, and it indicates that the -h sites are more favorable than the -k sites (for the neutron-irradiated samples). The explanation for this difference is most likely due to the different sample preparations. In the proton irradiated study, the 4H-SiC samples were annealed upon irradiation, and thermal equilibrium between -h and -k sites was reached. In our case, no thermal annealing was performed upon the fast neutron irradiation. Laplace DLTS has provided another indisputable evidence that EH1 and S1 originate from different defects. Moreover, it provides direct evidence that EH1 consists of a single emission line arising from the Ci at the -h lattice site, in contrast to S1 which has two emission lines arising from the VSi at the -h and -k lattice sites. Therefore, Laplace DLTS can be used for easy and conclusive discrimination of the EH1 and S1 defects in n-type 4H-SiC material. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work was supported by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization Science for Peace and Security Program through Project No. G5674.