Theory of Nb-Zr alloy superconductivity and first experimental demonstration for superconducting radio-frequency cavity applications Nathan S. Sitaraman,1, ∗ Zeming Sun,2, ∗ Ben Francis,3, ∗ Ajinkya C. Hire,4, ∗ Thomas Oseroff,2 Zhaslan Baraissov,5 Tom ́as A. Arias,1, † Richard Hennig,4, ‡ Matthias U. Liepe,2, § David A. Muller,5 and Mark K. Transtrum3, ¶ (Center for Bright Beams) 1Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA 2Cornell Laboratory for Accelerator-Based Sciences and Education, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah 84602, USA 4Quantum Theory Project, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA 5Department of Applied Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA (Dated: August 24, 2022) Niobium-zirconium (Nb-Zr) alloy is an old superconductor that is a promising new candidate for superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavity applications. Using density-functional and Eliash- berg theories, we show that addition of Zr to a Nb surface in small concentrations increases the critical temperature Tc and improves other superconducting properties. Furthermore, we calculate Tc for Nb-Zr alloys across a broad range of Zr concentrations, showing good agreement with the literature for disordered alloys as well as the potential for significantly higher Tc in ordered alloys near 75%Nb/25%Zr composition. We provide experimental verification on Nb-Zr alloy samples and SRF sample test cavities prepared with either physical vapor or our novel electrochemical deposi- tion recipes. These samples have the highest measured Tc of any Nb-Zr superconductor to date and indicate a reduction in BCS resistance compared to the conventional Nb reference sample; they represent the first steps along a new pathway to greatly enhanced SRF performance. Finally, we use Ginzburg-Landau theory to show that the addition of Zr to a Nb surface increases the superheating field Bsh, a key figure of merit for SRF which determines the maximum accelerating gradient at which cavities can operate. Introduction. Superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) cavities are a key component of particle accel- erators used, e.g., as light sources and colliders . These cavities are extremely reliant on the supercon- ducting properties of the cavity surface. Of particular interest are the RF resistance, which determines energy dissipation and cooling costs, and the superheating field, which determines the maximum accelerating gradient and thus the number of cavities required . Further optimization of these quantities is necessary to enable more energy-efficient and compact accelerators and requires the exploration of superconductors beyond industry-standard niobium (Nb). Many efforts have explored adding other elements to the SRF surface of Nb cavities, such as tin [5–7] and ni- trogen . One of the limitations of these materials is the difficulty of producing uniform layers of the neces- sary phases and compositions that achieve the desired improvements in superconducting properties. A possi- ble material that avoids these complications is niobium- zirconium (Nb-Zr). Nb-Zr alloys retain a body-centered cubic (bcc) crystal structure, the same as Nb, across a broad compositional range up to about 50% Zr , and form a stable, insulating Zr native oxide which should cause little dissipation under RF conditions. The superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys, how- ever, are not as well characterized as those of other Nb- based superconductors. Literature studies have focused on bulk random alloy samples very different from the thin-film alloy layers necessary for SRF. Further- more, these bulk random-alloy samples showed a rela- tively modest enhancement of the critical temperature Tc compared to elemental Nb, far less than would be ex- pected based on the rigid band shift theory proposed by early researchers . As for the superheating field Bsh, previous studies have addressed homogeneous superconductors [12–16] and lay- ered superconductors [17–21], but efforts to improve SRF cavity performance have revealed that material inhomo- geneities are key factors which affect Bsh . Recent studies of Bsh for inhomogeneous superconductors in- clude materials with continuously-varying impurity con- centrations and the effect of spatial variations in Tc . To better understand the Nb-Zr alloy system, we use density-functional theory (DFT) and Eliashberg theory in the dilute limit (≤25% Zr), where the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) allows us to calculate a variety of superconducting properties. We confirm that the addi- tion of Zr to Nb increases Tc. We then switch from VCA to a supercell approach in order to directly account for lattice relaxation effects, which become important at higher Zr concentrations (up to 50% Zr), and focus on Tc. With this approach, we find good agreement with the literature for random alloys at all concentrations, and we investigate the potential for arXiv:2208.10678v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 23 Aug 2022 2 ordered alloy structures to surpass the limitations of the random alloy. We synthesize Nb-Zr alloy surface layers of different Zr doping profiles using physical vapor and electrochemical methods and examine their material and RF supercon- ducting properties. We find that the measured Tc meets or exceeds literature values for Nb-Zr random alloys, in agreement with our calculations. We show that the en- hanced Tc likely translates to improved performance un- der RF conditions by comparing the BCS resistance of the alloyed sample to that of a reference Nb sample. Finally, we use GL theory to investigate how Nb-Zr surface layers with different thicknesses and compositions affect Bsh. We incorporate spatial variations of multiple superconducting properties using realistic profiles of Zr concentration. We find that addition of Zr to Nb notice- ably improves Bsh, making Nb-Zr an excellent candidate for SRF applications. Superconducting properties of Nb-Zr in the dilute limit. We calculate the superconducting properties of Nb-Zr al- loys in the dilute limit using VCA. We use Quantum Espresso (QE) [24–26] to perform the DFT calculations. We use the Perdew–Burke-Ernzerhof functional for the exchange-correlation energy and norm conserving pseudopotentials . We use the Methfessel-Paxton smearing scheme to smear the electrons during lat- tice relaxation. For the electron-phonon calculations, we use the tetrahedron method as implemented in QE, with a q-mesh of 8×8×8 and a k-mesh of 24×24×24 to calculate the Eliashberg function α2F. Finally, we calcu- late the superconducting gap using isotropic Eliashberg theory, as implemented in the EPW code . ties for Zr concentrations ranging from 0 to 25%. The calculated Tc agree well between the three methods used to calculate the critical temperature - Allen-Dynes , Xie , and isotropic Eliashberg. As Zr concentration increases, so do both the electron-phonon coupling con- stant and the Tc of the alloy. This increase in Tc can be attributed to softening of the phonons, as shown in Fig. 1, and an increase in the density of states at the Fermi level N(0). Superconducting properties of Nb-Zr alloys at higher Zr concentrations. Previous experimental studies of Nb1−nZrn bcc random alloys have found moderately in- creased Tc and greatly increased upper critical field Bc2 compared to Nb across a broad compositional range from n = 0 to n = 0.5 . Alloys made with molybde- num (Mo), Nb’s other 5th row neighbor, have Tc’s that drop off quickly with increasing Mo concentration. This data (Fig. 2‘experiment’ curve) is in qualitative agree- ment with the simple alloy theory originally used to de- scribe bcc alloy superconductivity, namely that there is a universal d-band shape, and alloying simply shifts the position of the Fermi level by adding or removing d-band electrons, thus altering N(0) and therefore Tc . 0 5 10 15 20 25 Frequency (meV) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2F Nb 10 at % Zr 20 at % Zr increases, phonons at lower frequency couple strongly with electrons, leading to an increase in the electron-phonon cou- pling constant. Quantitatively, this effect is captured in our VCA calcu- lations (Fig. 2 ’VCA’ curve), which show good agreement with experiment for Nb-Mo, but significantly overesti- mate Tc for Nb-Zr. This indicates that, while VCA may accurately describe Nb-Mo and dilute Nb-Zr alloys, it misses important nonlinear effects in the Nb-Zr system that alter the d-band shape and tend to lower Tc. Exploration of the full compositional range of Nb1−nZrn therefore requires an analysis of Nb-Zr which accounts fully for the effects of Zr substitutions in the Nb lattice; for this we employ the supercell method. Specifi- cally, for each n, we construct 48-atom supercells, substi- tute the required number of Nb atoms with Zr at random sites, and fully relax the structure, using the JDFTx soft- ware package with the PBE exchange-correlation func- tional and ultrasoft pseudopotentials . Aver- aging the resulting density of states (DOS) over multiple configurations at each composition yields an expected macroscopic N(0). We then estimate Tc as a function of composition through the BCS N(0)-Tc relationship, resulting in the ‘random alloy’ predictions displayed in Fig. 2. We find quite good agreement with the random- alloy experiments for both Nb-Mo and Nb-Zr, indicating that our calculated N(0)–composition relationship cor- rectly captures the important nonlinear effects that de- termine Tc in Nb-Zr random alloys. Examining our supercell calculations, we find that, for atoms at their unrelaxed, ideal bcc locations, the elec- tronic DOS for Nb-Zr alloys resemble that of Nb with a rigid band shift, similar to what would be found in VCA. However, we find that the atoms tend to move away from their ideal bcc locations in a way that sig- nificantly reduces N(0). This final, reduced N(0) value varies only modestly with composition up to 50% Zr, ex- 3 coupling constant λe and the superconducting gap ∆. Tc was calculated using the Allen-Dynes equation, isotropic Eliashberg theory, and Xie22 using μ∗ = 0.16. λL and ξ have been rescaled to match experimental values for Nb. Composition λe c (K) T El c (K) T Xie c (K) λL (nm) ξ (nm) Bc (mT) κ Nb 1.13 2.4 14.2 39.0 38.0 157 1.03 3.0 16.8 39.5 30.3 195 1.30 4.0 20.8 18.3 38.9 23.7 253 1.64 5.3 25.3 38.0 18.5 331 2.05 5.8 26.7 37.9 17.6 350 2.16 VCA (yellow squares), random supercell theory (blue circles), and Jahn-Teller-Peierls stability limit (red). plaining the modest variations that are observed in Tc. Nb-Zr random alloy, where the initially large DOS peak near the Fermi level essentially vanishes. Moreover, con- sistent with our observation that simple alloy theories work well for Nb-Mo, Fig. 3b shows this relaxation effect to be absent in the Nb-Mo system. Fundamentally, the Nb-Zr alloy minimizes its energy by lowering the energies of occupied electronic states near the Fermi level, resulting in a reduced N(0). This relax- ation does not occur in Nb-Mo, which has fewer states near the Fermi level, and thus less ability to lower its en- ergy in this manner. The redistribution of electronic en- ergy levels in Nb-Zr is accomplished by the relaxation of lattice degrees of freedom, i.e., by the movement of atoms away from their ideal lattice positions. This brings us to a key difference between random Nb-Zr alloys, which have been our focus so far, and ordered Nb-Zr alloys. It has been pointed out that the symmetries of highly ordered structures can effectively limit the degrees of freedom for lattice relaxation . In our case, this could result in a crystal with electronic structure similar to the VCA or the unrelaxed-random-alloy electronic structure and thus a much higher Tc. It may be possible to grow such an ordered alloy in a low-temperature thin-film process such as those often employed in SRF cavity production. We estimate the maximum attainable Tc of an ordered Nb-Zr alloy of a given composition as follows. We note that the same force which drives ionic displacements in the Nb-Zr random alloy tends to break the symmetries Electronic DOS for 50/50 Nb-Zr (a) and Nb-Mo (b) random alloys before atomic relaxation (red) and after atomic relaxation (black). (c) Histogram of atomic displacements in for three different ordered 50/50 Nb-Zr alloys before (red) and after (black) applying electronic smearing to reduce N(0) and stabilize the structure. of ordered Nb-Zr structures . Indeed, this Jahn-Teller- Peierls effect has been proposed as a driving force for bcc phase instability in binary alloys, including Nb-Zr . The magnitude of this driving force is directly re- lated to the N(0) of the unrelaxed structure, which we can tune artificially by broadening the electronic states in our calculations. We then determine the limiting value of N(0) beyond which the Jahn-Teller-Peierls instabil- ity causes the structure to break its symmetry and relax to a lower-symmetry state with reduced N(0). Fig. 3d, for example, shows the result of this process for three high symmetry structures at the same Zr concentration of n = 0.5, showing that they all exhibit very similar N(0) just before the onset of the instability. Finally, this stability-limited Fermi-level DOS can be used to deter- mine the limiting Tc as a function of composition through BCS theory. Figure 2 (‘Jahn-Teller-Peierls stability limit’ curve) displays the results of the above process. We gen- erally expect that the Tc values for Nb1−nZrn will all lie within the pink shaded region, between the random alloy result and the limiting Jahn-Teller-Peierls value for any special, ordered structure. For example, an Eliashberg calculation for a specific ordered structure at n = 0.25 gives an electron-phonon coupling constant λe = 1.93 4 compared to a value of λe = 1.18 for Nb. To estimate the corresponding Tc enhancement, we use the Allen-Dynes formula with μ∗ = 0.1 and an additive shift in the λe pa- rameter to account for spin-fluctuations and match the experimental Tc of bulk Nb . This yields a Tc of 15.7 K for the ordered n = 0.25 alloy, close to our predicted stability limit of 17.7 K. This prediction rep- resents an additional 50% enhancement over the random alloy Tc, similar to what we indeed observe in our exper- iments (see below). Experimental verification. In order to validate our theoretical predictions, we measure the superconducting properties and RF performance of different Nb-Zr surface profiles. Samples were prepared using e-beam evapora- tion of a Zr target (base pressure: 1.3 × 10−6 torr) on the Nb surface or electrochemical reaction with the Nb surface, followed by thermal annealing under 2 × 10−7 torr vacuum, and a subsequent HF etch. The initial film thickness (20 – 40 nm) and post annealing conditions (600 – 1000 °C for 1/3 – 10 h) were varied to modify the surface Zr atomic concentration. As probed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, we ob- serve 15–27 at.% Zr at the surface of evaporation-based samples (Fig. 4) as well as significant oxygen concentra- tions. From X-ray diffraction (Fig. 5a), we infer that substitutional Zr doping was achieved, as evidenced by the doping peaks at lower diffraction angles compared to a Nb cubic reference. Zr’s and Nb’s bcc lattice parame- ters are 0.354 nm and 0.330 nm, respectively . Based on Vegard’s law, these doping peaks are induced by lat- tice enlargement when Zr dopants are incorporated into the cubic structure. Moreover, the HF etch entirely elim- inates the hexagonal Zr phases that appeared on the out- ermost region after annealing. Note that the hexagonal α and ω phases have low Tc’s of 7 K and 4 K, respectively , so avoiding these hexagonal phases is critical to obtaining high Tc. Additionally, the only oxide we de- tect is ZrO2, which is ideal for SRF applications due to its wide bandgap. Resistance measurements using a Physical Property Measurement System under the AC transport mode demonstrate a Tc of up to 13.5 K for evaporation-based samples that were annealed under 600 °C for 10 h. Even more impressively, the flux expulsion measurements in- dicate our electrochemically fabricated samples have a higher Tc of 16 K. We point out that the 13.5 K and 16 K Tc values are significantly higher than the literature- reported 11 K Tc for Nb-Zr bulk alloys and the 7.4 K Tc measured in sputtered Nb-Zr thin films . One can infer that retention of an ordered cubic structure is crit- ical to achieving a higher Tc than random alloys, which matches well with our DFT simulations. To assess the use of Nb-Zr alloys for SRF accelera- tor applications, we employ an electrochemical method to scale up the alloying process to be compatible with the Cornell sample test cavity . Indeed, as shown in Zr concentration n vs. depth x for Nb-Zr samples prepared under various annealing conditions, as well as for the profile n(x) in Eq. (4). Fig. 5b, after Nb-Zr alloying, the 5.2 GHz low-field BCS surface resistance is trending lower, which is consistent with the expected benefit of the high Tc of the Nb-Zr material. This first RF demonstration of Nb-Zr alloys establishes a new direction for SRF cavities with high Tc and low surface resistance. As we now show, these cavi- ties also have the potential for high superheating fields. GL predictions of Bsh. To calculate Bsh, we employ GL theory to simulate Nb-Zr alloys in cavity surface lay- ers using the data from Table I. The main object of the theory is the free energy density F of the system [45–47], which includes both an expansion in a superconducting order parameter ψ (with phenomenological coefficients α, β, and γ) and a contribution from the total magnetic field B = Ba − ∇ × A, where Ba is the applied field and A is the magnetic vector potential: F = α|ψ|2 + β 2 |ψ|4 + γ|(−iħ∇ − 2eA) ψ|2 + B2 2μ0 . (1) Bsh is the value of Ba at which the superconducting Meissner state becomes unstable. It can be shown that α, β, and γ are related to the London penetration depth λL, coherence length ξ, and thermodynamic critical field Bc: λ2 L = β 8μ0e2|α|γ , ξ2 = ħ2 γ |α|, Bc = |α| �μ0 β . (2) We use Eq. (2) to calculate λL, ξ, and Bc for each of the compositions in Table I. We observe a favorable increase in Bc as Zr concentration increases. We calculate the GL parameter κ ≡ λL/ξ for each of the compositions in Table I and note that addition of Zr raises κ. At κc ≈ 1.15, the type of instability which disrupts the superconducting state changes . Desta- bilizing perturbations can be decomposed into Fourier modes with wave number k. Below κc, the instability is due to the k = 0 mode (i.e., uniform penetration of mag- netic flux). Above κc, the instability results from a mode 5 Structural and superconducting properties of Nb-Zr samples. (a) X-ray diffraction pattern for evaporation-based samples annealed at 600°C for 10 h, with a subsequent HF etch. (b) BCS resistance before and after Nb-Zr alloying. with k > 0. When calculating Bsh for Nb-Zr alloys, we are careful to search across perturbations with k > 0 to look for this transition, so as not to overestimate Bsh. We simulate inhomogeneous superconductors by treat- ing the coefficients α, β, and γ as local quantities that vary spatially with material composition. For clean su- perconductors, these coefficients have been shown to depend on N(0), Tc, and the Fermi velocity vF : α = N(0) Tc (T − Tc), β = 7ζ(3)N(0) BT 2c , γ = β v2 F 6 . (3) We use these relationships to obtain α(x), β(x), and γ(x) as follows. First, we consider a concentration profile n(x) in which Zr concentration n falls off exponentially with depth x in the material from a surface value n0 on a scale set by δx: n(x) = n0e−x/δx. (4) (see Fig. 4). We then interpolate the values of N(0), T AD c , and vF in Table I for intermediate concentrations n to obtain N(0; x), Tc(x), and vF (x). Finally, we compose these with Eq. (3) to obtain α(x), β(x), and γ(x). We calculate Bsh using the linear stability analysis de- scribed in for various choices of n0 and δx (Fig. 6). In all cases, Bsh increases as the total Zr content is in- creased, consistent with the improvements in other su- perconducting properties listed in Table I. Conclusion. In summary, we have proposed and demonstrated a new type of SRF surface via Nb-Zr al- loying that enables: (1) a high Tc of 16 K that minimizes energy dissipation and cryogenic costs; (2) a promising predicted enhancement of Bsh up to 350 mT that allows approximately 85 MV/m accelerating gradients. We find an excellent match between theoretical and experimental results, which show improvement of Tc after Zr is incor- porated into the Nb lattice, and our RF results indicate Calculated Bsh of Nb-Zr surface layers with varying compositions [see Eq. (4)], rescaled by the value of Bc for Nb in Table I. a reduction of BCS resistance. Moreover, our theoretical predictions provide a viable road map to further tune and improve Tc and Bsh. Overall, we have demonstrated that Nb-Zr alloys promise to be a new, feasible technology for accelerator physics.