Theoretical proposal to obtain strong Majorana evidence from scanning tunneling spectroscopy of a vortex with a dissipative environment Gu Zhang,1, 2 Chuang Li,3 Geng Li,4 Can-Li Song,2, 5 Xin Liu,3, 6, вҲ— Fu-Chun Zhang,7, 6, вҖ  and Dong E. Liu2, 5, 1, 6, вҖЎ 1Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China 2State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China 3School of Physics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430074, China 4Beijing National Center for Condensed Matter Physics and Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, PR China 5Frontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing 100184, China 6Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China 7Kavli Institute for Theoretical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China (Dated: July 11, 2023) It is predicted that a vortex in a topological superconductor contains a Majorana zero mode (MZM). The confirmative Majorana signature, i.e., the 2e2/h quantized conductance, however is easily sabotaged by unavoidable interruptions, e.g. instrument broadening, non-Majorana signal, and extra particle channels. To avoid these interruptions, we propose to obtain strong Majorana evidence following our novel Majorana hunting protocol that relies on dissipation introduced by disorders at e.g., the sample-substrate interface. Within this protocol, we highlight three features, each of which alone can provides a strong evidence to identify MZM. Firstly, dissipation suppresses a finite-energy Caroli-de Gennes-Matricon (CdGM) conductance peak into a valley, while it does not split MZM zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP). Secondly, we predict a dissipation-dependent scaling feature of the ZBCP. Thirdly, the introduced dissipation manifests the MZM signal by suppressing non-topological CdGM modes. Importantly, the observation of these features does not require a quantized conductance value 2e2/h. I. INTRODUCTION A Majorana zero mode (MZM) is an exotic quasi-particle state that has equal electron and hole weights. Importantly, due to its non-abelian feature, MZM has become one important candidate to realize quantum operations and the ensued topologically pro- tected quantum computation [3вҖ“5]. Some pioneering the- ories have predicted the existence of MZMs in multiple physically realizable systems [6вҖ“12]. Experimental efforts had been made to detect MZMs in many platforms, e.g., semiconductor-superconductor nanowire structures [13вҖ“ 25], the vortex states in iron-based superconductors [26вҖ“ 36] or topological insulator-superconductor heterostruc- tures [37вҖ“40], magnetic atom chain and topologi- cal Josephson junctions [42вҖ“44], etc. Among all those platforms, hybrid nanowire structures (theoretically pro- posed by Refs. ) have received a worldwide interest. However, the Majorana hunting in these systems encoun- ters the emergence of false-positive signals arising from trivial Andreev bound states and other disorder effects (see e.g., Refs. [45вҖ“52]). Regarding this debate, Ref. proposed a scheme to suppress these false-positive sig- nals by introducing dissipation to the probe (see recent progress in Refs. [54вҖ“56] for more detailed theoretical and experimental analysis). Recently, Microsoft quan- tum team proposed another solution and considered a more sophisticated design by combining three different measurements on a single detection device , which however sacrifices the quality of the local measurement signals . So far, there is no solid evidence to conclude the existence of the elusive MZM. Zero-bias conductance peak (ZBCP) has also been re- ported as a Majorana feature in spectroscopic measure- ments of vortex states via the standard scanning tunnel- ing microscopy (STM) technique [26вҖ“31, 33вҖ“40]. More inspiringly, a recent progress shows that topologi- cal vortexes can form into an ordered lattice through the introduction of a biaxial charge density wave. This technical advance can potentially reduce the difficulty of Majorana manipulation: the next stage in the realiza- tion of topological quantum computation. However, the spectroscopically measured signal is normally influenced by interruptions (e.g. instrument broadening, potential non-Majorana signal , and possible existence of extra particle channels ), that may sabotage the quantized Majorana conductance 2e2/h . Actually, most vortex- based researches (e.g., Refs. [26вҖ“28, 38]) report ZBCPs in the unit of a.u. (arbitrary unit). In addition, the ob- tained conductance is close to the quantized value only under an extremely small tip-sample distance (see e.g., Refs. ). Of this situation, however, the tip has a spatially wide contact with the sample, where the valid- ity of the point-contact tunneling model remains an open question. In this paper, we solve problems above, by introduc- ing dissipative environments that couple to the electron tunneling between tip and vortex. Experimentally, dis- sipation can be introduced via a disorder layer [63вҖ“65] or strong lattice mismatch between the superconductor and substrate, illustrated in Fig. 1. Indeed, a strong dissipation has been observed in the STM detection [63вҖ“ arXiv:2209.14006v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Jul 2023 2 ! Iron-based SC island substrate Disorder layer (a) substrate S-wave SC TI Disorder layer (b) Two possible experimental realizations of our theory. (a) An iron-based superconducting island placed on top of a substrate. A MZM is expected in the middle of the island (the red circle). Due to the disordered layer, disorders are induced between the island and the substrate, leading to dissipative tip-sample-tunnelings. (b) An alternative structure where a topological insulating (TI) layer is placed on top of an s-wave superconductor . A disordered layer exists between the s-wave superconductor and the substrate, leading to a dissipative tip-sample tunneling. (c) The equivalent circuit of our system. Scatterings at the disordered layer are incorporated by a resistance R. A voltage bias Vbias is applied between the tip and the sample. 68], including Ref. where dissipation arises from a disordered Pb wetting layer. Akin to the dissipation influence in a hybrid nanowire system [53вҖ“55, 69], dis- sipation added to a vortex system suppresses possible interruptions from e.g., soft-gaps or that from a contin- uous Caroli-de Gennes-Matrico (CdGM) spectrum . More recently, Ref. experimentally demonstrates that the introduction of dissipation (realized via oxidiza- tion the Nb layer) can reduce the anisotropy and am- plitude of conductance, by suppressing tunnelings into CdGMs. Although Ref. mainly focuses on regimes out of the superconducting gap, we anticipate the ob- servation of similar features within the gap, following the analysis of our work. Remarkably, we also discover strong and vortex-system-specified Majorana evidence for three generic Majorana hunting situations. Impor- tantly, all features predicted in our work do not require the knowledge of the conductance unit or the quantized conductance value , thus greatly reducing the diffi- culty of possible experiments. Although disorders at the superconductor-substrate interface is required in our pro- tocol, a clean TI-superconductor interface is required, to support the existence of Majorana zero modes. In real experiments, a clean TI-superconductor interface (on top of a disordered superconductor-substrate interface) can be possibly realized after optimizing sample fabrica- tions, e.g., increasing the thickness of the superconduct- ing layer. The observed results in vortex Majorana hunting can be classified into three generic situations: (i) the case with a ZBCP and multiple finite-energy CdGM conduc- tance peaks ; (ii) the case with only one ZBCP , either topological or trivial, and (iii) the case where the Majorana ZBCP is concealed by a con- tinuous CdGM spectrum . In the conventional (i.e., dissipation-free) STM spectrum detection, the Majorana signature requires the observation of a robust quantized conductance with a reasonably small tip-sample distance: otherwise it is hard to reach a conclusive statement due to potential interruptions from false-positive signals. As the central point of our work, we show that dissipation provides strong Majorana evidence in a vortex system. Of case (i), dissipation strongly suppresses CdGM peaks within the gap, leading to splitting of them. ZBCP aris- ing from the MZM, by contrast remains. The distinct responses of CdGM and MZM peaks to dissipation then provide a strong and clear evidence of a Majorana. Of case (ii), the MZM presence can be proven by measuring the dissipation-dependent universal scaling of the con- ductance; while the trivial ZBCP splits due to suppres- sion from dissipation. Of case (iii), conductance from a continuous CdGMs can be suppressed by dissipation, thus manifesting the вҖҳdissipation-proofвҖҷ Majorana signal. II. THE SCHEME SETUP AND MAJOR RESULTS We consider the setup of Fig. 1 where a sample is spec- troscopically detected by a tip. The sample contains a vortex in the topological regime. Such a system can be realized with either an iron-based superconductor in the topological regime [Fig. 1(a)] [26вҖ“31, 33вҖ“36], or a topo- logical insulator (TI) on top of a s-wave superconductor [Fig. 1(b)] . In either case, a disordered layer can exist between the superconducting layer and the sub- strate. With the disordered layer, tip-sample tunnel- ings couple to dissipative modes that can be mimicked by a circuit Ohmic resistance R [Fig. 1(c)]. The dis- sipative modes, arising from the disordered layer, sup- press tip-sample tunnelings. The suppression is espe- cially strong under low energies (i.e., low temperature and bias), when the dissipated energy is unaffordable by the system. This phenomenon, known as dynami- cal Coulomb blockade, has been well studied in meso- scopic devices (see, e.g., Ref. ), as well as spectro- 3 scopically probed superconducting islands [63вҖ“65, 68]. For clarification, we emphasize that not all impurities can produce such dissipative modes. Indeed, impurities at the sample surface are known to generate only triv- ial localized states that interrupt the Majorana detec- tion. On the other hand, impurities outside of the co- herence length, e.g., these in the fridge or the amplifier, can be considered as resistors in-series (see discussions in e.g., Refs. ), and are thus irrelevant to our consideration. In our case, the chosen dissipative resis- tance R should be large enough to suppress the CdGM peaks (at experimentally accessible temperatures), and also r вүЎ Re2/h < 0.5 (the dimensionless dissipation) to avoid sabotaging the Majorana ZBCP . Dis- sipation around several kilo-ohms has been experimen- tally realized by the inter-surface disorders or the generic mismatch between superconductor-substrate lattices [63вҖ“ 65, 67, 68]. The dissipation strength r in real experiments can be obtained by measuring the scaling feature of the conductance in the normal state. We also assume a large enough sample such that its charging energy is smaller than other relevant energy scales, including the STM res- olution, temperature and bias in the system. Generically, a vortex in a topological superconduct- ing island contains a zero-energy Majorana, and multi- ple finite-energy CdGMs. These CdGMs can be consid- ered as Andreev bound states that are recognizable in the energy space (see e.g., for experimen- tal realizations). Fortunately, dissipation influences re- ceived by these finite-energy CdGM peaks are distinct from that of the Majorana ZBCP (see Appendixes A, B, and Supplementary Information for the details on the calculation of CdGM peaks and the Majorana ZBCP, respectively). This fact, as will be shown below (the de- tails of the theoretical analysis and calculation will be shown in the next section), provides us a strong Majo- rana evidence. We first discuss our improved Majorana detection scheme and main results, and leave the details of the calculation in the next section. Without the loss of generality, the calculations are carried out with dis- sipation r вүЎ Re2/h = 0.2. We emphasize that features predicted below are also anticipated for other finite dis- sipation, as long as r < 0.5. We define an energy scale Оөch вҲқ t2/(1вҲ’2r) MZM П„ (1+2r)/(1вҲ’2r) c that depends on the tunnel- ing amplitude tMZM [of the Hamiltonian (3)], dissipation r and the inverse of the ultra-violate cutoff П„c (вҲј 1/EF , with EF the fermi energy). The value of Оөch is experimen- tally tunable by changing the tip-sample distance. The- oretically, Оөch labels the energy above which scaling fea- ture begins to develop. As an experimentally reasonable value, We take the scale Оөch = вҲҶsc/400 (in both Figs. 2 and 3), where вҲҶsc is the bulk superconducting gap. This corresponds to an experimentally accessible sample tem- perature T = 5Оөch вүҲ 500mK in real ex- periments, considering the typical iron-based supercon- ducting gap вҲј 35K. If needed, temperatures lower than 100mK are also experimentally realizable . More specifically, in Fig. 2, we compare the conduc- 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 (a) Vbias/вҲҶSC Majorana peak CdGM peak Vbias/вҲҶSC (b) CdGM peak L = 3.3О» L = 3.7О» L = 3.3О» L = 3.7О» Accidental ABS G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) a vortex for (a) The topological situation and (b) the triv- ial situation. In both figures, the red curve refers to the case with a larger tip-sample distance (or a smaller tunnel- ing amplitude), in comparison to that of the blue . Here О» refers to the decaying amplitude of the tip-MZM tunnel- ing tMZM(L) вҲқ exp(вҲ’L/О»). In (a), the zero-bias conduc- tance peak arises from the topological MZM. Its peak value, calculated with Eq. (4) following the Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz (see Ref. or a brief introduction in Appendix B), increases monotonously when the tip approaches the sam- ple. In contrast, conductance peaks from both finite-energy CdGMs or zero-energy Andreev bound state (denoted as вҖңAc- cidental ABSвҖқ in the figure) split for a small enough tip- sample distance (valleys of blue curves). The CdGM conduc- tance is evaluated with renormalization group (RG) equations [see Eqs. (5) and (6) for the initial and final RG equations, and Appendix A for more details]. Close enough to these peaks, the energy from bias difference is smaller than the sample temperature T = Оөch. Conductance in these areas, highlighted by dashed lines, is uncertain from RG method. tance landscape of the topological (a) and trivial (b) situations. Of the trivial case, the ZBCP is assumed to come from a zero-energy Andreev bound state. We plot only conductance of positive bias, as the landscape is symmetric in bias. In both figures, the blue curves are plotted with a smaller tip-sample distance вҖ” equiva- lently, a stronger tip-sample tunneling than those of the red curves. In Fig. 2(a), the conductance contains contri- butions from both the zero-energy Majorana and a finite- energy CdGM (centered at Vbias = 0.5вҲҶsc). Noticeably, 4 (a) (b) вҮ  T 2rвҲ’1 (c) 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 L/О» вҮ  V 2rвҲ’1 0.1 1 10 100 0.05 0.10 0.20 0.50 (d) 0.01 0.10 1 10 100 0.05 0.10 0.50 1 T/вңҸch V = 0 T = 5вңҸch Vbias/T вҮ  T 8r V = 0 0.1 0.5 1 0.01 0.02 0.05 0.10 0.20 0.50 T/T0 G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) tance peak . The universal feature can be observed by changing either the temperature [(a), at zero bias V = 0], or the bias [(b), with a fixed temperature T = 5Оөch]. Of the latter case, the universal feature appears when Vbias is much larger than the temperature T = 5Оөch. When Vbias вүӘ T, the conductance saturates to a value smaller than 2e2/h, due to the finite-temperature effect. The Majorana coupling tMZM has the same value for (a) and (b). The universality might be alternatively detected by measuring the zero-bias conductance as function of the tip-sample distance L (c), af- ter obtaining the dependence of tunneling amplitude on L, i.e., tMZM(L). In making (c) we have assumed the tip-sample tunneling tMZM вҲқ exp(вҲ’L/О»), as an easy example. All curves are obtained following Eq. (4), following the Thermodynamic Bethe Ansatz . (d) For an accidental zero-energy An- dreev bound state, the equilibrium (i.e., V = 0) conductance decreases at a low temperature, following a different scaling feature G вҲј T 8r. Here T0 refers to the temperature with the highest conductance. when the tip-sample distance becomes small, the CdGM conductance peak (the red curve) can split into a valley (the blue curve). This peak-valley transition signifies the influence of dissipation on the tunneling into a CdGM. Experimentally, one can fix the experimental temper- ature Texp, and observe the peak splitting by decreasing the tip-sample distance L. In this work we treat the tip-sample junction as a tunneling barrier, with which the tip-sample transmission О“0(L) вҲқ exp(вҲ’2L/О») decays exponentially when L increases. The decaying width О» reflects the feature of the tunneling potential barrier. As a natural question, what is the requirement on the tip-sample distance L, to observe the peak splitting at a given experimental temperature Texp? To answer this question, we provide the following experimental steps. As the first step, one measures the transmission О“0(L) at a temperature T0. This temperature is chosen to be high enough such that (within the range of L dur- ing this measurement) interruption from dissipation can be avoided. Then, we switch back to the experimental temperature Texp < T0, where dissipation will play an im- portant role. At Texp, we expect to see the CdGM peak- splitting as long as L < LвҲ—,where the critical distance LвҲ— is defined by its corresponding transmission that satisfies Factor ОІ < 1 is non-universal and depends on the posi- tion detected by the tip: ОІ is close to (1 вҲ’ 2r)/(1 + 2r) in case of an extremely large asymmetry among differ- ent weights of the CdGM at the tip position. Here, the weight specifically means the weight between different components of the CdGM wavefunction [see Eq. (1) and Appendix A]. For instance, one can see the peak split- ting of CdGM peaks when L changes from 3.7О» to 3.3О» (see Fig. 2). The curves are evaluated by solving the RG equations numerically. By contrast, when the total electron and hole weights equal, ОІ approaches one, where the CdGM conductance signature at the detected position strongly mimics that of a real Majorana. Fortunately, the symmetric weight situ- ation for a non-Majorana CdGM is not robust and can be only preserved at some special tip locations. Therefore, a CdGM with accidental symmetric weight can be dis- tinguished (from a Majorana) by detecting its tunneling signal at different positions. In strong contrast, the zero-energy Majorana peak remains, and keeps growing when decreasing the tip- sample distance. We emphasize that for a real MZM, this Majorana-specified feature does not depend on the tip position (in the 2D plane parallel to the sample). Indeed, the dissipative tunneling into a MZM is anticipated as a universal process , and increases monotonously with an increasing tip-sample tunneling. The coexis- tence of a Majorana ZBCP and splitted CdGM peaks is a strong Majorana signature [Fig. 2(a)]. In strong contrast, if the ZBCP arises instead from an acciden- tally zero-energy Andreev bound state, the ZBCP always splits if one reduces the tip-sample distance [Fig. 2(b)]. We emphasize that dissipation is crucial in this land- scape measurement вҖ” otherwise the CdGM and Andreev bound state peaks will not split. The observation of the proposed phenomenon above, importantly, does not re- quire knowing the conductance unit. Calibration is thus unnecessary, lowering the difficulty of its potential exper- imental realization. A concrete observation of the peak splitting requires a STM resolution to be smaller than the splitting temperature. This temperature describes an en- ergy scale at which the dissipation effect starts to cause the peak splitting as the temperature drops further. To date, STM resolution around or smaller than 100mK has been realized . Given large enough dissipation, this resolution is smaller than the peak-splitting temper- ature [for instance, see the evaluated peak-splitting tem- perature (вҲј 1K) in the previous paragraph], thus being enough to observe the peak splitting. The above protocol to detect MZM with the conduc- tance landscape however does not apply to the special case (see e.g., Ref. ) where the MZM state is the only discrete level within the superconducting gap. Of this case, the dissipation effect in Majorana detection can- not be benchmarked by the splitting of a CdGM peak. 5 (b) (a) r = 0 r = 0.2 r = 0.2 (c) -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.05 0.06 0.07 0.08 0.09 0.10 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 Vbias/!0 Vbias/!0 Vbias/!0 G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) G (2e2/h) -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 Energy scale Пү0 is the half-width of the continuous spectrum. (a) The r = 0 case. The Majorana signal is disguised by the CdGM conductance background. Here Пү0 refers to the range of energy of CdGM spectrum. (b) The r = 0.2 case. The Majorana ZBCP becomes visible after the CdGM conductance has been suppressed by dissipation. The red and blue curves correspond to conductance curves with a comparatively lower and higher temperature, respectively. (c) The zoom-in plot of the conductance curves in the grey dashed box. When temperature decreases, the peak-valley difference of the ZBCP increases, leading to a more manifest Majorana signal. Here we calculate the conductance from the continuous spectrum following the P(E) theory Eq. (7). We emphasize that the ZBCP, while being small, appears under the influence of dissipation. It is intrinsically different, although appearing similar, in comparison to the pioneering Majorana hunting achievement in a hybrid nanowire system . Indeed, with dissipation present, possible interruption from e.g., soft gaps and impurities will be removed by dissipation. In (b) and (c) temperatures of the blue and red curves equal Пү0/50 and Пү0/150, respectively. Assuming Пү0 вҲј 3meV, the observation of these two curves require a STM resolution of 0.06meV and 0.02meV, respectively, both realizable in real experiments . One can instead confirm the Majorana signal by investi- gating the dissipation-dependent universality class (i.e., the conductance scaling features) of the Majorana ZBCP. Briefly, near the weak tunneling regime, dissipative tun- neling into a MZM displays the scaling feature of the con- ductance GMZM вҲқ Оө2rвҲ’1 , where r вүЎ Re2/h refers to the dimensionless dissipation. The system energy Оө can be either temperature or bias. We thus have two possi- ble choices to observe the anticipated scaling feature: by changing either the system temperature T [Fig. 3(a) or tip-bias Vbias [Fig. 3(b)]. In these two cases, we anticipate to observe the scaling features in temperature (T 2rвҲ’1) and bias (V 2rвҲ’1 bias ), respectively. As the third possibility, we can also investigate the dependence of the ZBCP on the tip-sample distance [Fig. 3(c)]. This option however requires to know the tip-sample tunneling amplitude as a function of the tip-sample distance. In making Fig. 3(c), we simply assumed a Gaussian decaying (with width О») of the tip-sample tunneling. In addition, scaling features emerge at relatively high energies. Their observation thus has a relatively milder requirement on the STM resolu- tion. Measurement of the scaling feature also helps confirm- ing a MZM of generic cases (i.e., the cases with multiple CdGMs within the superconducting gap). Indeed, with both pieces of evidence observed (i.e., the scaling fea- ture of the ZBCP and the splitting of CdGM peaks), the existence of the MZM can be more strongly confirmed. However, for generic cases, the observation of the scaling feature in bias requires a large-enough CdGM energy: otherwise the Majorana ZBCP scaling feature in bias is disguised by the CdGM contribution. In previous paragraphs, we assume CdGMs that are distinguishable in energy. For a vortex with CdGM energy level spacing smaller than the STM resolution, those CdGMs instead form into a continuous spectrum described by the density of states ПҒ(Оө). Of this case, dissipation also benefits the identification of the Majo- rana signal. Briefly, when the tunneling is dissipation free, the Majorana tunneling signal is disguised by the CdGMs around zero energy [Fig.4(a)]. Here we have assumed a Gaussian-shape CdGM density of states ПҒ(Пү) = ПҒ(0) exp(4Пү2/Пү2 0), where Пү0 вүҲ 0.8вҲҶSC. With dis- sipation included, in contrast, the CdGM tunnelings are strongly suppressed at low energies, thus manifesting the Majorana signal by a sharp ZBCP, especially under lower temperatures [Figs. 4(b) and 4(c)]. Noticeably, to ob- serve this feature, the distance between two вҖңshouldersвҖқ of the curve, вҲј Пү0 вҲҡr should be much larger than the temperature T. This requirement is normally satisfied as Пү0 вү« T. On the contrary, for the cases without MZM, dissipation always strongly suppresses the zero bias con- ductance and leads to a clean valley structure . Based on the strong Majorana evidence discussed above, we provide a protocol to identify Majorana in a vortex, in Fig. 5. III. THE SYSTEM HAMILTONIAN AND CALCULATION DETAILS A vortex of the considered topological system (Fig. 1) contains a MZM and multiple finite-energy CdGMs. Tunneling (from the tip) into each of these localized 6 Discrete finite-energy peaks, e.g., Refs. , and Apply a large magnetic field: non-SC normal state Step 1: Pre Majorana-hunting procedures Obtain dissipation ! via conductance fitting, e.g. Ref.. Find parameters of three relevant cases: 1. Case with negligible dissipation influence (only for reference): Choose a high temperature "# and a relatively large distance $#. The corresponding dissipation effect is invisible; 2. Case with Intermediate dissipation influence (with parameters "% and $%): Dissipation effect is visible. 3. Case with strong dissipation influence: Reduce to a lower temperature "& and a smaller distance $&. Here, Dissipation strongly modifies the tunneling features. Step 3: Distinguish Majorana from topological-trivial signals Step 2: Observe the overall conductance landscape in the case with intermediate dissipation influence ("% and $%) Other finite-energy conductance peaks? Trivial regime Yes Potential topological regime With ZBCP? No Decrease the magnetic field Peak splitting at some tip positions All peaks split, Fig. 2(b) ZBCP always remains; finite-energy peaks split, Fig. 2(a) Move to the case with strong dissipation influence Only a narrow ZBCP, e.g., Refs. , and ZBCP splits *Scaling feature (Fig. 3): obtained ! agrees with that obtained in step 1 A broad conductance peak Trivial regime: Accidental ZBCP Topological regime: Robust ZBCP Trivial regime: Accidental ZBCP Topological regime: Robust ZBCP Suppressed conductance at low bias: a clear valley structure An apparent ZBCP surrounded by suppressed trivial conductance signal, Figs. 3(a) and (b) Trivial regime: Accidental ZBCP Topological regime: Robust ZBCP Move to the case with strong dissipation influence Move to the case with strong dissipation influence ZBCP remains obtained from scaling features (marked by the asterisk) and that from a direct measurement is a confirmative, yet not strictly necessary Majorana signature. Indeed, of the single-conductance-peak situation, the non-splitting zero-bias peak is by itself a strong piece of Majorana evidence. states can be described by the Hamiltonian HT(r) = пҝҪ n пҝҪ teвҶ‘,n(r)ПҲвҖ  вҶ‘(r)an + teвҶ“,n(r)ПҲвҖ  вҶ“(r)an +thвҶ‘,n(r)ПҲвҖ  вҶ‘(r)aвҖ  n + thвҶ“,n(r)ПҲвҖ  вҶ“(r)aвҖ  n пҝҪ eвҲ’iПҶ + h.c., (1) where r labels the (three dimension) tip position, ПҲПғ refers to the tip fermion with spin Пғ, and an refers to the vortex state (n = 0 for the Majorana and otherwise for a CdGM). The electron and hole sectors of a local state are labelled by e and h, respectively. In Eq. (1), ПҶ is the phase fluctuation operator (of the tip-sample junc- tion) that couples to dissipative environmental modes. This phase is conjugate to the charge number of the tip- sample junction, with its dynamics given by the long-time correlation вҹЁexp[iПҶ(t)] exp[вҲ’iПҶ(0)]вҹ© вҲқ tвҲ’2r, (2) where r = Re2/h is the dimensionless dissipation am- plitude. The dynamics Eq. (2) indeed agrees with ex- perimental data obtained in a Pb-superconducting is- land, where dissipation is introduced via the disordered layer Especially, for the tip-Majorana coupling, parameters equality of electron and hole weights of a Majorana , for any position r. The tip-Majorana coupling then becomes HT-MZM(r) = tMZM(r) пҝҪ ПҲвҖ  tipeвҲ’iПҶ вҲ’ ПҲtipeiПҶпҝҪ Оі, (3) where Оі = ОівҖ  = (a0 + aвҖ  0)/ вҲҡ 2 is the vortex MZM. Due to its polynomial long-time feature Eq. (2), phase ПҶ can be combined with the field ПҶtip introduced from the bosonization of the tip fermion ПҲtip вҲј exp(iПҶtip)/ вҲҡ 2ПҖa , where a is the short-distance cut- off. By doing so, the tip-Majorana coupling instead be- comes HвҖІ T-MZM = вҲ’itMZM пҝҪ 2 ПҖa sin( вҲҡ 1 + 2rОҰ)Оі, (4) with the combined phase ОҰ = (ПҶtip+ПҶ)/вҲҡ1 + 2r and the MZM-coupling strength tMZM. The operator of Eq. (4) 7 has the scaling dimension 1/2 + r, and is thus relevant as long as r < 1/2. In this work, вҖңrelevanceвҖқ is de- fined in the renormalization group (RG) perspective. An tunneling is relevant (irrelevant), if its tunneling param- eter (e.g., tMZM) becomes increasingly important (unim- portant) when decreasing the system energy (e.g., tem- perature or bias) . The Majorana fermion Оі2 = 1 and couples only to the tip. The tip-Majorana tunnel- ing Eq. (4) is then equivalent to the Hamiltonian of a boundary Sine-Gordon model , which is exactly solvable with thermodynamic Betha Ansatz (see a brief outline in Appendix B). Following Ref. , we work out the MZM conductance in Figs. 2(a) and 3 (for r = 0.2). Especially, the conductance presents perfect scaling features as functions of temperature [Fig. 3(a)] and bias [Fig. 3(b)], respectively. Following the results of the boundary Sine-Gordon , the MZM conductance always increases , when decreasing the temperature, the applied bias, or the tip-sample distance: as long as the tunneling model (4) remains valid. In contrast to the Majorana situation, generically the tip-CdGM tunneling involves four independent tunneling parameters as shown in Eq. (1). The tip-CdGM tun- neling then can not reduce to the analytically solvable Hamiltonian Eq. (4). Now, we perturbatively investigate the tunneling into CdGMs with the Coulomb-gas RG method (see Appendix A). Briefly, with RG equations, one obtains the effective tunneling parameters under dif- ferent energies Оө. In real experiments, Оө can be either bias Vbias in the tip or the system temperature T. At the beginning of the RG flow, all four tunneling parameters follow the same flow equation dtОұ dl = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ пҝҪ1 2 + r пҝҪпҝҪ tОұ, (5) for Оұ = e вҶ‘, h вҶ‘, e вҶ“ and h вҶ“, and all n values alike. The parameter l = exp(Оө0/Оө) вҲ’ 1 labels the progress in the RG flow, where Оө0 is the initial RG cutoff. It equals zero initially (where Оө = Оө0), and increases with a de- creasing RG cutoff Оө. In real experiments, Оө refers to the energy fluctuation of the system. Specifically, it can be considered as either the difference between local-state energy and the applied bias, or the system temperature, whichever is larger. Following Eq. (5), when RG flow begins, all tunneling parameters share the scaling di- mension of the Majorana-tunneling r + 1/2 of Eq. (4). They are all relevant if r < 1/2, and effectively increase when Оө decreases. Scaling dimensions of them however become different after the RG flow (see Appendix A). More specifically, the system generically begins to pre- fer the tunneling process with the leading amplitude. At the end of the RG flow, the system approaches the weak tunneling fixed point, where only the tunneling process with the largest initial value dominates at low-enough energies. For instance, near the fixed point where teвҶ‘ dominates (i.e., teвҶ‘ вү« teвҶ“, thвҶ‘, thвҶ“), the flow of tunnel- ing parameters follows (here we drop the label of n for simplicity) dteвҶ‘ dl = teвҶ‘, dthвҶ‘ dl = вҲ’(1 + 4r)thвҶ‘, dteвҶ“ dl = 0 teвҶ“, dthвҶ“ dl = вҲ’4rthвҶ“, (6) where only the leading process teвҶ‘ remains relevant, and approaches perfect transmission after the RG flow. Notice that a finite current can only be produced via the successive application of e and h-involved tunnel- ing processes. Of the teвҶ‘-dominating situation, the flow of current is then determined by thвҶ“, i.e., G/(e2/h) вҲқ 2t2 eвҶ‘t2 hвҶ“/(t2 eвҶ‘ + t2 hвҶ“) вҲј 2t2 hвҶ“ (see Appendix A), where teвҶ‘ вү« thвҶ“ вү« other tunnelings near the fixed point. This combined process of G is irrelevant in the RG, with the scaling dimension 1+4r. This irrelevance of current tun- neling, remarkably, is distinct from the relevance of tun- neling before the flow Eq. (5). More specifically, trans- mission is a relevant process initially, where the conduc- tance increases with a decreasing RG cutoff Оө. After the RG flow, however, transmission becomes irrelevant, where conductance instead decreases with Оө. A critical energy is thus anticipated as the вҖңwatershedвҖқ that sepa- rates the regimes with relevant and irrelevant transmis- sion. Experimentally, this critical energy corresponds to the temperature where peak splitting begins, i.e. Fig. 2. Finally, when the island contains a continuous CdGM spectrum, the dissipative conductance can be obtained with the so-called P(E) method О“tipвҶ’sample(Vbias) = 1 RT ЛҶ dE ЛҶ dEвҖІP(E) (7) with which the current equals I(Vbias) = О“tipвҶ’sample(Vbias) вҲ’ О“sampleвҶ’tip(Vbias). Here RT is the tunneling resistance (indicating the tunneling barrier strength), ПҒ is the density of state of the sample at the tip location, ПҒtip is the tip density of state, f(E) is a fermionic distribution, and finally, P(E) incorporates the chance to dissipate electron energy E via the dissipative environment . For a dissipation-free system, the Majorana is fully disguised by the surrounding CdGMs, and simply increases ПҒ of the island [Fig. 4(a)]. It is hard to tell whether the conductance вҖңpeakвҖқ has any Majorana-origination. With dissipation involved, the interrupting CdGM signal is strongly suppressed, leaving the Majorana signal standing out [Fig. 4(b) and (c)]. IV. DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY In this paper, we have studied the transport features of a dissipative tunneling into a topological vortex. In- stead of the 2e2/h conductance quanta, we propose three dissipation-unique phenomena that can help the identifi- cation of a Majorana. Firstly, the CdGM peak can split when the tip approaches the sample (see Fig.2). This 8 non-universal feature of the CdGM peak, if coexisting with a non-splitting ZBCP, is a strong Majorana signal. The observation of this phenomenon requires the exis- tence of finite-energy CdGMs. Observation at different tip positions is also required, to avoid accidental equality of electron and hole weights (of CdGMs). In addition, the STM resolution is preferred to be smaller than the temperature at which the peak splitting begins. Other- wise the peak-splitting can only be indirectly detected by measuring the CdGM peak half-width: which is ex- pected to become larger if peak splitting occurs. For an sample with transmission 0.25 at temperature T = 10K, the peak splitting is expected to occur around 1K, larger than the latest STM resolution . Secondly, one can further confirm the Majorana existence by measuring the universal feature, i.e., the dependence of the ZBCP as functions of temperature [zero-bias, Fig.3(a)] or bias [temperature smaller than bias, Fig.3(b)]. Measuring the power-law scaling feature requires the STM resolu- tion to be smaller than temperature/bias of the univer- sal regime. In addition, if one measures the scaling fea- ture with bias, the applied bias is required to be smaller than the lowest CdGM energy: otherwise the scaling fea- ture is interrupted by the CdGM conductance. Thirdly, with interrupting CdGM signals suppressed by dissipa- tion, the Majorana signal becomes manifest and experi- mentally accessible even when the CdGM energy differ- ence is smaller than the STM resolution (Fig. 4). The STM resolution is only required to be smaller than the energy difference between вҖңshouldersвҖқ of the continuous spectrum, which is normally at the order of the super- conducting gap. Remarkably, all proposed phenomena do not require knowing the exact unit of conductance. A complicated calibration (of the measured current) is then unnecessary, lowering potential experimental difficulty. Before closure, we briefly discuss the relevant experi- mental parameters, including the dissipation amplitude r and the charging energy of the sample. To begin with, we choose the dissipation r вҲј 0.2 since such a dissipa- tion amplitude has been proven as enough to suppress false positive signals (i.e., conductance peaks due to An- dreev bound states) in a hybrid nanowire system , at an experimentally accessible temperature вҲј 200mK. This dissipation amplitude has indeed been realized ex- perimentally in a Pb superconducting island [63вҖ“65]. For instance, Ref. reports a dissipation r вҲј 0.26 of a Pb-superconducting island due to a disordered Pb wet- ting layer. Similar dissipation amplitude is anticipated as experimentally realizable in a vortex system, by a dis- ordered layer (Fig. 1). As the second requirement, the charging energy of the island should be smaller than the temperature required to see the peak splitting: otherwise the observation of the peak splitting can be interrupted by the Coulomb blockade effect. In real experiments, a small charging energy Ec = e2 4ПҖОөsampleОө0Rsample (8) requires a large sample radius Rsample and large (rela- tive) dielectric constant Оөsample (here Оө0 is the vacuum dielectric constant). For instance, a 2D sample with ra- dius Rsample вҲј 2Ојm is required to have a relative dielec- tric constant around Оөsample вҲј 50, to produce a small enough charging energy Ec вҲј 10ОјeV вҲј 100mK. Fortu- nately, Majorana hunting experiments in iron-based vor- texes, e.g., Refs. [27вҖ“31, 33вҖ“36] do not report apparent interruption from Coulomb blockade, thus supporting the applicability of our theory. As a summary, it is experi- mentally feasible to fabricate a sample that is both free from Coulomb blockade, and also has enough dissipation to generate our predicted phenomena. Appendix A: Coulomb-gas RG equations Briefly, the renormalization group (RG) method inves- tigates the low-energy system features (e.g., the conduc- tance) by figuring out the change of system parameters (the so call вҖңRG flowвҖқ) when decreasing the system en- ergy (temperature, bias, or the inverse of some dephasing time). In general, a RG method deals with the system action with the form Ssystem[ПҶ, Оӣ, {ОіОұ}] = N пҝҪ Оұ=1 ОіОұOОұ[ПҶ], (A1) where ПҶ is some field, and ОіОұ is the prefactor of the op- erator OОұ labelled by Оұ. The system has an initial cutoff Оӣ in energy at the beginning of the RG flow. When this cutoff decreases Оӣ вҶ’ Оӣ вҲ’ ОҙОӣ, particle states with en- ergies between the initial and reduced cutoffs should be removed, after effectively incorporating the interaction between these states and the states with energies below the new cutoff. These interactions then effectively mod- ify the prefactors ОіОұ, leading to an effectively new action Ssystem[ПҶ, Оӣ вҲ’ ОҙОӣ, {ОівҖІ Оұ}]. When ОҙОӣ is infinitesimal, the change of parameters ОіОұ follows the RG flow equations. This basic idea applies to most RG methods, including the Coulomb gas RG. More specifically, for the Coulomb gas RG method, one deals with the partition function Z(П„c, {ОіОұOОұ}) = пҝҪ n ЛҶ ОІ 0 dП„1 В· В· В· ЛҶ П„i+2вҲ’П„c 0 dП„i+1 В· В· В· Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ 0 (A2) that is required to be invariant during the RG flow. In Eq. (A2), the integral of вҖңtimeвҖқ is between zero and the temperature inverse ОІ = 1/T. As a consequence, strictly Coulomb gas RG equations describe the flow of equilib- rium systems by decreasing the temperature. However, if within the weak-tunneling regime, temperature and bias are exchangeable as both can be considered as the energy cutoff. Indeed, difference between temperature and bias 9 emerges only in the crossover regime , i.e., away from both the strong and weak coupling fixed points. The partition function Eq. (A2) contains вҖңkinksвҖқ at moments П„1, П„2...П„i... when the system state changes. In the Coulomb gas RG method, a cutoff in time П„c is in- troduced. The Coulomb gas RG contains the steps be- low. To begin with, before each RG step, the вҖңtime dif- ferenceвҖқ |П„i вҲ’ П„i+1| > П„c between any two kinks is as- sumed to be larger than the cutoff П„c, forbidding the occurrence of two kinks within П„c. When the RG step begins, this cutoff increases to П„c вҶ’ П„c + ОҙП„c, where ОҙП„c > 0 refers to the changing of the cutoff. Notice that 1/П„c can be interpreted as the cutoff in energy. The in- creasing of П„c then indicates the decreasing of the energy cutoff. Due to the increasing of cutoff in time, kinks now have the chance to occur within the new cutoff, i.e., П„c < |П„i вҲ’ П„i+1| < П„c + ОҙП„c. Contribution of these kinks should then be integrated out within this RG step. The contribution of the integrated pairs to the partition func- tion then leads to the modification of the partition func- tion Z(П„c, {ОіОұOОұ}) вҶ’ Z(П„c + ОҙП„c, {ОівҖІ ОұOОұ}), with a set of modified parameters ОівҖІ Оұ. Finally, to guarantee the invari- ance of partition function, we rescale the cutoff back to П„c. When ОҙП„c вүӘ П„c is infinitesimal, the modification of parameters can be written in terms of differential equa- tions known as RG equations. Now we go back to our specific system i.e., the dis- sipative tunneling into the vortex. Experimentally, the realization of this system is distinct from that of a hybrid nanowire. However, the tunneling Hamiltonian Eq. (1) is exactly the same as the dissipative tunneling into an Andreev bound state of a superconducting-proximitized nanowire. The RG equations of the hybrid nanowire sys- tem are thus also capable to describe the flow of parameters of the vortex system under consideration. As the only difference, Ref. considers only the zero-bias conductance peak, where the Andreev bound state en- ergy serves as another possible energy cutoff. In our case, by contrast, non-equlibrum tunneling into a CdGM with finite energy ОөCdGM is considered. This problem can how- ever be solved by treating the bias that equals the CdGM energy Vbias = ОөCdGM as the effective zero bias. We em- phasize that the Majorana identification protocol in our work strongly relies on the vortex-specified feature where finite-energy CdGMs and a MZM coexist. This feature is novel as it does not appear in hybrid nanowire sys- tems . With this treatment, tunneling parameters follow the RG equations dteвҶ‘ dl = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (K1 + 1)2 + g(K2 + 1)2 4g пҝҪ teвҶ‘, dthвҶ‘ dl = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (K1 вҲ’ 1)2 + g(K2 вҲ’ 1)2 4g пҝҪ thвҶ‘, dteвҶ“ dl = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (K1 + 1)2 + g(K2 вҲ’ 1)2 4g пҝҪ teвҶ“, dthвҶ“ dl = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (K1 вҲ’ 1)2 + g(K2 + 1)2 4g пҝҪ thвҶ“, (A3) where g = 1/(1 + 4r), and l вҲқ ln Оө labels the RG pro- cess in terms of the energy Оө. In experiments, Оө can be considered as temperature or bias. Initially, l = 0, where both parameters K1(l = 0) = K2(l = 0) = 0 equal zero. At this point, all tunneling parameters of Eq. (A3) follow the same flow equation, i.e., dtОұ/dl = [1 вҲ’ (r + 1/2)]tОұ for Оұ = e вҶ‘, h вҶ‘, e вҶ“ and h вҶ“. The values of K1 and K2 begin to change when l increases, following dK1 dl = вҲ’2П„ 2 c пҝҪ пҝҪ , dK2 dl = вҲ’2П„ 2 c пҝҪ пҝҪ . (A4) Noticeably, Eq. (A4) is asymmetric with respect to tun- neling parameters, through which the final values of K1 and K2 are determined by the leading process. For in- stance, with teвҶ‘ dominant, K1 = K2 = вҲ’1 after the RG flow, leading to a most strongly reduced scaling dimen- sion of teвҶ‘ [Eq. (6)]. By solving flow equations (A3) and (A4), and the con- ductance expression G вҲқ e2 h П„ 2 c пҝҪ 2t2 eвҶ‘t2 hвҶ“ t2 eвҶ‘ + t2 hвҶ“ + 2t2 eвҶ“t2 hвҶ‘ t2 eвҶ“ + t2 hвҶ‘ пҝҪ , (A5) we arrive at the CdGM conductance peak contributions in Fig. 2 (see the contained Mathematica Notebook). For a generic CdGM, one of the four parameters dominates after the flow. For instance, if teвҶ‘ dominates, the con- ductance G вҲқ 2t2 eвҶ‘t2 hвҶ“/(t2 eвҶ‘ + t2 hвҶ“). Appendix B: Thermaldynamic Bethe Ansatz As has been discussed, since Оі2 = 1, Eq. (4) agrees with that of a boundary Sine Gordon model. It has been shown that such a system is perfectly integrable (and thus exactly solvable), and contains quasiparticles including a kink, an anti-kink, and may have multiple breathers. To figure out the number of breathers, we notice that our Hamiltonian вҲј sin(вҲҡ1 + 2rОҰ) has the 10 r < 1/2, following Ref. , the system we consider has zero breather. To proceed, one needs to solve the dispersion function of quasiparticles (kink and anti-kink), as functions of the rapidity Оё. More specifically, the dispersion function can be figured out from the integral equation ОөОІ(Оё, Vbias) = MeОё T вҲ’ пҝҪ ОІвҖІ ЛҶ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОёОҰОІ,ОІвҖІ(Оё вҲ’ ОёвҖІ) Г— ln пҝҪ 1 + eОІвҖІVbias/2T вҲ’ОөОІвҖІ(Оё,Vbias/T )пҝҪ , (B1) where ОІ, ОІвҖІ equal 1 and вҲ’1 for kink and anti-kink, respec- tively. The function ОҰОІ,ОІвҖІ is related to the quasiparticle scattering matrix in the bulk ОҰОІ,ОІвҖІ(Оё) = вҲ’ 1 2ПҖ cosh Оё. (B2) The first term of Eq. (B1), i.e., M exp(Оё)/T influences the interaction-free contribution. The choice of M is a common prefactor that will not influence the final con- ductance. With the dispersion function obtained, the current equals I(Tref, Vbias, T) = eTn(r) 2h ЛҶ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОё 1 пҝҪ 1 + eVbias/2T вҲ’Оө(Оё+ln(M/2T ),Vbias) 1 + eвҲ’Vbias/2T вҲ’Оө(Оё+ln(M/2T ),Vbias) пҝҪ , (B3) where Tref is the effective вҖңreflectionвҖқ amplitude. When Tref/T вүӘ 1, reflection is weak, and conductance approaches the quantized value 2e2/h. In the opposite limit Tref/T вү« 1, reflection is strong, and conductance approaches zero. A large Tref indicates a small tip-sample tunneling, or a large tip-sample distance. In Eq. (B3), the function n(r) is a normalization factor. Theoretically, it equals 2r + 1. In real numerics, its value might devi- ates from 2r + 1 by e.g., one to two percents. Due to the smallness of conductance in the weak tunneling limit, one needs to figure out the precise value of the normalization factor. With Eq. (B3), we obtain the Majorana conductance peaks in Figs. 2 and 3 (see C coding provided). Appendix C: Evaluation of the peak splitting energy As an important question, experimentalists would wonder what is the approximate temperature or tip- sample distance when peak splitting occurs. Without loss of generality, we consider the situation where teвҶ‘ dominates after the RG flow. Of this case, peak splitting occurs when the conjugate process thвҶ“ has become marginal in the RG prospective. For simplicity, assuming equal K1 and K2, the RG-marginal of thвҶ“ re- and noticing that K1(0) = K2(0) = 0 initially, the chang- ing of K1 and K2 during the RG flow is triggered by the first term of Eq. (A4). This term is small under a weak Of this situation, the flows of K1 and K2 are rather slow, and peak splitting can only occur at a significantly small temperature. On the contrary, in the opposite limit where |teвҶ‘| вү« |teвҶ“|, |thвҶ‘|, |thвҶ“|, the flow of K1 and K2 is basically deter- mined by teвҶ‘. One can approximately predict the peak splitting by measuring the tip-sample transmission О“bm at a temperature Tbm that is high enough to avoid sup- pression from dissipation. With this measurement, we ask what is the requirement to observe the peak splitting at the experimental temperature Texp. Here we further approximately treat |teвҶ‘| as a constant. With these sim- plifications, at the experimental temperature Texp, one anticipates the peak splitting, if the initial transmission О“bm satisfies О“bm > ln 1+2r 4r ln Tbm Texp . (C1) From this equation, one sees that in the extremely asym- metric limit, peak splitting requires a large transmis- sion (small tip-sample distance), or a small tempera- ture Texp. Meanwhile, since ln[(1 + 2r)/(4r)] decreases monotonously when r increases, the peak splitting of a sample with a larger r occurs at a relatively larger tem- perature вҖ” since peak splitting at smaller values of K1 and K2. For a more intuitive understanding, if r = 0.2, О“bm = 0.2 when Tbm = 5K, then peak splitting is antici- pated to occur around Texp вүҲ 500mK. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Hao Zhang and Zhan Cao for valuable discussions. This work was supported by China MOSTвҖҷs Innovation Program for Quantum Science and Technology (Grant No. 2021ZD0302400, the Na- tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants inghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program, CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (YSBR-003), and the Strategic Priority Research Pro- gram of CAS (Grant No. XDB28000000). 11 вҲ— phyliuxin@hust.edu.cn вҖ  fuchun@ucas.ac.cn вҖЎ dongeliu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn N. Read and Dmitry Green, вҖңPaired states of fermions in two dimensions with breaking of parity and time- reversal symmetries and the fractional quantum Hall ef- fect,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267вҖ“10297 (2000). A Yu Kitaev, вҖңUnpaired Majorana fermions in quantum wires,вҖқ Physics-Uspekhi 44, 131вҖ“136 (2001). A Yu Kitaev, вҖңFault-tolerant quantum computation by anyons,вҖқ Ann. Phys. (Amsterdam) 303, 2вҖ“30 (2003). Chetan Nayak, Steven H Simon, Ady Stern, Michael Freedman, and Sankar Das Sarma, вҖңNon-Abelian anyons and topological quantum computation,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. Sankar Das Sarma, Michael Freedman, and Chetan Nayak, вҖңMajorana zero modes and topological quantum computation,вҖқ npj Quantum Inf. 1, 15001 (2015). Liang Fu and C. L. Kane, вҖңSuperconducting proximity effect and Majorana fermions at the surface of a topolog- ical insulator,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 096407 (2008). Masatoshi Sato, Yoshiro Takahashi, and Satoshi Fuji- moto, вҖңNon-abelian topological order in s-wave superflu- ids of ultracold fermionic atoms,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, Jay D. Sau, Roman M. Lutchyn, Sumanta Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңGeneric new platform for topological quantum computation using semiconductor heterostruc- tures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 040502 (2010). Roman M. Lutchyn, Jay D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңMajorana fermions and a topological phase transition in semiconductor-superconductor heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 077001 (2010). Yuval Oreg, Gil Refael, and Felix von Oppen, вҖңHelical liquids and Majorana bound states in quantum wires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 177002 (2010). T.-P. Choy, J. M. Edge, A. R. Akhmerov, and C. W. J. Beenakker, вҖңMajorana fermions emerging from magnetic nanoparticles on a superconductor without spin-orbit coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 84, 195442 (2011). S. Nadj-Perge, I. K. Drozdov, B. A. Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani, вҖңProposal for realizing Majorana fermions in chains of magnetic atoms on a superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 88, 020407 (2013). Vincent Mourik, Kun Zuo, Sergey M Frolov, SR Plissard, Erik PAM Bakkers, and Leo P Kouwenhoven, вҖңSigna- tures of Majorana fermions in hybrid superconductor- semiconductor nanowire devices,вҖқ Science 336, 1003вҖ“ M. T. Deng, CL Yu, GY Huang, Marcus Larsson, Philippe Caroff, and HQ Xu, вҖңAnomalous zero-bias con- ductance peak in a Nb-InSb nanowire-Nb hybrid device,вҖқ Nano Lett. 12, 6414вҖ“6419 (2012). Anindya Das, Yuval Ronen, Yonatan Most, Yuval Oreg, Moty Heiblum, and Hadas Shtrikman, вҖңZero-bias peaks and splitting in an AlвҖ“InAs nanowire topological super- conductor as a signature of Majorana fermions,вҖқ Nat. Phys. 8, 887 (2012). A. D. K. Finck, D. J. Van Harlingen, P. K. Mohseni, K. Jung, and X. Li, вҖңAnomalous modulation of a zero- bias peak in a hybrid nanowire-superconductor device,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 126406 (2013). H. O. H. Churchill, V. Fatemi, K. Grove-Rasmussen, M. T. Deng, P. Caroff, H. Q. Xu, and C. M. Marcus, вҖңSuperconductor-nanowire devices from tunneling to the multichannel regime: Zero-bias oscillations and magneto- conductance crossover,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 87, 241401 (2013). W Chang, SM Albrecht, TS Jespersen, Ferdinand Kuem- meth, P Krogstrup, J Nyg МҠard, and Charles M Marcus, вҖңHard gap in epitaxial semiconductorвҖ“superconductor nanowires,вҖқ Nat. Nanotechnol. 10, 232вҖ“236 (2015). P Krogstrup, NLB Ziino, W Chang, SM Albrecht, MH Madsen, Erik Johnson, Jesper Nyg МҠard, CM Mar- cus, and TS Jespersen, вҖңEpitaxy of semiconductor- superconductor nanowires,вҖқ Nat. Mater. 14, 400вҖ“406 M. T. Deng, S. Vaitiek МҮenas, E. B. Hansen, J. Danon, M. Leijnse, K. Flensberg, J. Nyg МҠard, P. Krogstrup, and C. M. Marcus, вҖңMajorana bound state in a coupled quantum-dot hybrid-nanowire system,вҖқ Science 354, Fabrizio Nichele, AsbjГёrn C. C. Drachmann, Alexan- der M. Whiticar, Eoin C. T. OвҖҷFarrell, Henri J. Suomi- nen, Antonio Fornieri, Tian Wang, Geoffrey C. Gardner, Candice Thomas, Anthony T. Hatke, Peter Krogstrup, Michael J. Manfra, Karsten Flensberg, and Charles M. Marcus, вҖңScaling of Majorana zero-bias conductance peaks,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 136803 (2017). S Vaitiek МҮenas, Y Liu, P Krogstrup, and CM Marcus, вҖңZero-bias peaks at zero magnetic field in ferromagnetic hybrid nanowires,вҖқ Nat. Phys. 17, 43вҖ“47 (2021). Huading Song, Zitong Zhang, Dong Pan, Donghao Liu, Zhaoyu Wang, Zhan Cao, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Dun- yuan Liao, Ran Zhuo, Dong E. Liu, Runan Shang, Jian- hua Zhao, and Hao Zhang, вҖңLarge zero bias peaks and dips in a four-terminal thin InAs-Al nanowire device,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Research 4, 033235 (2022). Dong Pan, Huading Song, Shan Zhang, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Dunyuan Liao, Ran Zhuo, Zhichuan Wang, Zitong Zhang, Shuai Yang, Jianghua Ying, Wentao Miao, Runan Shang, Hao Zhang, and Jianhua Zhao, вҖңIn situ epitaxy of pure phase ultra-thin InAs-Al nanowires for quantum devices,вҖқ Chinese Physics Letters 39, 058101 (2022). Zhaoyu Wang, Huading Song, Dong Pan, Zitong Zhang, Wentao Miao, Ruidong Li, Zhan Cao, Gu Zhang, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Ran Zhuo, Dong E. Liu, Ke He, Runan Shang, Jianhua Zhao, and Hao Zhang, вҖңPlateau regions for zero-bias peaks within 5quantized conductance value 2e2/h,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, 167702 (2022). Dongfei Wang, Lingyuan Kong, Peng Fan, Hui Chen, Shiyu Zhu, Wenyao Liu, Lu Cao, Yujie Sun, Shixuan Du, John Schneeloch, Ruidan Zhong, Genda Gu, Liang Fu, Hong Ding, and Hong-Jun Gao, вҖңEvidence for Majorana bound states in an iron-based superconductor,вҖқ Science Qin Liu, Chen Chen, Tong Zhang, Rui Peng, Ya-Jun Yan, Chen-Hao-Ping Wen, Xia Lou, Yu-Long Huang, Jin-Peng Tian, Xiao-Li Dong, Guang-Wei Wang, Wei-Cheng Bao, Qiang-Hua Wang, Zhi-Ping Yin, Zhong-Xian Zhao, and Dong-Lai Feng, вҖңRobust and clean majorana zero mode in the vortex core of high-temperature superconductor (Li0.84Fe0.16) OHFeSe,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 8, 041056 (2018). 12 T. Machida, Y. Sun, S. Pyon, S. Takeda, Y. Kohsaka, T. Hanaguri, T. Sasagawa, and T. Tamegai, вҖңZero- energy vortex bound state in the superconducting topo- logical surface state of Fe(Se,Te),вҖқ Nature Materials 18, Peng Zhang, Zhijun Wang, Xianxin Wu, Koichiro Yaji, Yukiaki Ishida, Yoshimitsu Kohama, Guangyang Dai, Yue Sun, Cedric Bareille, Kenta Kuroda, Takeshi Kondo, Kozo Okazaki, Koichi Kindo, Xiancheng Wang, Changqing Jin, Jiangping Hu, Ronny Thomale, Kazuki Sumida, Shilong Wu, Koji Miyamoto, Taichi Okuda, Hong Ding, G. D. Gu, Tsuyoshi Tamegai, Takuto Kawakami, Masatoshi Sato, and Shik Shin, вҖңMultiple topological states in iron-based superconductors,вҖқ Na- ture Physics 15, 41вҖ“47 (2019). Lingyuan Kong, Shiyu Zhu, MichaпҝҪl Papaj, Hui Chen, Lu Cao, Hiroki Isobe, Yuqing Xing, Wenyao Liu, Dongfei Wang, Peng Fan, Yujie Sun, Shixuan Du, John Schnee- loch, Ruidan Zhong, Genda Gu, Liang Fu, Hong-Jun Gao, and Hong Ding, вҖңHalf-integer level shift of vortex bound states in an iron-based superconductor,вҖқ Nature Physics 15, 1181вҖ“1187 (2019). Xiaoyu Chen, Mingyang Chen, Wen Duan, Xiyu Zhu, Huan Yang, and Hai-Hu Wen, вҖңObservation and characterization of the zero energy conductance peak in the vortex core state of FeTe0.55Se0.45,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:1909.01686 (2019), arXiv:1909.01686 [cond-mat.supr-con]. Shiyu Zhu, Lingyuan Kong, Lu Cao, Hui Chen, MichaпҝҪl Papaj, Shixuan Du, Yuqing Xing, Wenyao Liu, Dongfei Wang, Chengmin Shen, Fazhi Yang, John Schneeloch, Ruidan Zhong, Genda Gu, Liang Fu, Yu-Yang Zhang, Hong Ding, and Hong-Jun Gao, вҖңNearly quantized con- ductance plateau of vortex zero mode in an iron-based superconductor,вҖқ Science 367, 189вҖ“192 (2020). Wenyao Liu, Lu Cao, Shiyu Zhu, Lingyuan Kong, Guang- wei Wang, MichaпҝҪl Papaj, Peng Zhang, Ya-Bin Liu, Hui Chen, Geng Li, Fazhi Yang, Takeshi Kondo, Shixuan Du, Guang-Han Cao, Shik Shin, Liang Fu, Zhiping Yin, Hong-Jun Gao, and Hong Ding, вҖңA new Majorana plat- form in an Fe-As bilayer superconductor,вҖқ Nature Com- munications 11, 5688 (2020). Tianzhen Zhang, Weicheng Bao, Chen Chen, Dong Li, Zouyuwei Lu, Yining Hu, Wentao Yang, Dongming Zhao, Yajun Yan, Xiaoli Dong, Qiang-Hua Wang, Tong Zhang, and Donglai Feng, вҖңObservation of distinct spatial dis- tributions of the zero and nonzero energy vortex modes in (Li0.84Fe0.16)OHFeSe,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 127001 Lingyuan Kong, Lu Cao, Shiyu Zhu, MichaпҝҪl Papaj, Guangyang Dai, Geng Li, Peng Fan, Wenyao Liu, Fazhi Yang, Xiancheng Wang, Shixuan Du, Changqing Jin, Liang Fu, Hong-Jun Gao, and Hong Ding, вҖңMajorana zero modes in impurity-assisted vortex of lifeas super- conductor,вҖқ Nature Communications 12, 4146 (2021). Wenyao Liu, Quanxin Hu, Xiancheng Wang, Yigui Zhong, Fazhi Yang, Lingyuan Kong, Lu Cao, Geng Li, Kozo Okazaki, Takeshi Kondo, Changqing Jin, Fuchun Zhang, Jinpeng Xu, Hong-Jun Gao, and Hong Ding, вҖңTunable vortex Majorana modes controlled by strain in homogeneous LiFeAs,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2111.03786 (2021), arXiv:2111.03786 [cond-mat.supr-con]. Jin-Peng Xu, Mei-Xiao Wang, Zhi Long Liu, Jian-Feng Ge, Xiaojun Yang, Canhua Liu, Zhu An Xu, Dandan Guan, Chun Lei Gao, Dong Qian, Ying Liu, Qiang- Hua Wang, Fu-Chun Zhang, Qi-Kun Xue, and Jin-Feng Jia, вҖңExperimental detection of a Majorana mode in the core of a magnetic vortex inside a topological insulator- superconductor Bi2Te3/NbSe2 heterostructure,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 017001 (2015). Hao-Hua Sun, Kai-Wen Zhang, Lun-Hui Hu, Chuang Li, Guan-Yong Wang, Hai-Yang Ma, Zhu-An Xu, Chun-Lei Gao, Dan-Dan Guan, Yao-Yi Li, Canhua Liu, Dong Qian, Yi Zhou, Liang Fu, Shao-Chun Li, Fu-Chun Zhang, and Jin-Feng Jia, вҖңMajorana zero mode detected with spin selective andreev reflection in the vortex of a topological superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 257003 (2016). Yan-Feng Lv, Wen-Lin Wang, Yi-Min Zhang, Hao Ding, Wei Li, Lili Wang, Ke He, Can-Li Song, Xu-Cun Ma, and Qi-Kun Xue, вҖңExperimental signature of topological superconductivity and Majorana zero modes on ОІ-Bi2Pd thin films,вҖқ Science Bulletin 62, 852вҖ“856 (2017). Yonghao Yuan, Jie Pan, Xintong Wang, Yuqiang Fang, Canli Song, Lili Wang, Ke He, Xucun Ma, Haijun Zhang, Fuqiang Huang, Wei Li, and Qi-Kun Xue, вҖңEvidence of anisotropic Majorana bound states in 2M-WS2,вҖқ Nature Physics 15, 1046вҖ“1051 (2019). Stevan Nadj-Perge, Ilya K Drozdov, Jian Li, Hua Chen, Sangjun Jeon, Jungpil Seo, Allan H MacDonald, B An- drei Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani, вҖңObservation of Majo- rana fermions in ferromagnetic atomic chains on a super- conductor,вҖқ Science 346, 602вҖ“607 (2014). Antonio Fornieri, Alexander M Whiticar, F Setiawan, El МҒДұas Portol МҒes, AsbjГёrn CC Drachmann, Anna Keselman, Sergei Gronin, Candice Thomas, Tian Wang, Ray Kalla- her, et al., вҖңEvidence of topological superconductivity in planar Josephson junctions,вҖқ Nature 569, 89вҖ“92 (2019). Hechen Ren, Falko Pientka, Sean Hart, Andrew T Pierce, Michael Kosowsky, Lukas Lunczer, Raimund Schlereth, Benedikt Scharf, Ewelina M Hankiewicz, Laurens W Molenkamp, et al., вҖңTopological superconductivity in a phase-controlled Josephson junction,вҖқ Nature 569, 93вҖ“98 Matthieu C. Dartiailh, William Mayer, Joseph Yuan, Kaushini S. Wickramasinghe, Alex Matos-Abiague, Igor ЛҮZuti МҒc, and Javad Shabani, вҖңPhase signature of topolog- ical transition in Josephson junctions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. Falko Pientka, Graham Kells, Alessandro Romito, Piet W. Brouwer, and Felix von Oppen, вҖңEnhanced zero-bias Majorana peak in the differential tunnel- ing conductance of disordered multisubband quantum- wire/superconductor junctions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, Jie Liu, Andrew C. Potter, K. T. Law, and Patrick A. Lee, вҖңZero-bias peaks in the tunneling conductance of spin-orbit-coupled superconducting wires with and with- out Majorana end-states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 267002 Dmitry Igorevich Pikulin, JP Dahlhaus, M Wimmer, Henning Schomerus, and CWJ Beenakker, вҖңA zero- voltage conductance peak from weak antilocalization in a Majorana nanowire,вҖқ New J. Phys. 14, 125011 (2012). Elsa Prada, Pablo San-Jose, and Ram МҒon Aguado, вҖңTransport spectroscopy of NS nanowire junctions with Majorana fermions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 86, 180503(R) (2012). So Takei, Benjamin M. Fregoso, Hoi-Yin Hui, Alejan- dro M. Lobos, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңSoft superconducting 13 gap in semiconductor Majorana nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Dong E. Liu, Enrico Rossi, and Roman M. Lutchyn, вҖңImpurity-induced states in superconducting heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 97, 161408 (2018). Haining Pan and S. Das Sarma, вҖңPhysical mechanisms for zero-bias conductance peaks in Majorana nanowires,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Research 2, 013377 (2020). Haining Pan, Chun-Xiao Liu, Michael Wimmer, and Sankar Das Sarma, вҖңQuantized and unquantized zero-bias tunneling conductance peaks in Majorana nanowires: Conductance below and above 2e2/h,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 103, 214502 (2021). Dong E. Liu, вҖңProposed method for tunneling spec- troscopy with ohmic dissipation using resistive elec- trodes: A possible Majorana filter,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. Donghao Liu, Gu Zhang, Zhan Cao, Hao Zhang, and Dong E. Liu, вҖңUniversal conductance scaling of Andreev reflections using a dissipative probe,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. Shan Zhang, Zhichuan Wang, Dong Pan, Hangzhe Li, Shuai Lu, Zonglin Li, Gu Zhang, Donghao Liu, Zhan Cao, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Dunyuan Liao, Ran Zhuo, Runan Shang, Dong E. Liu, Jianhua Zhao, and Hao Zhang, вҖңSuppressing Andreev bound state zero bias peaks using a strongly dissipative lead,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 076803 Zhichuan Wang, Shan Zhang, Dong Pan, Gu Zhang, Zezhou Xia, Zonglin Li, Donghao Liu, Zhan Cao, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Dunyuan Liao, Ran Zhuo, Yongqing Li, Dong E. Liu, Runan Shang, Jianhua Zhao, and Hao Zhang, вҖңLarge Andreev bound state zero bias peaks in a weakly dissipative environment,вҖқ (2022). Dmitry I. Pikulin, Bernard van Heck, Torsten Karzig, Es- teban A. Martinez, Bas Nijholt, Tom Laeven, Georg W. Winkler, John D. Watson, Sebastian Heedt, Mine Temurhan, Vicky Svidenko, Roman M. Lutchyn, Mason Thomas, Gijs de Lange, Lucas Casparis, and Chetan Nayak, вҖңProtocol to identify a topological superconduct- ing phase in a three-terminal device,вҖқ arXiv:2103.12217 Morteza Aghaee, Arun Akkala, Zulfi Alam, Rizwan Ali, Alejandro Alcaraz Ramirez, Mariusz Andrzejczuk, An- drey E Antipov, Mikhail Astafev, Bela Bauer, Jonathan Becker, et al., вҖңInas-al hybrid devices passing the topo- logical gap protocol,вҖқ arXiv:2207.02472 (2022). Meng Li, Geng Li, Lu Cao, Xingtai Zhou, Xiancheng Wang, Changqing Jin, Ching-Kai Chiu, Stephen J. Pen- nycook, Ziqiang Wang, and Hong-Jun Gao, вҖңOrdered and tunable Majorana-zero-mode lattice in naturally strained LiFeAs,вҖқ Nature 606, 890вҖ“895 (2022). Jacob R. Colbert and Patrick A. Lee, вҖңProposal to mea- sure the quasiparticle poisoning time of Majorana bound states,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 89, 140505 (2014). Kam Tuen Law, Patrick A Lee, and Tai Kai Ng, вҖңMajo- rana fermion induced resonant Andreev reflection,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 237001 (2009). C. Chen, Q. Liu, T. Z. Zhang, D. Li, P. P. Shen, X. L. Dong, Z.-X. Zhao, T. Zhang, and D. L. Feng, вҖңQuantized conductance of Majorana zero mode in the vortex of the topological superconductor (Li 0.84 Fe 0.16 )OHFeSe,вҖқ Chinese Physics Letters 36, 057403 (2019). Christophe Brun, Konrad H. M МҲuller, I-Po Hong, Fran М§cois Patthey, Christian Flindt, and Wolf-Dieter Schneider, вҖңDynamical Coulomb blockade observed in nanosized electrical contacts,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, L. Serrier-Garcia, J. C. Cuevas, T. Cren, C. Brun, V. Cherkez, F. Debontridder, D. Fokin, F. S. Berg- eret, and D. Roditchev, вҖңScanning tunneling spec- troscopy study of the proximity effect in a disordered two-dimensional metal,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 157003 Sangjun Jeon, Sungmin Kim, and Young Kuk, вҖңZero- bias anomaly and role of electronic correlations in a dis- ordered metal film,вҖқ New Journal of Physics 22, 083045 A. B. Odobescu, A. A. Maizlakh, and S. V. Zaitsev- Zotov, вҖңElectron correlation effects in transport and tun- neling spectroscopy of the Si(111)вҲ’7 Г— 7 surface,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 92, 165313 (2015). C. Carbillet, V. Cherkez, M. A. Skvortsov, M. V. FeigelвҖҷman, F. Debontridder, L. B. Ioffe, V. S. Stol- yarov, K. Ilin, M. Siegel, D. Roditchev, T. Cren, and C. Brun, вҖңSpectroscopic evidence for strong correlations between local superconducting gap and local Altshuler- Aronov density of states suppression in ultrathin NbN films,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 102, 024504 (2020). Bryan Rachmilowitz, He Zhao, Zheng Ren, Hong Li, Konrad H. Thomas, John Marangola, Shang Gao, John Schneeloch, Ruidan Zhong, Genda Gu, Christian Flindt, and Ilija Zeljkovic, вҖңCoulomb blockade effects in a topo- logical insulator grown on a high-Tc cuprate supercon- ductor,вҖқ npj Quantum Materials 5, 72 (2020). Zhichuan Wang, Shan Zhang, Dong Pan, Gu Zhang, Zezhou Xia, Zonglin Li, Donghao Liu, Zhan Cao, Lei Liu, Lianjun Wen, Dunyuan Liao, Ran Zhuo, Yongqing Li, Dong E. Liu, Runan Shang, Jianhua Zhao, and Hao Zhang, вҖңLarge andreev bound state zero-bias peaks in a weakly dissipative environment,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 106, Joel D. Shore, Ming Huang, Alan T. Dorsey, and James P. Sethna, вҖңDensity of states in a vortex core and the zero-bias tunneling peak,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 3089вҖ“ Artem Odobesko, Felix Friedrich, Song-Bo Zhang, Soumyajyoti Haldar, Stefan Heinze, Bj МҲorn Trauzettel, and Matthias Bode, вҖңAnisotropic vortices on supercon- ducting nb(110),вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 102, 174502 (2020). Gert-Ludwig Ingold and Yu V. Nazarov, вҖңCharge tun- neling rates in ultrasmall junctions,вҖқ in Single Charge Tunneling: Coulomb Blockade Phenomena In Nanostruc- tures, edited by Hermann Grabert and Michel H. Devoret (Springer US, Boston, MA, 1992) pp. 21вҖ“107. See Supplemental Material at [URL will be in- serted by publisher] for the generation of conductance curves. P. Fendley, A. W. W. Ludwig, and H. Saleur, вҖңEx- act nonequilibrium transport through point contacts in quantum wires and fractional quantum Hall devices,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 52, 8934вҖ“8950 (1995). T. Machida, Y. Kohsaka, and T. Hanaguri, вҖңA scanning tunneling microscope for spectroscopic imag- ing below 90 mK in magnetic fields up to 17.5 T,вҖқ Review of Scientific Instruments 89, 093707 (2018), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5049619. Marta Fern МҒandez-Lomana, Beilun Wu, Francisco Mart МҒДұn- 14 Vega, Raquel S МҒanchez-Barquilla, Rafael МҒAlvarez Mon- toya, Jos МҒe Mar МҒДұa Castilla, Jos МҒe Navarrete, Juan Ram МҒon Marijuan, Edwin Herrera, Hermann Suderow, and Isabel Guillam МҒon, вҖңMillikelvin scanning tunneling microscope at 20/22 T with a graphite enabled stickвҖ“slip approach and an energy resolution below 8 ОҪeV : Application to conductance quantization at 20 T in single atom point contacts of Al and Au and to the charge density wave of 2HвҖ“NbSe2,вҖқ Review of Scientific Instruments 92, 093701 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0059394. M. H. Devoret, D. Esteve, H. Grabert, G.-L. Ingold, H. Pothier, and C. Urbina, вҖңEffect of the electromagnetic environment on the Coulomb blockade in ultrasmall tun- nel junctions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1824вҖ“1827 (1990). C. L. Kane and Matthew P. A. Fisher, вҖңTransmission through barriers and resonant tunneling in an interacting one-dimensional electron gas,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 46, 15233вҖ“ Subir Ghoshal and Alexander Zamolodchikov, вҖңBound- ary S matrix and boundary state in two-dimensional in- tegrable quantum field theory,вҖқ International Journal of Modern Physics A 09, 3841вҖ“3885 (1994). Christian R. Ast, Berthold J МҲack, Jacob Senkpiel, Matthias Eltschka, Markus Etzkorn, Joachim Ankerhold, and Klaus Kern, вҖңSensing the quantum limit in scan- ning tunnelling spectroscopy,вҖқ Nature Communications Alexander Altland and Ben D. Simons, вҖңThe renormal- ization group,вҖқ in Condensed Matter Field Theory (Cam- bridge University Press, 2010) p. 409вҖ“495, 2nd ed. H. T. Mebrahtu, I. V. Borzenets, H. Zheng, Y. V. Bomze, A. I. Smirnov, S. Florens, H. U. Baranger, and G. Finkel- stein, вҖңObservation of majorana quantum critical be- haviour in a resonant level coupled to a dissipative envi- ronment,вҖқ Nature Physics 9, 732 вҖ“ (2013).