Weak-signal extraction enabled by deep-neural-network denoising of diffraction data J. Oppliger,1 M. M. Denner,1 J. K ̈uspert,1 R. Frison,1 Q. Wang,1, 2 A. Morawietz,1 O. Ivashko,3 A.-C. Dippel,3 M. v. Zimmermann,3 I. Bia�lo,1, 4 L. Martinelli,1 B. Fauqu ́e,5 J. Choi,6 M. Garcia-Fernandez,6 K.-J. Zhou,6 N. B. Christensen,7 T. Kurosawa,8 N. Momono,8, 9 M. Oda,8 F. D. Natterer,1 M. H. Fischer,1 T. Neupert,1 and J. Chang1 1Physik-Institut, Universit ̈at Z ̈urich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, CH-8057 Z ̈urich, Switzerland 2Department of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China 3Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY, Notkestraße 85, 22607 Hamburg, Germany. 4AGH University of Science and Technology, Faculty of Physics and Applied Computer Science, 30-059 Krak ́ow, Poland 5JEIP, USR 3573 CNRS, Coll`ege de France, PSL University, 11, place Marcelin Berthelot, 75231 Paris Cedex 05, France 6Diamond Light Source, Harwell Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, United Kingdom 7Department of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 8Department of Physics, Hokkaido University - Sapporo 060-0810, Japan 9Department of Applied Sciences, Muroran Institute of Technology, Muroran 050-8585, Japan Removal or cancellation of noise has wide-spread applications for imaging and acous- tics. In every-day-life applications, denoising may even include generative aspects, which are unfaithful to the ground truth. For scientific use, however, denoising must reproduce the ground truth accurately. Here, we show how data can be denoised via a deep convolutional neural network such that weak signals appear with quantitative accuracy. In particular, we study X-ray diffraction on crystalline materials. We demon- strate that weak signals stemming from charge ordering, insignificant in the noisy data, become visible and accurate in the denoised data. This success is enabled by super- vised training of a deep neural network with pairs of measured low- and high-noise data. We demonstrate that using artificial noise does not yield such quantitatively accurate results. Our approach thus illustrates a practical strategy for noise filtering that can be applied to challenging acquisition problems. In recent years, significant progress through deep learn- ing techniques has been made in the field of image restoration [1–6]. A central task in image restoration is removing noise from an image [7–11], where pixel j is composed of the intrinsic signal sj and noise nj, xj = sj + nj. A typical benchmark problem has corre- lated signal between neighboring pixels whereas the noise is uncorrelated and white. Such denoising problems have been the subject of both supervised and unsuper- vised machine-learning approaches. Super- vised algorithms rely on either ground-truth (xj, sj) or noise-2-noise training pairs (xj, x′ j). In the latter case, the image pairs have different (or equal) noise levels. In both cases, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been successfully applied to images with Gaussian noise [1–5]. Unsupervised approaches, sometimes dubbed noise-2-self, noise-2-void , or noise-as-clean , have also been employed. Their realization relies on less train- ing information as a ground truth is absent. Unsuper- vised approaches therefore deliver (slightly) inferior per- formance compared to supervised algorithms. Many scientific disciplines utilize digital data record- ing. One, two, or three dimensional data structures, can always be transformed into a pixel-based picture format. Two-dimensional detectors are common across experimental fields such as astronomy, material science and medical imaging. Counting of events with time- independent probability are expected to follow Poisson statistics. As such, virus-cell infection, radioactivity and particle scattering are events following a Poisson distri- bution. That is, the signal sj and the noise nj are no longer independent as the standard deviation is given by σj = √sj. Poisson noise can generally be reduced by sufficient acquisition time. However, long exposure times are not always possible. For example: for radia- tion of molecules, proteins, or human tissue, low exposure times are required to avoid beam damage . Diffrac- tion experiments in pulsed magnetic fields, by construc- tion, have limited counting times and hence suffer from low-counting statistics . Finally, many experi- ments explore multi-dimensional parameter spaces that are virtually impossible to cover completely with suffi- cient statistics. Thus there is a clear potential in de- veloping robust methods to denoise low-counting (LC) statistics data to produce results of comparable qual- ity to what would be obtained from high-counting (HC) statistics data. By extension, noise filtering can speed-up exploratory approaches by orders of magnitudes. However, removal of noise from experimental data is challenging. This can be attributed to the fact that ex- perimental noise is the sum of multiple noise sources, such as Poisson and read-out noise, with their respec- tive statistical properties. It is therefore difficult – often impossible – to accurately simulate experimental noise. The common approach to analyze artificially added noise nj to a ground-truth signal sj is not directly applicable. Limited experimental training data however prevents fur- ther progress on this important problem . arXiv:2209.09247v3 [eess.IV] 11 Dec 2023 2 (a) (e) (f) (g) (h) (b) Low-count (LC) input Intensity (arb. units) Deep convolutional neural network (CNN) Denoised output High-count (HC) data Lo Hi CDW (c) (d) h (r.l.u.) k (r.l.u.) −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 −12 −9 −6 −3 0 l k h 0 7 0 4 0 2 0 6 0.0 2.4 0.0 0.6 0 5 0.0 1.8 0.0 0.4 l (r.l.u.) Example of denoising X-ray diffraction (XRD) data using a deep convolutional neural network (CNN). (a) Real experimental low-count frame (exposure time 1 second) is used as an input to a deep CNN (b) – trained to remove the noise. (c) The denoised output reveals a charge-density-wave signal (CDW, marked in red), barely visible in the raw low-count data. (d) The real experimental high-count frame (exposure time 20 seconds) is shown for comparison. (e) A stack of denoised X-ray scans through Q ≈ (0.23, 0, 8.5) along the h, k and l reciprocal space axes, in units of reciprocal lattice units (r.l.u.). For every projected scan, a background subtraction has been performed – see main text. Gaussian fits for high-count and denoised output profiles are indicated by red solid lines. The data points depicted in the denoised output profile are computed as the mean value over five training runs of the IRUNet neural network with different initial conditions. Error bars for low- and high-count are shown under the assumption of counting statistics. Error bars for the denoised output are shown as the standard deviation over the mentioned training runs. The clock symbols indicate relative counting time and the network symbol indicates the denoised low-count produced by the neural network. Here, we present experimental training data recorded by X-ray diffraction (XRD), (xj, x′ j) = (xLC j , xHC j ), where LC and HC refer to low- and high-counting statistics, re- spectively. Two deep CNNs are trained on such pairs to remove noise from the LC data. In a further step, the performance of the neural networks trained on experi- mental data is compared to the same networks trained on artificial training pairs where the HC data is corrupted with synthetic Poisson noise. We find that noise filtering of experimental noise – the ultimately relevant task – is significantly improved by training the neural networks on experimental data. This fact is particularly evident when analyzing physical length scales associated with weak sig- nals. As such, we provide a noise filtering approach for scientific data with challenging signal-to-noise features. I. RESULT SECTION A. X-ray diffraction data An example of XRD intensities recorded on the high- temperature superconductor La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 is shown in Figure 1(a,d) and 2(b,c) with LC and HC frames, re- spectively. The experimental setup is schematically de- picted in Figure 2(a) and further described in the meth- ods section. Although the data covers volumes of recipro- cal space, the training is carried out on two-dimensional slices (so-called frames). Therefore, the neural networks do not have access to the three-dimensionality of the data set but rely on the two-dimensional correlation of pixels in individual frames. The LC (HC) data are recorded 3 Experimental LC Simulated LC + Poisson (λ) Experimental HC 2D detector sample X-rays 2θ (b) (a) (e) (c) (d) Intensity 0 Density Poisson skewed Voigt 200 400 600 (f) Intensity 0 0.12 0.24 experimental simulated Density 0 6 12 (g) (i) Lo Hi (j) (h) Adding Poisson noise to experimental high-count frame (b) leads to a simulated low-count frame (d). (e) Intensity distribution of the high-count frame (b) with fitted Poisson and skewed Voigt profiles. (f) Intensity distribution of the experimental and simulated low-count frame in (c,d) with fitted Poisson profile. (g,h) Zoom of white dashed rectangular region in (b,c) encircling the charge-density-wave reflection. (i,j) Zoom of white dashed rectangular region in (c,d) after denoising using the IRUNet network trained on the respective noise distributions. typically for 1 (20) seconds. Such experimental pairs were recorded successively with all experimental param- eters fixed. The entire data set contains 7134 frame pairs (194 x 242 pixels each) and includes signals with intensi- ties varying over six orders of magnitude. Weak two- dimensional charge-density-wave (CDW) order [20–22] manifests by vertical rod-like shapes. In cuprates, the ex- act nature of CDW ordering is still being debated. On an atomistic level, the CDW in La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 represents monoclinic distortions of the fundamental orthorhom- bic crystal structure . Fundamental Bragg peaks (not shown) are more intense and distributed circularly over much fewer pixels. The data also contains Debye- Scherrer (powder) rings originating from the polycrys- talline sample environment. Finally, the data includes spurions (unidentified signal) and dead pixels. Bragg scattering implies a direct connection between scatter- ing angle (i.e. position on the detector) and incident photon energy/wavelength. As such, conclusions drawn here are invariant under different scattering angles de- fined by incident photon energy or sample (lattice param- eter). Furthermore, a different doping concentration in our La2−xSrxCuO4 show case, would change the charge order incommensurability , but not the overall data content. The data set is separated into a training, validation, and test set. All frames containing obvious CDW sig- nals – our main feature-of-interest – are excluded from the training and validation set. These frames are instead moved to the test set, which is used for performance eval- uation. Overall, the size of the training set is 3280 pairs while the size of the validation set is 820 pairs. B. Artificial noise generation As shown in Figure 2(f), the experimental LC data fol- lows an approximate Poisson distribution. Therefore, to complement the experimental LC data, we artificially cre- ate LC data by adding Poisson noise to the experimental HC data. XRD data is governed by counting statistics, where the probability of a single photon hitting pixel j is theoretically given by the Poisson probability distri- bution Pj for large total count N – ideally N → ∞. For fair comparison, artificial and experimental LC data should be statistically similar. To achieve this, we define λf as the ratio between frame-integrated low-count N LC f and high-count N HC f (f here refers to a frame index) and λ = median(λf). Each HC frame is then normalized with λ and LC frames being generated by adding the associ- ated Poisson noise, resulting in simulated LC frames as shown in Figure 2(d). Notice that signal intensities may vary by many orders of magnitude across the detector pixels, therefore the HC data typically displays an asym- metric probability distribution as shown in Figure 2(e). 4 SRBR low-count, denoised 0 0.5 1.0 0 0.5 1.0 denoised low-count h Signal-to-residual-background ratio (SRBR) high-count 0 1.5 3.0 0 1.5 3.0 k 0 12.5 25.0 0 12.5 25.0 l experimental data. Multiple frames containing charge-density-wave signals are analyzed along the reciprocal (h, k, l) direction in a similar fashion as in Figure 1(f-h). The signal-to-residual-background ratio of the charge-density-wave reflection in the high-count frame is plotted against the signal-to-residual-background ratio of the low-count frame and its denoised version. We observe that the denoising of the low-count frames improves the signal-to-residual-background ratio and, in many cases, even leads to better results than the high-count data. C. Deep neural-network architectures and training We implement two neural-network architectures re- ferred to as VDSR and IRUNet – see learn the intrinsic features of the LC input frames, and produce a denoised output using the HC frames as refer- ence. The VDSR architecture relies on stacking many convolutional layers and uses a residual learning ap- proach to extract the noise-free data from its noisy vari- ant . The IRUNet architecture combines convo- lutional layers with an encoder/decoder framework, uti- lizing skip connections to reduce the vanishing gradient problem and increase accuracy. An Adam optimizer with the AMSGrad variant is used to improve conver- gence. All frames are normalized by their total intensity, ensuring equal scaling between LC and HC frames. Dur- ing training, we apply data augmentation in the form of mirroring the frames along the l and k direction, and randomly adjusting the global brightness of the frames. Additional information can be found in the methods sec- tion. D. Analysis Performance evaluation of the trained neural networks – on test data – is illustrated by one-dimensional line- cuts (along the reciprocal h, k, and l directions) through the CDW ordering vector – see Figure 1(e-h). This in- volves the summation of pixel intensities within a region- of-interest (ROI) and subtraction of neighbouring ROIs – see supplementary information. This subtraction is made to eliminate the background surrounding the CDW sig- nal such as powder rings. As the background subtraction is not always perfect, the one-dimensional line-cuts are composed of signal and a small residual ”background”. To avoid negative residual background intensities, a small constant shift has been applied. In Figure 1(f-h), we ana- lyze the line-cuts by fitting a Gaussian model. The result- ing parameters are the amplitude A, the peak position μ, the standard deviation σ, and the constant residual back- ground C. We furthermore define the signal-to-residual- background ratio SRBR = A/C. In Figure 3, we show the SRBR for 50 different examples of CDW order from the test set. Denoising using a neural network signifi- cantly improves the SRBR of the CDW order – often- times surpassing the results obtained from the HC data. Due to the random nature of noise, the network is not able to learn the small but finite noise component of the HC data, resulting in an efficient noise-removal. These results are summarized in Table I and put in contrast to values extracted from the unfiltered LC data. We also compare the training with experimental and arti- ficial noise of similar noise levels. Additionally to the SRBR, we calculate the mean absolute error between the denoised peak position μh,k,l and standard devia- tion σh,k,l with the HC values. From these results, we conclude that training on experimental data greatly im- proves noise filtering. This conclusion holds even in the case when the amount of artificial training data is larger than the amount of experimental training data. A con- siderable improvement can be achieved by employing a multiscale training procedure where the artificial train- ing data covers a wide range of statistics. More details as well as a table containing standard image quality met- rics describing the denoising performance can be found in the supplementary information. Finally, we observe that both IRUNet and VDSR networks, on average, achieve comparable results despite their different architectures. 5 set containing charge-density-wave (CDW) signals. The first column indicates the used training and evaluation methodology. For example training on artificial Poisson noise and evaluation on experimental noise (Poisson → Exp.). The Gaussian peak position μα and standard deviation σα with α = (h, k, l) are given as the mean absolute error between the Gaussian parameter obtained from the denoised and the one obtained from the high-count signal (the lower the better). Values for the signal- to-residual-background ratio (SRBRα) are given as the absolute ratio of the Gaussian parameter obtained from the denoised and the one obtained from the high-count signal (the higher the better). Values for μα as well as values for σα are scaled as indicated. Because of the broader peak in the l direction, a scaling of 10 for μl and σl has been chosen over a scaling of 100. μh (×102) μk (×102) μl (×10) σh (×102) σk (×102) σl (×10) SRBRh SRBRk SRBRl Low-count IRUNet Poisson → Poisson Poisson → Exp. Exp. → Exp. VDSR Poisson → Poisson Poisson → Exp. Exp. → Exp. II. DISCUSSION Eventually, removal of experimental noise is the goal of noise-filtering algorithms. Many studies have focused on filtering artificial noise from photographs [1–6]. The ar- tificial noise typically has a single statistical distribution (Gaussian, Poisson, or Bernoulli) and the photographs are represented by Red-Green-Blue (RGB) color scales from 0 to 255. Experimental noise poses a much harder problem as multiple noise sources are present and the sig- nal can vary by many orders of magnitude. This suggests that denoising algorithms should (also) be benchmarked on more challenging experimental data. Here, we provide an XRD data set where the signal intensity varies by six orders of magnitude. Not surprisingly, we find that net- works trained to remove artificial noise perform well on exactly that task. However, the high performance, un- fortunately, does not carry over to the filtering of exper- imental noise. Our results suggest that neural networks filter experimental noise better when trained on exper- imental noise rather than artificial noise profiles. This statement is especially true when the noise levels of ex- perimental and artificial noise are comparable. To illustrate the generality and robustness of this work, we apply the trained network to resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) data. XRD and RIXS are fundamen- tally different experimental techniques – see methods sec- tion. In Figure 4, we show a raw RIXS spectrum recorded on SrTiO3 with different counting statistics as indicated (top panels). In the bottom panels we show the corre- sponding denoised output from a CNN trained on exper- imental XRD data exclusively. As the used RIXS detec- tor does not offer single photon sensitivity, the signal is not expected to follow pure Poisson statistics. Despite the dissimilar experimental technique, different sample, and different noise distribution, the trained neural net- work achieves a visible noise reduction and consequently enhances the SRBR. The successful denoising of RIXS data likely stems from the rich variation of signals (pow- der rings, charge order and lattice Bragg peaks, spurious, and dead pixels) and noise sources in the XRD training data. Our results, therefore, encourage the collection of even more diverse training data with different compositions of noise sources from other scattering, spectroscopy, and mi- croscopy techniques. Small-angle neutron and (resonant inelastic) X-ray scattering data would be an obvious choice to extend the training data. Spectroscopies and microscopies such as angle-resolved photoe- mission electron spectroscopy and transmission elec- tron microscopy data could also help expand- ing the amount and variety of training data. Further- more, the application of transfer learning using a pre-trained model might prove beneficial in reducing the amount of distinct training data needed. By applying our method to future studies, a large amount of beam- time could be saved, or a fixed beamtime budget could be used more efficiently by, for example, being able to probe a larger parameter space. 6 0 200 400 Energy loss (meV) (a) 0 200 400 Energy loss (meV) Lo Hi t (b) 4t (c) 1.5 2.0 2.5 1.5 2.0 2.5 1.5 2.0 2.5 Intensity (arb. units) Detector channel Detector channel Detector channel Intensity (arb. units) Intensity (arb. units) 40t 1, 4 and 40 times 3 minutes (top row). Left panels display counting intensities with detector channel versus energy loss. The right panels show the (horizontally) projected RIXS spectra. The panels in the bottom row are the corresponding denoised neural-network outputs of the top row. Three inelastic peaks are highlighted by arrows in (c). III. METHODS X-ray diffraction: The training data was recorded on a La1.88Sr0.12CuO4 single crystal , at beamline P21.1 at the PETRA III storage ring at DESY in Hamburg. The scattering intensities were recorded using a DEC- TRIS PILATUS3 X CdTe 100k detector. This detector provides us with 195 x 487 pixels per frame and a bit- depth of 32. Each pixel is associated with a horizon- tal and a vertical scattering angle from which recipro- cal space coordinates can be reconstructed as described in . The convolutional neural network (CNN) train- ing is independent of this reconstruction that is done to extract correlation lengths. The diffractometer was oper- ated with 100 keV photons and the sample was cooled to around 30 K where a charge-density-wave (CDW) order is fully developed. The charge order has a short correla- tion length along the c-axis directions. Hence, along the reciprocal c-axis (l), the CDW order manifests by a long rod of scattering intensity. Resonant inelastic X-ray scattering: The oxygen K- edge RIXS spectra were recorded at the I21 beam- line at Diamond Light Source on a SrTiO3 crys- tal. Linear vertical light polarization and photon en- ergy of ∼531 eV were used. The sample tempera- ture was 20 K and the momentum transfer was set to (h, k, l) = (0, 0, 0.245) r.l.u.. Convolutional neural networks: Although networks for three-dimensional data structures exist , we employed architectures designed for uncorrelated two-dimensional images. A comprehensive review of deep learning and convolutional neural networks applied to noise-filtering of images is given in Ref. . Generally, many networks are displaying comparable performance. In this work, we implemented two different neural-network architec- tures referred to as VDSR and IRUNet . For the VDSR architecture, we did not include the final ad- dition layer as we do not find a significant performance change – see supplementary information. The weights of the convolutional layers are randomly initialized using the He method . For the VDSR model we make use of a parametric rectifying linear unit (PReLU) after each convolutional layer while a normal ReLU is used in the IRUNet architecture. The VDSR network has been trained for 150 epochs using a batch size of 8 and an initial learning rate of 5×10−4. The IRUNet network has been trained for 200 epochs using a batch size of 16 and an initial learning rate of 5×10−4. The learning rate was decreased after a certain number of epochs to ensure good convergence. For the VDSR model, we multiply the learning rate with 0.5 after every 50 epochs. For the IRUNet model, the learning rate is multiplied with 0.5 af- ter 150 epochs. The total training duration of the VDSR and IRUNet models was on average around 20 and 10 hours respectively on a Nvidia Tesla P100 GPU with 10 GB of VRAM using TensorFlow 2.4.1. A discussion of the receptive field of the neural networks can be found in the supplementary information. Loss function: During each training epoch, the perfor- mance of the neural networks is determined by compar- ing the denoised output with the high-count frame. The used loss function L is given by a combination of mean absolute error (MAE) and multiscale structural similarity (MSSIM) . We find that this loss function results in a better overall denoising performance when compared to other losses such as mean squared error (L2 loss) – see supplementary information. 7 Data availability: The experimental data used in this work can be found at doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8237173. Code availability: The code used for the setup and training of the neural networks is available at github.com/joppli/XRD denoising. Competing interests: The authors declare no compet- ing interests.