Sharp enhancement on thermoelectric figure-of-merit of post-transi- tion metal chalcogenides (PTMCs) using heterostructures with Mexi- can-hat valence band Marcel S. Claro*1,2 1 INL-International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory, Av. Mestre José Veiga s/n, 4715-330 Braga, Portugal. 2 Centro Singular de Investigación en Química Biolóxica e Materiais Moleculares (CiQUS), Departamento de Química- Física, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela 15782, Spain e-mail: marcel.santos@usc.es ABSTRACT: Post-transition metal chalcogenides (PTMCs) such as GaSe, GaS, InSe, and InS have been proposed as prom- ising thermoelectric materials due to low lattice conductivity, originating from the atomically layered structure, high See- beck coefficient, and the anticipation that its figure-of-merit be improved when thinned to few-layers as the band structure turns into Mexican-hat valence band (MHVB). Here we show by ab initio calculations that the MHVB should be present even on thick films of InSe/GaSe type-II heterostructures, and a 50% enhancement on thermoelectric figure-of-merit zT at room-temperature is expected when compared with bulk InSe. Thermoelectric (TE) materials and devices can directly con- vert heat to electricity based on the Seebeck effect, and are key enabling technologies of new clean (carbon-free) sources of energy and to harvest energy which is usually wasted on inef- ficient equipment and energy generation.1–3 Nonetheless, The main obstacle to the wide adoption of TE devices is their low efficiency. The efficiency of thermoelectric materials is meas- is the Seebeck coefficient, σ is the electrical conductivity, T is the absolute temperature, κL and κe are the lattice and elec- tronic thermal conductivities, respectively. Increase zT value has been proved challenging over the years, as it requires sim- ultaneously a high Seebeck coefficient and electrical conduc- tivity but low thermal conductivity, when high electrical con- ductivity actually has a detrimental effect on the electron ther- mal conductivity (Wiedemann-Franz law). Various methods are proposed to enhance the TE efficiency, including band en- gineering to improve the power factor (S2σ), for example, us- ing low dimensional semiconductors to obtain step-like and delta-like density of states (DOS).4 Another typical example is use materials with Mexican-hat valence band (MHVB), pre- sent in the most efficient TE materials, e.g., Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3.5,6 This band profile combines the large DOS and large transport velocity due to the flatness of the band. Therefore, enhancing at the same time all the TE properties. Mexican-hat dispersions are relatively common in few-layer two-dimensional materials. Ab initio studies and ARPES direct measurements have found Mexican-hat dispersions in the va- lence band of many few-layer Post-transition metal chalco- genides (PTMCs) materials such as GaSe, GaS, InSe, and InS.7– 9 These materials are interesting for electronic and photonic application and also have been proposed as promising TE due to their low lattice conductivity (<2 Wm-1K-1)10, high Seebeck coefficient11, and the anticipation that its figures-of-merit be improved when thinned to TL scale, due to the increment of the density of states (DOS) when the band structure turns into MHVB.5,6 Such thin PTMCs in theory would present zT as high as 2.05 and as good as the reference Bi2Te3 alloys. Nevertheless, the MHVB only appears in those materials in the form of very thin films, with less than 7 TLs12 which results in difficulties to practical exploit its properties, including the growth or trans- fer of such thin films, the stability of the material in air13,14, and the difficulties to measure tiny signals and properties at (Se- spite the early theoretical interest, there are not experimental reports to date on the thermoelectric properties of few-layers PTMCs. Here we show that short-period GaSe/InSe superlat- tices (SL) share the same valence band properties. As a result, important electronic properties, in particular the thermoelec- tric figures-of-merit, that have already been calculated or measured in samples of few-layer thickness would be compa- rable in superlattices with the advantage of been amplified by the film thickness (number of SL periods) and facilitated ap- plication. Starting from the indication that the MHVB is stronger in thinner films.5,12 We performed calculations based on plane- waves density functional theory (DFT) to obtain the band structure of several InSe/GaSe SL SLs containing 1 to 3 TLs of GaSe in a 4 TL SL unit cell (Table 1). In this case, InSe replaces the vacuum of isolated layers as a barrier, due to type-II band alignments. In comparison to isolated layers, similar valley depth and peak k-point is obtained5. The SL with deepest val- ley (3 TL InSe / 1 TL GaSe SL) is then used in the following calculations. top of valence band for 4 TL SL unit cell heterostructures with ε-(P6m2) stack using PBEsol functional. Γ-valley depth (meV) Peak k-point (Å-1 ) 1 TL GaSe/3 TL InSe 54 2 TL GaSe/2 TL InSe 45 3 TL GaSe/1 TL InSe 21 GaSe and InSe have several known polymorphs appearing de- pending on the growth method, the most common polytypes with non-centrossymetric TL (D3h) are named as ε-(P6m2), β- ing sequences between the adjacent layers. 15–18 Nevertheless, we reported recently the first structural observation of a new GaSe and InSe polymorph (R3m) (named as γ ́-polymorph) characterized by a distinct atomic configuration with centro- symmetric TL (D3d).17,19,20 When with the same monolayer symmetry, polymorphs present small differences in band structure, electronic and optical properties particularities due to the presence or lack of special symmetries, however, usually these differences are not noticeable in most practical uses. Considering it, despite the γ ́ and γ are the most common pol- ytypes in our SL growth by MBE, we use the ε-stack and its centrosymmetric version P63/mc (named as ε ́-polymorph) to compare between the D3h and D3d TLs SL, and these results should extend to the same TL symmetry polytypes. It is con- venient not just because of the smaller unit cell (2 vs 3 TL) but also because the γ is rhombohedral with a different k-space, with A-A bandgap instead of Γ- Γ.16 In the Figure 1 we show the comparison between D3h and D3d TLs SL band structure using Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBEsol)21 generalized-gradi- ent-approximation (GGA). We observe a small difference in the bandgap in the Γ- and M-point, a larger bandgap differ- ence, and a spin degenerecence break in the K-point (D3d full Brillouin path in the supplementary information), however, more importantly, is the shape of the valence band. The cen- trosymmetric TL SL is the only one having MHVB. It suggests that the electronic hybridization between the TLs is reduced in the D3d polymorphs22 and makes it a case closer to isolated TL. Since the PBEsol functional is well-known to underestimate the bandgap, in the following calculations we used the modi- fied Becke-Johnson exchange-correlation (mBJ) potential23, which provides more accurate bandgaps and band structures in comparison to many-body theory (G0W0) and experimental data after the calibration of the parameter c that weights the Becke-Russel exchange16. In this way is not necessary to deal with scissor operators when the properties depend on the bandgap, as the properties of interest. For GaSe and InSe the parameter c was fixed (c = 0.838) after obtain the experimental band gap of β-InSe(D3h TL) (1.2515,16 eV). In the mBJ calcula- tions (Figure 2a) the Γ-valley shows a depth of 17 meV and ra- dius of 0.094 Å-1. These are the main MHVB features, from which most of the characteristic material properties derive, and they are similar to the values found experimentally in iso- lated 2 TL GaSe7. The comparison between the functionals (Figure 2a), shows that these values can change slightly de- pending on the chosen functional, but the MHVB shape largely remains unaltered. TL InSe with centrosymmetric (D3d) and non-centrosymetric (D3h) TLs in a ε-type stack along the plane, and its band structures around the Γ-point (bottom). We proceed with our analysis taking InSe as a reference since this SL is actually 3⁄4 InSe. Figure 2b makes this comparison with the calculated DOS. While the conduction band DOS is very similar on both materials, the SL exhibits van Hove sin- gularities in the region where InSe has the standard parabolic band DOS due to MHVB. To state how it reflects in the TE properties, we performed a estimation of S, the power-factor (S2σ), and zT (Figure 3) which is straightforward from the band structure and DOS, making use of Boltzmann equa- tion24. The Seebeck coeficient, conductivity (σ/τ) and elec- tronic thermal conductivity (ke/τ) are calculated using BoltzTraP package and the output of DFT-mBJ. τ is the elec- tron scattering time. The unknown values (τ and κL) can be obtained experimentally or from first principles calculations. In this work, τ (derivated from mean free path λ0=25 nm) is extracted the literature25 based on conductivity experimental data. The κL (T) is obtained from first-principles calculations and is also in agreement with experimental values.26 In fact, the zT and Seebeck coefficient obtained for bulk InSe are sim- ilar to experimental data11,27 which validates these approxima- tions. InSe TL / 1 GaSe TL superlattice (3/1 TL SL) using mBJ and PBESol functional b) Density of states (DOS) of ε ́-polymorph bulk InSe and 1 TL GaSe/ 3 TL InSe SL. Our calculations show that in comparison to bulk InSe the Seebeck coefficient barely changes for all temperatures and chemical potential considered. However, the singularities in the DOS caused by the MHVB result in a considerable increase in the electrical conductivity and the power factor without a corresponding increase in the κe. The outcome is that in-plane zT sharp increases (about 50% ) at room temperature in p-type SL. There is also a reduction of 200 K in the optimum temper- ature which makes it even more attractive for several applica- tions at room-temperature. This increment in zT can be even bigger considering the improvement in κL that occurs in SLs due to phonon confinement28 in the heterostructure inter- faces, and that was not considered in this first approximation. We recently presented the epitaxial growth of InSe/GaSe het- erostructures with atomically defined interfaces and D3d poly- morphs using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), which makes these superlattices readily available.20 Few candidates for dop- ing of PTMC already exist and can be used to achieve the chemical potential for peak zT.29–32 While MBE would be a method appropriate for high-value wafers, other methods like chemical vapor deposition33 (CVD), pulsed-laser deposition34 (PLD) can be used to produce inexpensive large surfaces of this material in the future. Yet, The van der Waals (vdW) bond between the PTMC layers and the substrate facilitates the growth on a great variety of substrates and surface. ture and chemical potential between 300 and 800 K. In conclusion, using ab initio calculations we demonstrate that the in-plane zT can increases about 50% at room temper- ature in p-type on GaSe/InSe superlattices in comparison to bulk InSe due to the singularities in the DOS, which are pre- sent in the Mexican-hat valence band. MHVB exists only on non-centrosymmetric TL(D3d) SL, and a 1 TL GaSe/ 3 TL InSe SL presents a valance band shape which is similar to an iso- lated 2 TL GaSe. Similarly, this concept can be applied in other PTMCs, which are already considered as promising multifunc- tional materials, to enhance its performance as thermoelectric materials. Method The ab initio calculations were done using density pertur- bation theory (DFT) within the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBEsol)21 generalized-gradient-approximation (GGA) and the modified Becke-Johnson exchange-correlation (mBJ meta- GGA) as implemented in Quantum Espresso35,36 (QE) and LIBXC37 using norm-conserving pseudopotentials38. We have optimized lattice parameters and atomic positions using PBEsol until forces in each atom are smaller than 0.01 eV/Å. For all systems, the basis-set cutoff energy is 140 Ry and the Brillouin zone integrated with 15x15x6 Γ-centered Monkhorst- Pack grid of k-points for bulk materials (β- ε- polytypes) and 15x15x3 grids for the 2 unit cells superlattices in the self-con- sistent calculations with convergence criteria of 1x10-8 eV. We used twice the number of points (31x31x10 and 31x31x6) in non- self-consistent calculations for DOS and transport properties using BoltzTraP24, which interpolate each k-point with 5 more intermediary points. 300 400 500 600 700 800 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 SL p-type SL n-type InSe p-type InSe n-type zT T (K) bulk InSe and 1 TL GaSe/ 3 TL InSe SL between 300 K and 800 K. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The computations were performed on the Tirant III cluster of the Servei d’Informàtica of the University of Valencia (project vlc82) thanks to Alejandro Molina-Sánchez and the Darwin cluster of INL-International Iberian Nanotechnology Labora- tory thanks to Joaquín F. Rossier.