arXiv:2209.14506v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Sep 2022 Magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and hardness of high-entropy alloys FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt Jiro Kitagawa1 1 Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Fukuoka Institute of Technology,3-30-1 Wajiro-higashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 811-0295, Japan Abstract We report the magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and Vickers microhardness of as-cast and annealed high-entropy alloys (HEAs) FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt with the face-centered cubic structure. The heat treatment at 800 ◦C does not largely affect the physical properties in each HEA. The values of the Curie temperature and the saturation moment at 50 K are 955 K and 1.458 μB/f.u. for the annealed FeCoNiPd, and 851 K and 1.456 μB/f.u. for the annealed FeCoNiPt, respectively. Each HEA is a soft ferromagnet and shows metallic resistivity. The electronic structure calculations of both HEAs support the ferromagnetic ground states. The comparisons between experimental and theoretical values are made for the Curie temperature, the saturation moment, and the residual resistivity. The Vickers microhardness of annealed FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt are both 188 HV. The hardness vs. valence electron count (VEC) per atom plot of these HEAs does not largely deviate from an expected universal relation forming a broad peak at VEC∼6.8. This study would give some hints on designing a soft ferromagnetic HEA with high hardness. Keywords: High-entropy alloy, Soft ferromagnetism, Electrical resistivity, Hardness 1. Introduction High-entropy alloys (HEAs) receive much interest due to their rich functionality, such as high strength, corrosion resis- tance, energy storage, radiation protection, superconductivity, soft ferromagnetism, and biocompatibility. The entropy state of an alloy is classified by the configurational entropy ∆S mix = −R �n i=1 cilnci, where n is the number of ele- ments, ci is the atomic fraction, and R is the gas constant. At the initial stage of HEAs research, HEA required ∆S mix larger than 1.62 R, which can be realized by the solid solution of more than five elements. The critical value defining HEA is now 1.0 R. So the equiatomic quaternary alloy investigated in this study can be referred to as HEA. In HEAs, the microstructure often affects the physical properties, and, for example, the control of microstructure towards improved mechanical or magnetic prop- erties is the central topic of HEAs. The other current topic is the materials research on HEAs exhibiting novel phe- nomena by utilizing the large compositional space of HEAs. Magnetic HEAs are attracting much attention because of their good soft ferromagnetism coexisted with high strength and/or high hardness. The magnetic HEAs are a promis- ing alternative to conventional soft magnetic materials with poor strength. Based on a face-centered cubic (fcc) Fe- CoNi with high saturation magnetization and low coercive field Hc, many studies on the effect of adding alloying elements are carried out. For example, AlxCoCrFeNi is well investigated Email address: j-kitagawa@fit.ac.jp (Jiro Kitagawa1) HEA, which shows a structural change from fcc to body- centered cubic (bcc) structure with increasing x. The Curie temperature TC of Al-free CoCrFeNi is 120 K, which can be enhanced above room temperature as x increases. NiFe- CoCrPd and NiFeCoCrMn are famous equiatomic HEAs with TC=440 K and 38 K, respectively. There are a few reports which aim at attaining a higher Hc. FeCoNiAlCuxTix shows a relatively high Hc of 955 Oe after heat treatment. The recent research on magnetic HEAs shows a growing in- terest in controlling magnetic properties through tailoring a microstructure. For example, Fe15Co15Ni20Mn20Cu30 exhibits a spinodal decomposition after a heat treatment, which leads to enhanced TC. We are focusing on HEAs with the combination of 3d mag- netic elements and noble metals (e.g., Rh, Ir, Pd, and Pt) because materials research on such an HEA is unexplored. Re- cently, Fukushima et al. reported the database (TC, spin mo- ment, residual resistivity) of 147630 quaternary HEAs pro- duced by a density functional theory calculation. This database contains fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt, which can be regarded as Pd- or Pt-added FeCoNi alloy, and the magnetic properties of these HEAs are not well investigated. Only the M ̈ossbauer effect of FeCoNiPd is reported, and the funda- mental magnetic properties such as TC and saturation moment Ms are unknown. Therefore, this study’s first purpose is to as- sess the fundamental magnetic properties of fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt and to compare the magnetic properties between these HEAs and FeCoNi. The Vickers microhardness is usually measured to evaluate the hardness of a material. In HEAs, it is reported that the Vick- ers microhardness empirically correlates with the valence elec- Preprint submitted to J. Magn. Magn. Mater. September 30, 2022 resistivity ρres of each sample. sample a (Å) atomic composition TC (K) Ms (μB/f.u.) ρres (μΩcm) FeCoNiPd (as-cast) Fe24.8(8)Co26(1)Ni25.2(5)Pd24(1) 947 9.6 FeCoNiPd (annealed) Fe25.2(9)Co24(1)Ni25.5(5)Pd25.3(4) 955 8.1 FeCoNiPt (as-cast) Fe25.4(6)Co24(1)Ni23.8(6)Pt26.8(9) 848 26.1 FeCoNiPt (annealed) Fe24(1)Co25.0(5)Ni26.0(7)Pt25.0(7) 851 21.2 tron count (VEC) per atom. The hardness vs. VEC plot of HEAs with VEC ranging from 4.1 to 8.8 seems to form a broad peak at VEC∼6.8, as mentioned below. The VEC of FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt is 9.25, and we are interested in the hardness to check the possible universal relationship between the hardness and the VEC. This examination would be useful for designing soft ferromagnetic HEAs with high hardness. The second pur- pose of this study is to investigate the Vickers microhardness of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt. This paper reports the magnetic properties, electrical resis- tivity, and hardness of as-cast and annealed fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt. The electronic structure was calculated to elu- cidate the ferromagnetism in each HEA. We have found that the heat treatment does not significantly influence the physical properties of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt. The soft ferromagnetic behaviors are observed in both HEAs. The comparisons be- tween experimental and theoretical values are made for TC, Ms, and the residual resistivity. The hardness of FeCoNiPd and Fe- CoNiPt do not deviate from the empirical relationship between the hardness and the VEC. 2. Materials and Methods Polycrystalline samples of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt were synthesized by a home-made arc furnace using constituent el- ements Fe (99.9 %), Co (99.9 %), Ni (99.9 %), Pd (99.9 %), and Pt (99.9 %) under Ar atmosphere. The button-shaped sam- ples were remelted several times on a water-cooled Cu hearth and flipped each time to ensure homogeneity. The as-cast sam- ples were annealed in an evacuated quartz tube at 800 ◦C for four days. Room temperature X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of samples were recorded using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD- 7000L, Shimadzu) with Cu-Kα radiation. We used thin slabs cut from the samples due to their high ductility. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were collected using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, JSM-7100F, JEOL). The chemical composition was also evaluated by an en- ergy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometer equipped with the FE-SEM. The temperature dependence of dc magnetization χdc (T) be- tween 50 and 300 K was measured using VersaLab (Quantum Design). The high-temperature χdc (T) from 300 K to 1173 K was measured by a vibrating sample magnetometer (TM- VSM33483-HGC, Tamakawa) to estimate TC. The isothermal magnetization (M) curve at 50 K was taken using the VersaLab. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity ρ (T) be- tween 3 K and 300 K was measured by a conventional dc four- probe method using a home-made sysytem in a GM refrigerator is shifted by a value for clarity. (UW404, Ulvac cryogenics). The Vickers microhardness was measured under the applied load of 0.49, 0.98, 1.96, 2.94, and 4.903 N, respectively, using a Shimadzu HMV-2T microhard- ness tester. The holding time under the diamond indenter is 10 s. We also performed the electronic structure calculation us- ing the coherent potential approximation (CPA) approach be- cause of no report of the density of states (DOS) in the previous study. We employed the Akai-KKR program package, which is based on the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) method with CPA. We used the generalized gradient approximation from Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) and treated the spin- polarization and the spin-orbit interaction. The spin-orbit in- teraction is not included in the previous study. 3. Results and Discussion FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt. All patterns can be indexed by fcc structure with the Miller indices denoted in the figure. The lat- tice parameters a obtained by the least square method are listed in Table 1. SEM images and elemental mappings of all samples are displayed in Fig.2. In each sample, no trace of impurity phase is detected, and the elemental mapping shows a homoge- neous elemental distribution. The chemical compositions eval- uated by EDX measurements are tabulated in Table 1 and agree well with the ideal one with 25 at.% for each element. HEAs of- ten show composition segregation after heat treatment. 2 mappings are also shown. each sample. (b) Temperature dependences of χdc of as-cast and annealed FeCoNiPt. The external field is 100 Oe. The inset is the temperature derivative of χdc for each sample. (c) Isothermal magnetization curves at 50 K of as-cast and annealed FeCoNiPd. The inset is the expanded view. (d) Isothermal magnetization curves at 50 K of as-cast and annealed FeCoNiPt. The inset is the expanded view. 3 However, FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt forms a stable single-phase fcc against the heat treatment at 800 ◦C. H of 100 Oe for FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt, respectively. In each sample, a steep increase of χdc is observed as the tem- perature is lowered, which indicates a ferromagnetic ordering. TC is estimated by the temperature derivative of χdc and de- fined by the minimum point described in the inset of Fig.3(a) or (b). This is one of the effective ways to obtain TC in transi- tion metal-based ferromagnets. Thus obtained TCs are listed in Table 1, and the slight enhancement of TC after the annealing is confirmed in each HEA. Fukushima et al. have provided TC data obtained by the density functional theory cal- culation for 147630 quaternary HEAs and placed the data in a repository. The predicted TCs of fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc Fe- CoNiPt are 1137 and 1085 K, respectively. Although the higher TC of FeCoNiPd compared to FeCoNiPt is consistent with the experimental result, the theoretical value is approximately 200 K higher than the experimental one in each HEA. The mean- field approximation used for calculating TC tends to overesti- mation, which is the reason for the relatively large difference between theoretical and experimental values. The isothermal M-H curves of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt measured at 50 K are exhibited in Figs.3(c) and (d). With the increase of H from 0 Oe in each HEA, M increases steeply and soon saturates, which supports the ferromagnetic ground state. Thermal an- nealing seems not to affect M-H curves. The values of Ms for HEAs investigated are summarized in Table 1 and compared with the theoretical values below. The inset of each figure is the expanded view to show the hysteresis. The very weak hys- teresis indicates the soft ferromagnetism in each HEA. While Hc of FeCoNiPt would be approximately 2 Oe, no hysteresis is observed for FeCoNiPd within the measurement accuracy. Here we compare the magnetic properties of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt with those of fcc FeCoNi. The lattice parameter, TC, and Ms of fcc FeCoNi are reported to be 3.599 Å, 1000 K, and 163 emu/g (=1.687 μB/f.u.), respectively. The atomic radius of Pd(Pt) is 1.3754 Å(1.387 Å), which is larger than those of Fe, Co, and Ni (1.2412, 1.2510, and 1.2459 Å, respectively). Therefore, the lattice parameter of Fe- CoNiPd or FeCoNiPt expands compared to FeCoNi. As dis- cussed later, Pd(Pt) carries the magnetic moment smaller than Fe, Co, and Ni moments, which causes the reduction of Ms in FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt. Going from FeCoNi, FeCoNiPd to FeCoNiPt, the lattice parameter increases, and TC is systemat- ically reduced. The expansion of lattice means the increase of interatomic distance between 3d elements, which would lead to a weakened magnetic exchange interaction. In this case, the systematic reduction of TC with increasing lattice parameter can be anticipated. We note that FeCoNiCr (a=3.580 Å, TC=104 K) and FeCoNiMn (a=3.6029 Å, TC=332 K) sig- nificantly reduce TC, which is independent of the unit-cell vol- ume change compared to FeCoNi. The alloying by antifer- romagnetic elements of Cr or Mn severely decreases the av- eraged magnetic exchange interaction strength. FeCoNi pos- sesses Hc of 1.5 Oe and this value is not largely enhanced in fcc FeCoNiAlx or fcc FeCoNiSix (Hc: 0.5∼6 Oe). The same trend is observed in FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt, and the soft fer- romagnetism of fcc FeCoNi is robust against the addition of alloying elements. Next, Ms and Hc of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt are compared with those of related systems. The values of Ms in the unit of emu/g for FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt after annealing are 116 emu/g and 88 emu/g, respectively. The corresponding val- ues of FeCoNi-related systems are, for exam- ple, 130 emu/g in FeCoNiAlx (x=0.2 and 0.3), 126 emu/g in FeCoNiSi0.25, and 101 emu/g in FeCoNiAl0.25Mn0.25. So, while Ms of FeCoNiPd is slightly reduced compared to FeCoNiAlx and FeCoNiSi0.25, the relatively large reduction of Ms occurs in FeCoNiPt due to the heavy element Pt with a small magnetic moment. This comparison indicates that light elements are fa- vorable for achieving high Ms soft ferromagnet. FeCoNiAlx (x=0.2 and 0.3), FeCoNiSi0.25, and FeCoNiAl0.25Mn0.25 pos- sess Hc ranging from 0.5 to 5 Oe. These val- ues are comparable to Hc (∼2 Oe) of FeCoNiPt. On the other hand, Hc of FeCoNiPd would be smaller compared to the re- lated systems. Hc of HEAs and commercial soft ferromagnets are summarized in the review by Huang et al. According to the review, Hc of FeCoNiPd would locate in the range of com- mercial soft ferromagnets (Ni-Fe alloys with Hc of 0.004 Oe ∼ 0.1 Oe). CoNiPd and FeCoNiPt. For each HEA, ρ of the as-cast sample decreases after the heat treatment, which suggests a relaxation of the lattice distortion. Despite the existence of atomic disor- ders, ρ smoothly decreases with cooling. The measured temper- ature range is well below TC, and relatively large temperature dependences mean the dominance of magnetic contribution to the electrical transport. Such a behavior is often observed in fer- romagnetic metals with atomic disorders. The database by Fukushima et al. also includes the values of residual resis- tivity ρres. According to the database, ρress of fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt are 5.1 and 21.6 μΩcm, respectively, which agree well with the experimental values of annealed HEAs. In the electronic structure calculations of fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt, the lattice parameters obtained for the annealed 4 due to the dominant contribution around the Fermi level. The Fermi energy is set to 0 Ry. moments are 1.402 μB/f.u. and 1.421 μB/f.u. for FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt, respectively. FeCoNiPd FeCoNiPt atom spin moment (μB) orbital moment (μB) atom spin moment (μB) orbital moment (μB) Fe Fe Co Co Ni Ni Pd Pt 5 samples are used, and the perfect solid solution of constituent elements is assumed. Figures 5 (a) and (c) exhibit the total DOSs of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt, respectively. In each case, the difference in total DOS between spin-up and spin-down electrons supports the ferromagnetic ground state. Partial DOSs are displayed in Figs.5 (b) and (d) for FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt, respectively. Only d-electron DOS is drawn for each partial DOS due to the dominant contribution around the Fermi level. Reflecting the isoelectronic HEAs, the structures of partial DOS shown in Figs.5 (b) and (d) for each element are similar to each other. The partial DOSs indicate the presence of magnetic mo- ment for all elements. The spin and orbital moment values cal- culated for all elements are summarized in Table 2. In each HEA, all moments align parallel, and Fe and Co spin moments are dominant. The spin moment values of Fe, Co, and Ni are slightly larger than those obtained by Fukushima et al. Ac- cordingly, the total moments of 1.402 μB/f.u. for FeCoNiPd and 1.421 μB/f.u. for FeCoNiPt are also respectively larger than 1.383 and 1.395 μB/f.u. in the database. The spin-orbit interac- tion considered in this study would be responsible for the slight increase of moment. The calculated total moments in this study or the database well explain the experimental Mss (see also Ta- ble 1), which means that the magnetic structure of FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt would be a simple one with all spins aligning par- allel. load profiles for all samples. The hardness in each sample grad- ually decreases as the load is increased, which is also reported in many HEAs and intermetallic compounds. It is well known that the elastic recovery effect is responsible for the in- crease of Vickers microhardness with decreasing load. In FeCoNiPd, the annealed sample displays lower hardness than the as-cast sample. The annealing would cause the release of lattice distortion introduced in the rapid solidification process of arc melting, which leads to lower hardness. FeCoNiPt also shows similar behavior. It is proposed that the Vickers micro- hardness depends on the VEC. Figure 6(b) presents the VEC dependence of hardness. The solid curve is a guideline ob- tained for HEAs with the bcc structures (VEC: 6.0∼7.55) and fcc structures (VEC: 7.8∼8.8). The result of refractory bcc HEAs with VEC:4.14∼5.65 is also shown and seems to be connected to the guideline. In addition, a deep learning study of the hardness of refractory HEAs with the VEC: 4∼6 also supports the positive correlation between the hardness and VEC in that VEC range. The VEC of FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt is 9.25, and the hardness of 188 HV obtained at 4.9030 N load is employed because the hardness at a higher load is usually employed. In addition we cannot obtain the hardness under a load higher than 4.9030 N due to the limitation of the microhardness tester used. Thus plotted data points in Figure 6(b) do not essentially deviate from the expected universal relation between the VEC and the hardness. We note that there are not enough data points from other HEAs at VEC larger than 9. Therefore, further study is required to prove the universal relation. This study implies a vital role of VEC in designing the hardness of magnetic HEAs. The VEC is also related to the phase stability of fcc and bcc HEAs: FeCoNiPt. The solid curves are guides for the eyes. (b) VEC dependence of Vickers microhardness of FeCoNiPd and FeCoNiPt with VEC=9.25. The re- fractory bcc HEAs reported in the literatures are also plotted (VEC:4.14∼5.65). The solid curve represents the guideline obtained for HEAs with bcc structures (VEC: 6.0∼7.55) and fcc structures (VEC: 7.8∼8.8) taken from the literature. a single bcc phase for VEC between 5.0 and 6.87 and a single fcc phase for VEC larger than 8.0. Therefore, if we need a soft ferromagnetic HEA with high hardness within the limitation of a single fcc phase, a magnetic HEA based on FeCoNi with an alloying for tuning VEC=8 is desirable. 4. Summary We have investigated the fundamental magnetic properties, electrical resistivity, and Vickers microhardness of as-cast and annealed fcc FeCoNiPd and fcc FeCoNiPt. After the heat treat- ment at 800 ◦C, both HEAs keep the single-phase fcc, and the annealing does not largely alter the physical properties. The values of TC and Ms at 50 K are 955 K and 1.458 μB/f.u. for an- nealed FeCoNiPd, and 851 K and 1.456 μB/f.u. for annealed Fe- CoNiPt, respectively. The coercive fields of both HEAs are very small, and they are soft ferromagnets. In each HEA, the electri- cal resistivity shows the metallic temperature dependence. The 6 electronic structure calculations of both HEAs were performed, and the ferromagnetic ground states were obtained. The total moments are close to those reported in the database made by the density functional theory calculation and agree with the ex- perimental Mss. The theoretical values of TC and ρres are also reported in the database. While the theoretical TC values are rel- atively higher than the experimental ones in both HEAs, good agreement is confirmed between the theoretical and experimen- tal ρres values. The database would be beneficial for the mate- rials research on magnetic quarternary HEAs. In addition, the comparisons of magnetic properties of HEAs investigated and FeCoNi are made. The Vickers microhardness of FeCoNiPd or FeCoNiPt slightly decreases after the annealing. The hard- ness vs. VEC plot of these HEAs does not essentially deviate from the expected universal relation forming a broad peak at VEC∼6.8. This study provides a possible material design of soft ferromagnetic HEA with high hardness; a magnetic HEA based on FeCoNi with an alloying for tuning VEC=8 is promis- ing. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS J.K. is grateful for the support provided by the Comprehen- sive Research Organization of Fukuoka Institute of Technology. REFERENCES