Observation of robust zero-energy state and enhanced superconducting gap in a tri-layer heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) Shuyue Ding1†, Chen Chen1†, Zhipeng Cao2†, Di Wang2†, Yongqiang Pan3, Ran Tao1, Dongming Zhao1, Yining Hu1, Tianxing Jiang1, Yajun Yan4, Zhixiang Shi3, Xiangang Wan2,5, Donglai Feng4,5,6,7, Tong Zhang1,5,6* 1) Department of Physics, State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Advanced Material Laboratory, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. 2) National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures and School of Physics, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China. 3) School of Physics and Key Laboratory of MEMS of the Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China. 4) Department of Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. 5) Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing 210093, China. 6) Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China. 7) National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. † These authors contributed equally to this work * Email: tzhang18@fudan.edu.cn The interface between magnetic material and superconductors has long been predicted to host unconventional superconductivity, such as spin-triplet pairing and topological nontrivial pairing state, particularly when spin-orbital coupling (SOC) is incorporated. To identify these novel pairing states, fabricating homogenous heterostructures which contain such various properties are preferred, but often challenging. Here we synthesized a tri-layer type van-der Waals heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se), which combined s-wave superconductivity, thickness dependent magnetism and strong SOC. Via low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), we observed robust zero-energy states with notably nontrivial properties and an enhanced superconducting gap size on single unit-cell (UC) MnTe surface. In contrast, no zero- energy state was observed on 2UC MnTe. First-principle calculations further suggest the 1UC MnTe has large interfacial Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya interaction (DMI) and a frustrated AFM state, which could promote non-collinear spin textures. It thus provides a promising platform for exploring topological nontrivial superconductivity. Introduction: When materials with different quantum orders meet at the interface, new physical phenomena may emerge and bring potential applications. A well-known example is the ferromagnet - (s-wave) superconductor interface. Intensive studies have shown that while the spin-singlet pairing potential decays fast in ferromagnet, an odd-frequency spin-triplet pairing state can be induced (1-2). A spin rotation layer or spin orbital coupling (SOC) can further stabilize triplet Cooper pair and generate spin-polarized supercurrent (3-6), which is of particular interest in spintronic applications. Recently, there are increased research on magnet- superconductor interface with strong SOC or non-collinear spin textures, as these systems may give rise to topological superconductivity (TSC) (7-19). The chiral magnetic atom chain grown on strong SOC superconductors was considered as its 1D case (7,8), which is in analogy to the semiconductor nanowire-superconductor hybrids under Zeeman field (20,21). In the 2D case, magnetic moments arranged on superconductor can form Shiba lattice (9,10). Various types of chiral spin textures are predicted to induce effective p-wave pairing, and Majorana boundary mode will emerge when the system enters topological phase. The merits of these potential TSC platforms are that they don’t require external field and the spin textures could be controlled electronically (22,23). Besides, theoretical works also predicted that if a 3D topological insulator (TI) layer is inserted in between ferromagnet and superconductor layers, 2D TSC/chiral Majorana edge mode can be induced due to different gap opening in the top/bottom surface states (24,25). To experimentally identify these unconventional pairing states, fabrication of high quality magnet-superconductor heterostructures with proper interface is highly desired, since unconventional pairing is often sensitive to disorder or inhomogeneity, and local probe study such as STM favors atomically flat surface/interface. Several recent STM studies (26-29) have demonstrated the advantage of using layered magnetic material (like transition metal chalcogenides) to make such heterostructures, as they can be grown epitaxially and persist magnetism down to single-layer limit. Moreover, it is also preferred to introduce strong SOC material or topological band structure (such as a TI) into the heterostructure, as they can further promote the TSC phase. Particularly, it was shown that if combining strong SOC and inversion asymmetry (which always happens at interface) in a magnetic system, large Dzyaloshinskii- Moriya interactions (DMI) can be induced and give rise to non-collinear spin textures (30-32). Transport studies on ferromagnet-TI interfaces have indeed observed signatures of skyrmion- like spin structure (33-35). Therefore, it would be very promising to fabricate a magnet- superconductor heterostructure incorporated with strong SOC materials for exploring potential unconventional superconductivity. However so far such kind of heterostructure is rarely reported. In this work, we successfully synthesized a tri-layer type heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) which possesses atomically sharp interface. It combines the magnetism of MnTe, strong SOC from Bi2Te3 and superconductivity from Fe(Te, Se). Via low- temperature STM, we observed zero-energy conductance peaks (ZECP) on many regions of one unit cell (UC) thick MnTe surface, and an enlarged superconducting gap with comparing to that of Fe(Te, Se). The ZECPs show several distinguished properties: they are not correlated to the observed surface defects, robust under out-of-plane field and display saturated conductance at low tunneling barriers. Meanwhile, no in-gap state was observed on 2 UC MnTe surface. Our first-principle calculations suggest that 1UC MnTe with the Bi2Te3 host large interfacial DMI and a frustrated AFM state, which can promote non-collinear spin textures. Thus the emergence of ZECPs and their nontrivial features may originate from topological pairing state. Results: Growth and STM characterization of the heterostructure MnTe is a layered antiferromagnetic (AFM) insulator with a NiAs-type hexagonal structure (36,37) (which has an in-plane ferromagnetic order and AFM coupling between each plane); while bulk Bi2Te3 is a 3D TI whose unit-cell has a “quintuple layer” structure along c- axis (38). We fabricated the MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) heterostructure via ultrahigh vacuum molecular beam epitaxy (UHV-MBE). 1 UC Bi2Te3 was firstly grown on as-cleaved Fe(Te, Se) surface, followed by the growth of 1~2 UC MnTe film and post annealing. The sample was then transferred to a low-temperature STM with calibrated resolution (Fig. S1). Detailed experimental procedures are described in “Materials and Methods” section. The 1UC Bi2Te3 here not only provides strong SOC to the interface, but also acts as a necessary buffer layer for MnTe growth, as its in-plane lattice constant (0.437 nm) is close to MnTe (0.419 nm) and has a Te-terminated surface. Moreover, previous studies have shown that Bi2Te3 has good superconducting proximity effect when grown on Fe(Te, Se) (39,40). Fig. 1A shows a large-scale STM image of as-grown MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) heterostructure. The surface contains various types of atomically flat terraces, including 1UC Bi2Te3, 1UC / 2UC MnTe on 1UC Bi2Te3, and bare Fe(Te, Se) substrate. They can be identified through the step height (reflected by different colors in Fig. 1A) and the in-plane lattice structure. Fig. 1B shows a line profile taken across several terraces in Fig. 1A. The 1UC Bi2Te3 has its characteristic height of ~1.0 nm and 1UC MnTe has a height of 0.32 nm, which corresponds to the single UC thickness in their bulk form (37,38). Figs. 1C, 1D are zoomed-in images of 1UC Bi2Te3 and 1UC MnTe surfaces while Figs. 1E, 1F show their atomic lattice, respectively. Both of the two surfaces have a hexagonal lattice with a constant of 0.43 nm and are oriented in the same direction, which indicates MnTe is epitaxially grown on Bi2Te3 (sketched in Fig. 1B). Meanwhile, the exposed Fe(Te, Se) remains intact with a square lattice (Fig. 1G), indicative of a sharp interface. We note this MnTe/Bi2Te3 epitaxial structure is different from the MnBi2Te4 film reported by ref. 41, which is also grown by MBE but with different growth/annealing conditions. Actually a similar epitaxial structure was reported in the growth of MnSe on Bi2Se3 surface (42). As seen in Figs. 1C, 1D, there are certain amount of point defects on both Bi2Te3 and MnTe surfaces, which locate at the hollow site of Te lattice, as indicated in Figs. 1E, 1F. They are thus likely the substitutional defects of Bi or Mn (43). Nonetheless, these defects do not affect the superconductivity in either MnTe or Bi2Te3 surface noticeably, as shown in Fig. S2 and further discussion below. Having identified the interface structure, the electronic states are studied by tunneling spectroscopy. Fig. 1H shows large energy scale (±1 eV) dI/dV spectra taken on different surfaces. On Fe(Te, Se) substrate and 1 UC Bi2Te3, the line shapes of the spectra are similar to previous studies (39,40). For 1 UC MnTe on Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se), the dI/dV displays a large band gap about 500 meV wide, which is consistent with that bulk MnTe is an insulator. However, the EF of 1 UC MnTe locates close to upper edge of the gap. This is likely due to electron doping effect induced by interfacial charge transfer. Figs. 2A,2B show the quasiparticle interference (QPI) measurement on 1UC MnTe which further revealed a shallow electron pocket crossed EF, with a band bottom at -60(±10) meV (see Fig. S3 for additional QPI data). This indicates the electrons in 1UC MnTe will participate in superconductivity (QPI patterns are also observed on 1UC Bi2Te3, but displays a different dispersion, see Fig. S4). As for the 2 UC MnTe, there is still a flat insulating gap but the EF is at the gap center, indicating a weakened doping effect. Fig. 1. The surface of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) heterostructure. (A) Typical topographic image of the heterostructure (160×160 nm2, Vb = 1V, I = 20pA). Different surface termination layers can be identified by different false colors. (B) A line profile taken along the dashed line in panel (A). The lattice structure of MnTe, Bi2Te3 layers and Fe(Te, Se) substrate are illustrated. (C, D) Topographic image of (E, F, G) Atomically resolved images of MnTe, Bi2Te3 and exposed Fe(Te, Se) surface, respectively. The surface Te lattice is indicated on E and F. (H) Typical large scale dI/dV spectra taken on different surface terraces (setpoint: Vb = 1V, I = 100pA). The low energy dI/dV spectra which reflect superconducting state are then measured at T = 0.4K on different surfaces, as summarized in Fig. 2C. The superconducting spectrum of Fe(Te, Se) substrate is fully gapped with multiple pairs of coherence peaks at ±1.5 meV, ±1.9 meV and ±2.5 meV, respectively. We note similar gaps were also reported in previous STM study and were assigned to different bands of Fe(Te, Se) (44). The gap spectrum of 1UC Bi2Te3 share similarities with Fe(Te, Se): its major coherence peaks are at ±1.9 meV while kink features at ±1.5 meV and ±2.5 meV can also be observed. This indicates a good superconducting proximity effect in Bi2Te3. However for 1UC MnTe, the spectrum displays rather unconventional behavior. Firstly, in about 50% regions a large “U” shaped gap with a size of 2.9 meV (defined by the lowest kink feature at gap edge) is observed, as the one shown in Fig. 2C (red curve). Fig. 2D displays how the gap evolves at a boundary between 1UC Bi2Te3 and 1UC MnTe, in which one can clearly see the gap enhancement in 1UC MnTe region. Fig. 2E shows the temperature dependence of the 1UC MnTe gap. It almost disappeared above 13.6K which cannot be ascribed to the thermo broadening only (by comparing with numerically broadened spectra in Fig. 2E). This indicates the gap of MnTe is still a proximity gap induced by Fe(Te, Se) (similar temperature dependence was also observed for the gap of 1UC Bi2Te3, see Fig. S5). Moreover, we have also observed vortex state in the gapped region of 1UC MnTe (Fig. S6), which further confirms its superconducting nature. The enlarged gap size in 1UC MnTe is quite unexpected as one usually observes reduced gap in magnet/superconductor interfaces. Besides the enhanced gap, in other regions of 1UC MnTe we observed multiple in-gap states and zero- energy modes, which will be discussed in detail below. As for the 2UC MnTe (green curve in Fig. 2C), in contrast to 1UC MnTe it shows a uniform gap similar to Bi2Te3, with pronounced coherence peaks locate at ±1.9 meV. Fig. 2. The tunneling spectra and QPI of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) heterostructure. (A) dI/dV map and its FFT image taken on 1UC MnTe surface (Vb = 0.4 V, I = 100pA). (B) Summary of the FFT line profiles taken at various energies, which shows an electron-like dispersion with a band bottom at Eb ≈ - 60 meV. (C) Typical superconducting gap spectra taken on different surface layers. The positions of the multiple coherence peaks are marked by arrows and tracked by dashed lines. (D) A series of spectra taken across a boundary between 1UC MnTe and 1UC Bi2Te3 (Inset: topographic image of the boundary, the positions where the spectra were taken are marked) (E) Temperature dependence of the proximity superconducting gap on 1UC MnTe. The dashed curves are convolutions of the spectrum taken at T=0.4K with Fermi-Dirac distribution function at corresponding temperatures. In-gap states and zero-energy modes in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) To further investigate the spatial distributions of superconducting states, Figs. 3A, 3B show a surface topography and its zero-bias dI/dV map (taken at B= 0T), respectively. This area contains different terraces including 1UC MnTe, 1UC Bi2Te3 and Fe(Te, Se) substrate. The zero-bias conductance (ZBC) in the 1UC Bi2Te3 and Fe(Te, Se) regions are all near zero, indicating a spatially uniform superconducting gap. However, on the 1UC MnTe surfaces, there are many separated bright regions with finite ZBC. These small regions have a typical scale of 4 to 10 nm and we refer them as quasiparticle “puddles” below. Figs. 3C, 3D show two series of dI/dV spectra taken across two puddles indicated in Fig. 3B. A clear ZECP together with multiple discrete low-energy states are seen. Their intensities decay as leaving the puddle but the energies do not change obviously. Figs. 3E-3N show the typical spectra taken in other 10 different puddles (spots 1-10 in Fig. 3B). In-gap bound states and ZECPs are commonly observed. Meanwhile, the spectra taken outside of puddles show clean “U” shaped gap with a size of ≈2.9 meV (spots 11-13, Fig. 3O). We have repeatedly observed the quasi-particle puddles with a ZECP in different 1UC MnTe terraces (an additional data set is shown in Fig. S7). By fitting the dI/dV spectra with Gaussian peaks, we summarized the appearance probability of the in-gap states at different energies in Fig. 3P, the ZECP has a probability over 80%. The peak width (FWHM) of the ZECP is in the range of 0.35-0.55 meV, which is close to the energy resolution of our system. Fig. 3. ZECP and in-gap states in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se). (A) STM image of the =10 mV, I =100 pA). The boundary of 1UC MnTe terrace is tracked by white curve. (C, D) dI/dV spectra taken along the red arrows A and B in panel (B), respectively (setpoint: Vb = 3 mV, I =200 pA). (E-O) dI/dV spectra measured on numbered spots in panel (B). The red solid curves in each panel are Gaussian peak fitting (dashed lines are individual peaks). (P) Statistics of the appearance probability of the in-gap states at different energies. The quasiparticle puddles appear to distribute randomly. We have checked that the ZECP/in-gap state are not directly induced by observed defects in 1UC MnTe (see Figs. S2), and the distribution of quasiparticle puddles are also not correlated to surface defects or unevenness (see section S7 and Fig. S8). This indicates these in-gap states are unlikely the Yu- Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) state induced by impurities in MnTe. We also checked that the defects in exposed 1UC Bi2Te3 do not induce YSR state either (Fig. S2), which excludes the in-gap states in 1UC MnTe are induced by the defects of underlying Bi2Te3 layer. To explore the origin of ZECP and the in-gap states, we further measured their response to external magnetic field, elevated temperature and lowered tunneling barrier. Fig. 4A shows the typical spectra measured under out-of-plane field. The ZECP persists and does not show splitting behavior up to B=10T (detailed analysis show that the ZECP is only slightly broadened by ~0.14 meV at B=10T, but significant shift or broadening is observed for the non-zero energy state, see Section S8 and Fig. S9). Meanwhile, the shape and spatial distribution of the quasiparticle puddles do not show obvious change either (Fig. S10). Such robustness against out-of-plane B field for ZECP also disfavors YSR-like states, which should split with a Zeeman energy (~1.1meV for B=10T). Fig. 4B shows a temperature dependence of the in-gap states spectra. All the in-gap states are broadened quickly at elevated temperatures and disappear near the TC of Fe(Te, Se), which indicates they are still quasiparticle states related to superconductivity. Fig. 4. Magnetic field, temperature and tunneling transmission dependence of the in-gap states and ZECP. (A) dI/dV spectra taken at the same quasiparticle puddle in 1UC MnTe under different magnetic field (Vb =10 mV, I =200 pA). (B) Temperature dependence of the dI/dV spectra with in-gap states. (Dashed curves are convolutions of the T=0.4K spectrum with the Fermi-Dirac distribution at elevated temperatures) (C) Evolution of dI/dV spectra with increasing tunneling transmission GN (GN = Iset/Vb, Vb = 2 mV). (D-F) Representative dI/dV spectra taken at different GN, and the Gaussian fit to the three low-energy peaks (referred by E±1, E0). (G) The tunneling conductance at 0 mV and -1.9 mV as a function of GN. The absolute conductance value is calibrated by numerical differential of the I/V curve. (H, I) Energy positions and peak width (FWHM) of three fitted peaks (E0, E±1) as a function of GN, respectively. It was shown that the tunnelling spectra at low barrier can help to clarify the nature of bound states in superconductors. E.g., a Majorana mode should have quantized conductance of 2e2/h at strong coupling region and sufficiently low temperature (45-47). We measured the dI/dV spectra at reduced tip-sample distance via gradually increasing Iset at fixed Vb of 2 meV (GN =Iset/Vb describes the tunneling transmission). The results are summarized in Fig. 4C. As GN increases, the ZECP maintains its position, while the side peaks gradually move to higher energy (tracked by dashed lines). The three representative spectra shown in Figs. 4D-4F that taken at different GN clearly display such behavior. Furthermore, when the conductance of ZECP reached about 0.22 (2e2/h), it starts to saturate but the side peaks keep increasing and exceed the ZECP. In Fig. 4G we plot the ZBC as a function of GN and the saturation is directly evidenced. Similar behavior is also observed for other ZECPs (see Fig. S11 for another data set). We note such behavior resembles the vortex zero-modes reported in Fe(Te, Se), whose conductance are also saturated below 2e2/h (48). It could be due to temperature broadening on a quantized peak, as the temperature here (T = 0.4K) is similar to the case in ref. 48. To see detailed evolution of the in-gap states with increasing GN, we performed Gaussian fit to the ZECP (E0) and the two lowest side peaks (refer as E±1). The fitted peak positions and peak width (FWHM) as a function of GN are summarized in Figs. 4H and 4I, respectively. The FWHM of E0 and E±1 states all increase with GN and they nearly have similar values, which indicates all these states have similar tunneling broadening at high GN (46). Thus the ZECP is distinguished from the E±1 peaks for its non-shifting behavior. We notice that topologically trivial YSR states were reported to have energy shift when the tip-sample distance changes (49), which was attributed to tip induced gating effect. In our heterostructure we also occasionally observed such YSR-like shifting peaks (shown in Fig. S12). Since the tunneling spectroscopy of 1UC MnTe (Figs. 1H and 2A,2B) evidenced a band gap and a shallow electron pocket with kF ≈ 0.08 (1/Å), which corresponds to a low carrier density, the tip gating could also be the cause of the shifting peaks like E±1. Therefore the non-shifting ZECP and its saturated conductance would suggest its nontrivial origin. Absence of in-gap states and gap enhancement in 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) We also measured the superconducting state in 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3. Fig. 5A shows a topographic image which contains both 1UC and 2UC MnTe terraces. The height of second MnTe layer is similar to 1UC MnTe (Fig. 5C). Fig. 5B is the zero-bias dI/dV map taken on the surface of Fig. 5A. On the 1UC MnTe region, there are similar quasiparticle puddles in which ZECPs are found (Fig. 5D, points 2~4). However, for the 2UC MnTe region, no such in-gap states were observed. Its dI/dV spectra (Fig. 5E) display a uniform full superconducting gap with similar shape to that of 1UC Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se), which is also different from the enhanced gap observed in 1UC MnTe nearby (red curve in Fig. 5E, taken on point 1 in Fig. 5B). As the large scale spectrum of 2UC MnTe has a wide insulating gap with EF in the middle (Fig. 1H), the low-energy superconducting gap observed in 2UC MnTe is likely from direct tunneling into the underneath Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se). Thus these findings indicate that 2UC MnTe layer does not affect superconductivity of the system at all. Fig. 5. STM characterization of 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se). (A) Topological image including an 2UC MnTe terrace (53×70 nm2, Vb =1 V, I =20 pA). The white dashed curve indicates the edge of 2UC (C) The height profile along the red dashed line in panel (A). (D) dI/dV spectra measured at the 1UC MnTe regions which show a ZECP (on the spots 2-4 in panel B). (E) A series of dI/dV taken along the green arrow in panel B (on 2UC MnTe), and the spectrum taken on spot 1 in panel B (on 1UC MnTe). (setpiont: Vb =10 mV, I =150 pA) Calculations on the magnetism of 1UC and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 The quite different superconducting states in 1UC and 2UC MnTe imply that magnetism may play an important role. Since the bulk MnTe displays inter-layer AFM and intra-layer FM state (36,37), one may expect the magnetism in 1UC and 2UC MnTe is intrinsically different. However, it is also known that magnetism could change significantly in thin film or at interface. Therefore, we performed first-principle calculations on the magnetism of 1UC and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 heterostructures (details are shown in Section S11). Firstly, sufficient structure optimization of 1UC and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 were performed, and the results are shown in Figs. 6A-6C. They display similar in-plane lattice constant and inter-layer height as that measured by STM. Then we explore their most stable magnetic structures and evaluate the Heisenberg exchange coupling (J) in the LSDA+U framework. We find that 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 favors nearest-neighbor AFM coupling (AFM1 structure) and the magnetic moment of Mn lies in- plane; while the 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 favors an inter-plane AFM (AFM2) with out-of-plane orientated moments, as sketched in Figs. 6D-6E. The magnetic anisotropy energy of both the AFM1 and AFM2 states are larger than 5meV. Since MnTe has a triangular lattice, the nearest- neighbor AFM1 state will have intrinsic frustration. The calculated AFM1 state in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 is different from single UC MnTe in the bulk form. This is checked to be due to interfacial effect (e.g. lattice strain), as our calculation can correctly predict the in-plane AFM state of bulk MnTe (see SM). However, the above LSDA+U calculations only involve Heisenberg interactions, while for magnetic systems without inversion symmetry (such as heterostructures), SOC should give rise to DM interactions which favor twisted spin configuration. Based on a first-principles linear-response (FPLR) approach, we further calculated the DM interaction together with Heisenberg parameters of 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 (Section S11). The Heisenberg coupling (J) estimated by FPLR well agrees with that calculated by LSDA+U (≈ 20.0 meV). Meanwhile, the strength of nearest-neighbor DM interaction |DD| is estimated to be 4.2 meV (specific values of the D vector are shown in Table S6). Such a large DMI is originated from the large SOC of Bi2Te3 and the inversion asymmetric interface. We notice that several recent theoretical works on the structural asymmetric Mn dichalcogenide also give very large DMI (31,32). Fig. 6. Calculated magnetic structure of 1UC and 2UC MnTe on Bi2Te3 (A, B) Side views of optimized structure of 1UC and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 interface, respectively. The blue, purple and yellow balls represent Mn, Bi and Te atoms, respectively. (C) Top view of the interface. (D, E) Local magnetic structure of 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 and 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3, respectively. Discussion The robust ZECPs with non-trivial properties and enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) are rather unconventional phenomena. Below we will discuss their origin. Firstly, the observed ZECPs are located inside of the MnTe terrace, not at the edge. This excludes their origin of chiral edge mode which was predicted for FM/TI/SC heterostructures (24,25). A natural explanation is that the 1UC MnTe here is not ferromagnetic as shown by above calculations. Secondly, such randomly distributed ZECPs seem to resemble the tunneling spectra of previously reported ferromagnet/superconductor heterostructures (5,6), in which ZECPs were also observed and were attributed to spin-triplet pairing state (1,2). However, we notice that such spin-triplet state would require a spin rotation at the interface (i.e., misalignment between the interfacial spin and bulk magnetization of FM layer), and therefore is usually sensitive to external magnetic field (5,6). In our measurement, the ZECP is robust against magnetic field (at least for out-of-plane field), and the MnTe layer is only 1UC thick, which is unlikely to give interfacial spin misalignment. Thus the spin-triplet pairing scenario is also not favored here. Then the above calculations of magnetism can provide an alternative explanation. It was shown that DM interaction and frustrated AFM state can both promote (in-plane) non-collinear spin texture such as skyrmions (50-52). Here the calculated DMI strength in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 is even larger than that of the Co/Pt (≈ 3.0 meV) and Fe/Ir (≈ 1.7 meV) thin films (53,54), in which skyrmions were observed with a typical size down to few nm. Recently, a number of theoretical works have shown that various types of non-collinear spin texture can induce unconventional pairings in magnet/superconducting interface, which often manifest themselves as in-gap states (10-19). Particularly, zero-energy modes can be induced inside of FM skyrmions (11,12,14) or at the end of AFM skyrmion chains under certain conditions (17). Here the ZECPs/in-gap states in 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) are distributed in separated regions with a typical size of 4~10 nm (Fig. 3 and Fig. S7). As defect induced YSR states are not the origin, they are likely induced by certain non-collinear spin textures residing in such length scale. Moreover, the in-plane orientated magnetic moments in AFM1 state with strong anisotropy energy (> 5 meV) suggest they should be robust against out-of-plane field, which is consistent with our measurement in Fig. 4A. For 2UC MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se), the inter-plane AFM2 state with out-of-plane orientated moments is not frustrated and its interfacial DMI will also be weaker. Therefore, one expects to see less affected superconductivity in 2UC MnTe. Besides, the enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe is another remarkable founding. To our knowledge, this is a very rare case that a proximity induced gap in magnetic material can be notably larger than the host superconductor. Most tunneling measurements on magnet/superconductor heterostructures have reported a reduced gap (5, 26-28). Here since a shallow electron pocket crossed EF in 1UC MnTe (Fig. 2B), which indicates the conducting electrons in 1UC MnTe participated in superconductivity. Thus our results indicate such interfacial 1UC MnTe layer is a “doped AFM insulator”. We notice that the electron correlation in MnTe (in which the Mn atoms have 3d5 configuration) was reported to be strong (55). The gap enhancement mechanism could be related to the frustrated magnetism and electron correlations in 1UC MnTe, which is quite interesting and worthy of further investigation. As for the 2UC MnTe, since its EF is well inside of the insulating gap and the magnetism is also different, the gap enhancement is absent. At last, we shall point out another possibility for observing in-gap states at B= 0T: the “spontaneous” vortex state which was suggested for certain ferromagnet/superconductor interface (56) or superconductors with magnetic impurities (44,57,58). If assuming 1UC MnTe only provides an effective magnetic field to the underneath Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) and generated the in-gap state/ZECP, one would expect to see similar ZECP in vortex of 1UC Bi2Te3 by applying an external field. We have checked the vortex states of 1UC Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) (Fig. S6) which show that there is a broad peak near zero-bias at vortex center, and it gradually splits as leaving the vortex. This behavior is similar to that previously observed in Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) (39,40) and Bi2Te3/NbSe2 systems (59), but very different from the multiple in-gap states and non-splitting ZECP in 1UC MnTe here. Therefore the spontaneous vortex state scenario is also not favored. In summary, we have successfully fabricated a tri-layer type magnet-superconductor heterostructure of MnTe/Bi2Te3/Fe(Te, Se) which has atomically sharp interface, and in which strong SOC is intentionally introduced. The observation of robust zero-energy modes and enhanced superconducting gap in 1UC MnTe region strongly suggest an unconventional pairing state. Via first-principle calculations, we show that 1UC MnTe/Bi2Te3 has large DMI due to its inversion asymmetric structure and strong SOC, which can generate non-collinear spin textures and give rise to ZECP. The enhanced gap could also be related to the frustrated magnetism and electron correlations in 1UC MnTe. Therefore, this heterostructure provides a promising platform for further exploring unconventional and topological nontrivial superconductivity. Materials and Methods: Growth of the heterostructure: The sample growth was conducted in a low-temperature STM system (UNISOKU 1300) equipped with a MBE chamber. The FeTexSe1-x (x ≈ 0.55) single crystal with TC = 14.5K was cleaved in UHV chamber at 78K. 1 UC Bi2Te3 was firstly grown on cleaved surface by co-depositing Bi (99.997%) and Te (99.999%) with a flux ratio of ≈ 1:10. Then 1~2 UC MnTe was grown by co-depositing Mn (99.95%) and Te (99.999%) with a flux ratio of ≈ 1:10. The substrate was kept at 200°C during the growth and was post-annealed at the same temperature for 10 min to further improve the quality. The sample was transferred in-situ from the MBE chamber to STM chamber after growth. STM measurement: STM experiments were conducted at T= 0.4K or 4.2 K. PrIr tip was used after treatment on Au(111) surface. The dI/dV spectra were collected by a standard lock-in technique with a modulation frequency of 741 Hz and amplitude (ΔV) of 0.5 mV at 4.2 K and 0.1 mV at 0.4 K. The energy resolution and the zero point of sample bias were calibrated before measurement (Fig. S1 of SM).