Investigating the Electronic Structure of Prospective Water-splitting Oxide BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ Before and After Thermal Reduction Subhayan Roychoudhury§, Sarah Shulda¶, Anuj Goyal¶, Robert Bell¶, Sami Sainio‡, Nicholas Strange‡, James Eujin Park#, Eric N. Coker#, Stephan Lany¶, David Ginley¶, and David Prendergast§ § The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720, USA ¶National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA ‡SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025 #Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA Abstract BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ (BCM), a non-stoichiometric oxide closely resembling a perovskite crystal structure, has recently emerged as a prospective contender for application in renewable energy harvesting by solar thermochemical hydrogen generation. Using solar energy, oxygen-vacancies can be created in BCM and the reduced crystal so obtained can, in turn, produce H2 by stripping oxygen from H2O. Therefore, a first step toward understanding the working mechanism and optimizing the performance of BCM, is a thorough and comparative analysis of the electronic structure of the pristine and the reduced material. In this paper, we probe the electronic structure of BCM using the combined effort of first-principles calculations and experimental O K-edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). The computed projected density-of-states (PDOS) and orbital-plots are used to propose a simplified model for orbital-mixing between the oxygen and the ligand atoms. With the help of state-of-the-art simulations, we are able to find the origins of the XAS peaks and to categorize them on the basis of contribution from Ce and Mn. For the reduced crystal, the calculations show that, as a consequence of dielectric screening, the change in electron-density resulting from the reduction is strongly localized around the oxygen vacancy. Our experimental studies reveal a marked lowering of the first O K-edge peak in the reduced crystal which is shown to result from a diminished O-2p contribution to the frontier unoccupied orbitals, in accordance with the tight-binding scheme. Our study paves the way for investigation of the working-mechanism of BCM and for computational and experimental efforts aimed at design and discovery of efficient water-splitting oxides. Introduction: The quest for developing advanced mechanisms capable of harvesting energy in a renewable, sustainable and environment-friendly manner is one of the grand challenges of modern technological research. One such example is the production of solar fuel by splitting H2O or CO2 through a reversible two-step cycle involving reduction and re-oxidation of metal oxides. In particular, in one of its most promising approaches, the process of Solar Thermochemical Hydrogen generation (STCH)1–3 entails, as a first step, the removal of oxygen atoms from a metal oxide at a high temperature generated using solar irradiation under inert atmosphere. This is then followed by a re-oxidation of the oxide by exposing it to H2O, resulting in the production of hydrogen. For efficient water-splitting, the oxide must be structurally stable to withstand a large number of redox cycles. Additionally, it must be reducible at relatively low temperature and undergo re-oxidation in spite of the presence of H2 in the steam feed. The efficacy of an oxide in the STCH operation is governed by its chemical properties, which, in turn are primarily dictated by its electronic structure. Being able to decipher and manipulate the electronic structure of prospective water-splitting oxides with dedicated theoretical and experimental investigation is, therefore, of paramount importance in gaining a deeper understanding of their working-mechanism as well as in the discovery, design and performance-optimization of such materials. Owing to their stability against decomposition and phase-change under the extreme environment of a thermochemical reactor, non-stoichiometric oxides have recently received substantial attention in this regard4. In particular, non- stoichiometric ceria (CeO2) is generally recognized as the frontrunner among the prospective candidates5,6 since, besides possessing other beneficial attributes, it is capable of stripping oxygen from H2O even under an extremely unfavorable H2O:H2 ratio4 . However, contrary to the ease of the re-oxidation step, the reduction step for ceria poses a major disadvantage since it requires a temperature above 1500 ̊C7,8, which necessitates non-standard materials and becomes prohibitively expensive under standard industrial conditions. As a consequence, the last few years have witnessed the search for alternative oxides that can undergo reduction at a lower temperature, with significant attention being devoted toward perovskite-based structures9–15. Recently, the non- stoichiometric perovskite compound BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ (BCM) has been proposed as a contender for the STCH application16. In addition to high chemical stability and tunability of the point-defect thermodynamics, BCM is shown to offer nearly a three-fold improvement over ceria in hydrogen production at a reduction temperature below 1400 ̊C. Additionally, like ceria, BCM is also capable of operating under unfavorable H2O:H2 ratio. Therefore, as a first step toward gaining a detailed understanding of the factors responsible for its performance, a thorough exploration of the electronic structure of BCM is necessary. In particular, it is imperative that such a study addresses the change in the electronic structure induced by the reversible removal of oxygen atom from the compound. On the experimental front, investigation of the electronic structure of materials is performed most commonly using core-level spectroscopy. For example, x-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) produces an element-specific spectrum of the absorption intensity plotted as a function of photon-energy. However, in order to decipher the details of electronic structure from such a plot, the experimental efforts must often be complemented with theoretical studies. The aim of such theoretical calculations is then to be able to gain insight into the origin of the spectral features by assigning electronic processes and orbitals to them. For several decades, ab initio computation of electronic properties has been performed most commonly with the help of density-functional theory (DFT), thanks to its convenient balance between accuracy and expense. However, in addition to such first-principles simulations, simplified quantum-mechanical models can be extremely helpful in elucidating the electronic properties of most materials. With these considerations, in this paper we present a detailed combined theoretical and experimental investigation of the electronic structure of BCM. The information obtained with first-principles DFT calculations are presented mostly in the form of partial density-of-states (PDOS) and real-space representation of single-electron energy eigenstates, referred to as electronic orbitals hereafter. The computational studies are then complemented with crystal-field theory (CFT)- based models of orbital mixing which corroborate the first-principles results qualitatively. Experimental O K-edge XAS is performed to probe the electronic excitations before and after oxygen-removal from the compound. The absorption spectra so obtained are compared with their simulated counterparts obtained using an accurate many-body method. In particular, prominent changes in the experimental spectrum upon oxygen removal are replicated by the computational results which, in turn, are shown to follow from simplified models. Computational Formalism: Experimental and computational details, along with the crystal structure, are included in the Supplementary Materials. However, since a major portion of the paper deals with the analysis of x-ray absorption spectra, in order to facilitate the discussion, here we provide a brief outline of the computational framework employed in the spectroscopic simulations. The O K-edge spectra have been simulated using the Many-Body X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (MBXAS)17,18 formalism which, for an electronic excitation from the initial ground state (GS) |Ψ#$⟩ to some final core-excited state |Ψ&', evaluates the transition amplitude A#$ → & as A#$ → & = ,Ψ&-O/-Ψ#$', where O/ is the many-body transition operator, which, in these calculations, is approximated by the dipole term. |Ψ#$⟩ is approximated by a Slater determinant (SD) composed of the occupied Kohn-Sham (KS) orbitals of the DFT GS. The SD for |Ψ&', on the other hand, is constructed by populating KS orbitals of a different self- consistent field – that of a core-ionized state with an empty core orbital on a specific atom, which we refer to as the full core-hole1 (FCH) KS system. A specific final state, |Ψ&', refers to a SD comprising the valence occupied orbitals of the FCH system together with the specific (previously unoccupied) orbital indexed by f (within the so-called f(1) approximation). 1 Lowest energy state of the system corresponding to core-ionization of the relevant atom. Results and Discussions: (1) Structure and Configuration Fig. 1 The structure of a pristine 12R-BCM crystal. The atoms labeled A, B, C (also C’), D and E are representatives of a MnM, OM, MnS, OS and Ce atom, respectively. Atoms C’, A and C collectively constitute a representative triple of Mn atoms, as mentioned in the text. Each triple of Mn atom contains two MnS atoms of identical magnetic moment (C and C’, for this particular triple) and an MnM atom which has a magnetic moment in the opposite direction (A, for this particular triple). O Ce Ba Mn(↑) Mn(↓) A MnM C , MnS B OM D OS E Ce A B C D E C’ C’ As shown in Fig. 1, 12R-BCM has a rhombohedral crystal structure2 (R-3m, #166), with each of Ba, Mn, and O occupying the two unique Wyckoff sites and Ce a single Wyckoff site. Within the standard perovskite notation (not to be confused with the notation used in Fig. 1), the Ba atoms occupy the ‘A’ sites while Mn and Ce share the ‘B’ sites. Both Mn and Ce atoms exhibit six-fold coordination to neighboring O atoms. O atoms are present in two inequivalent coordinations each with two-fold coordination: OM refers to a ``Middle’’ O atom, which is coordinated by two Mn atoms while OS refers to a ``Side’’ O atom which is coordinated by a single Mn and a single Ce atom. Similarly, the Mn atoms exhibit two inequivalent coordinations in the lattice: those with a Ce atom as a second nearest-neighbor are hereafter labeled MnS, while those with two other Mn atoms as second nearest neighbors are labeled MnM. The Mn-O coordination environment is not perfectly octahedral because of the unequal Mn-O angles and bond lengths: 1.89 Å for MnS-OS and 1.99 Å (1.93 Å) for MnS-OM (MnM-OM). Ce-O bonds are arranged in a perfect octahedral symmetry with a Ce-O bond length (2.23 Å) larger than the Mn-O bond length. Notably, the difference in the Mn-OS and the Ce-OS bond lengths (2.23 Å -1.89 Å , i.e., 0.34 Å) is exactly equal to the difference in the ionic radius of Ce4+ (1.01 Å)3 and Mn4+ (0.67 Å)4. The Mn atoms, which are in the Mn4+ oxidation state, have strong net magnetic moments due to the 3d3 valence occupancy and are arranged in triples (groups of three neighbors). In our DFT calculations, we simulate the lowest energy anti- ferromagnetic spin configuration of Mn atoms in the rhombohedral structure such that, in terms of the magnetic moment, the Mn atoms follow an alternating arrangement. Within every triple of Mn atoms, if the MnM site has a net up (down) magnetic moment, then both of the MnS sites will have the opposite down (up) magnetic moment, resulting, for each triple, in a net magnetic moment with the direction dictated by the 2:1 majority of MnS constituents. In the particular anti- ferromagnetic arrangement in our chosen supercells, all triples within a given layer are spin-polarized along the same direction while triples belonging to neighboring layers have opposite spin-polarizations. The calculated ground-state total energy 2 The crystal structure is provided in the supplementary materials. 3 https://www.webelements.com/cerium/atom_sizes.html 4 https://www.webelements.com/manganese/atom_sizes.html of such a polarization-arrangement is seen to be lower than that of others: e.g., the ferromagnetic arrangement where all Mn atoms are polarized along the same direction or the anti-ferromagnetic one in which neighboring triples differ in their net spin-polarization but within a given triple, all Mn atoms are polarized along the same direction. (2) Electronic structure of the pristine crystal Fig. 2 The total and partial DOS of the pristine BCM crystal. The energy of the VBM is set at zero. Fig. 2 shows the density of states (DOS) of the pristine BCM crystal, along with the projected DOS (PDOS) contributions from the different species. The small contribution of Ce-4f in the occupied PDOS indicates that these orbitals do not partake significantly in mixing with O-2p orbitals. The Ce-4f states are mostly Energy (eV) PDOS Total Ce Ba Mn O unoccupied, with significant peaks appearing above the Fermi level, and highly localized in energy; confined within 1.5 eV on the energy axis with peak value around 0.75 eV above the CBM. In fact, the PDOS at the LUMO energy shows comparable contributions from O-p, Mn-3d and Ce-4f orbitals. The energy of the Ce-4f band is relatively similar across the two spin channels because Ce in the Ce4+ charge state has an empty valence 4f orbital. Fig. 3 PDOS plot of an MnM and an MnS atom belonging to the same triple. In this representative triple, the MnM and MnS atoms have a net up and down spin- polarization, respectively [see, for example, the triple consisting of the atoms C’, A and C in Fig. 1]. On the energy axis, 0 corresponds to the VBM. The magnitude of Lowdin polarization is seen to be lower (±3.13) for MnM than it is for MnS (±3.19), as reported in Tab. 1. This can be associated with the exchange interaction of MnM with electrons from the second nearest-neighbors, both of which are MnS atoms with magnetic moments in the direction opposite to that of the MnM atom. Note from Fig. 3, which shows the 3-d PDOS of a MnM and a MnS atom (which are constituents of the same triple and therefore, are spin-polarized MnM-3d MnS-3d Energy (eV) PDOS Spin Spin along opposite directions) that, in their respective majority spin channels, the CBM in the PDOS of MnM is at a higher energy compared to that of MnS. This trend, however, is reversed for the lowest unoccupied peaks of their respective minority channels. Noting that a larger polarization typically corresponds to a larger exchange-splitting, which, in turn, would result, in accordance with the tight- binding formalism, in a larger energy-difference between the unoccupied levels of the two spin-channels, we can attribute the aforementioned property of the PDOS to the relatively higher (lower) local magnetic moment of MnM (MnS). We can begin to understand the electronic structure by making some initial simplifications. If we assumed a local octahedral coordination, the Mn 3d-orbitals for each spin channel would split into eg and t2g orbitals. The former would occupy a higher energy subspace as a consequence of increased electronic repulsion resulting from the alignment along the octahedral Mn-O bonding-axes, while the latter would be oriented between the bonding-axes and consequently, would have lower energy. (i) In our attempt at deciphering the electronic structure, as a first approximation, we can neglect all orbital-mixing between the Mn and the O atoms. Since the Mn atoms have a 3d3 configuration, under such a hypothetical, fully-ionic Mn4+ scenario, then, in the majority spin channel, we would expect each t2g orbital to be occupied with parallel spins (according to Hund’s rule) with the eg orbitals remaining unoccupied. In the minority spin channel, the Mn 3d orbitals would have higher energy due to exchange splitting and therefore all the minority d-orbitals would be completely empty, giving rise to a net absolute atomic magnetic moment of 3 μ3 for each Mn atom. (ii) Introducing a further layer of complexity, in accordance with the concepts of ligand-field theory within the solid state19, we can take into account the mixing between the Mn-eg and the O-2p orbitals, while retaining the non-bonding nature of the Mn t2g orbitals since the latter are not oriented along the bonding axes. The mixed (Mn-eg + O-2p) orbitals would then split into occupied bonding and unoccupied anti-bonding orbitals. Thus, in the majority spin-channel, the occupied orbitals would exhibit either a bonding (Mn-eg + O-2p) nature or a non-bonding Mn-t2g nature, with the VBM consisting predominantly of the former. The unoccupied orbitals can be expected to show (Mn-eg + O-2p) nature. In the minority spin channel, all occupied orbitals would show exclusively (Mn-eg + O-2p) bonding character while in the unoccupied subspace, there would be anti-bonding (Mn-eg + O-2p) and non-bonding Mn-t2g orbitals. Fig. 4 The PDOS of an MnS and a neighboring OS atom, showing their 3d and 2p contributions, respectively. As in Fig. 3, the MnS atom has a majority of down spin electrons. Certain peaks in the up (U) and down (D) spin channels of the PDOS are labeled for further analysi of the corresponding orbitalss, as shown with isovalue plots in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6. In the labels, the superscript t and e, refers to an orbital showing appreciable mixing of O-2p with Mn- t2g and Mn- eg , respectively, while the superscript p refers to an orbital having predominantly O-2p character. In order to test the validity of two orbital mixing approximation, we analyze the 2p orbital PDOS of an OS atom and the 3d orbital PDOS of the adjacent MnS atom in Energy (eV) Mns-3d Os-2p Spin Spin tD1 tD2 eD3 eD4 tD5 tD7 tD8 eD9 eD10 tU2 eU3 eU4 pU5 pU6 tU7 tU8 eU11 eU9 eU10 eD11 tD6 tU1 PDOS Fig. 4. Note that, in contrast with OM, OS is coordinated with atoms of two separate species: an MnS and a Ce, the latter of which shows much weaker mixing with O p- orbitals in comparison with the Mns (as evident from the low contribution of Ce 4f in the occupied PDOS shown in Fig. 2), making the PDOS analysis of OS-2p comparatively simpler. A low numerical broadening (2.86 meV) has been used to facilitate the assignment of electronic orbitals to the PDOS features in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, present the isovalue plots of the KS orbitals contributing to various salient peaks of the PDOS for the up (U) and the down (D) spin channels, respectively. Notice, for example, that, in contrast with the aforementioned prediction of ligand-field theory, in the majority, i.e., down spin-channel, the PDOS around the VBM is dominated by orbitals exhibiting mixed (MnS-t2g + OS-2p) character [e.g. tD7, tD8] while orbitals at much lower energy (-4 eV) show distinct (MnS -eg + OS-2p) mixing [e.g. eD3, eD4]. Additionally, in the minority, i.e., up spin- channel, the occupied orbitals tU1, tU2 show noticeable (MnS-t2g + OS-2p) character. In order to explain such anomalies, (iii) we propose in Fig. 7, an alternative mixing scheme consistent with the orbital-characteristics observed in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 which accounts for the possibility of mixing between the MnS -t2g and the Os-2p orbitals, which is possible, especially due to the fact that the Mn-O coordination environment is not perfectly octahedral. This additional mixing leads to splitting of the MnS -t2g manifold into: a lower energy band of what would be called non-bonding orbitals under the mixing scheme (ii) outlined above, but which here exhibit some mixing with Os-2p; and a higher energy band, the anti-bonding counterpart, which, depending on the spin channel, may be occupied (down spin, majority) or not (up spin, minority). Fig. 5 also shows significant OS-2p (non-bonding) character near the up-spin VBM [pU5 and pU6]. Additionally, from Fig. 6, we can notice substantial presence of Ce-4f in the KS orbitals eD10 and eD11, which is consistent with the PDOS plot shown in Fig. 2. Overall, the schematic picture in Fig. 7 provides a consistent view of the ultimate electronic structure observed in our simulations. In summary, we have seen that the Ba orbitals have very little presence in the frontier PDOS. The Ce-4f orbitals, which show weak mixing with O-2p, are predominantly localized near the conduction band edge. The Mn-3d orbitals, on the other hand, mix substantially with O-2p, generating bonding and anti- bonding levels across a wide energy range, as shown schematically in Fig. 7. Fig. 5 Isovalue plots of up spin KS orbitals having significant contributions to the peaks labeled in Fig. 4. The relevant OS atom is marked with a “+” symbol. tU2 eU3 eU4 tU7 tU8 eU9 eU10 eU11 pU5 pU6 tU1 Fig. 6 Isovalue plots of down spin KS orbitals having significant contributions to the peaks labeled in Fig. 4. The relevant OS atom is marked with a “+” symbol. tD1 tD2 eD3 eD4 tD5 tD6 tD7 tD8 eD9 eD10 eD11 Fig. 7 PDOS of MnS-3d and OS-2p, along with a schematic detailing the bonding scheme in accordance with the LCAO formalism. Note that the down (up) spin channel corresponds to majority (minority) spins. (3) O K-edge XAS of the Pristine Crystal Spin Spin Spin Spin eg t2g Mns-3d Os-2p eg t2g Os-2p Energy (eV) Fig. 8 Top left panel shows the O K-edge XAS of the pristine BCM crystal. Panel (a) shows the experimental spectrum while the panel (b) shows the resultant simulated spectrum, along with the individual contributions from OS and OM. In order to facilitate comparison, the spectra have been divided into four regions along the energy axis and the salient crests and troughs have been labeled. Panel (c) shows, for both of the oxygen atoms, the contribution of the up and the down spin channels to the net spectrum. The rest of the panels show isovalue plots of orbitals of the promoted electron in the excited-states resulting from core-excitation of an OM a “+” symbol. The XAS peak marked by circle of a given color in panel (c) has Resultant OM OS Spin Spin Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) Experiment A A’ B B F C D I II III IV A A’ E F G C D E G (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) OM+OS OM OS Spin Spin Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) Experiment A A’ B B F C D I II III IV A A’ E F G C D E G (a) (b) (c) substantial contributions from a final (core-excited) state in which the excited electron resides in the orbital labeled by the same color in the isovalue-plots. One of the most efficacious avenues for experimental investigation of electronic structure is the element-specific X-ray spectroscopy. In the following, we present a detailed experimental and theoretical account of the O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) associated with exciting a 1s core electron of an O atom. Since the BCM unit cell contains an equal number of OM and OS atoms, the final spectrum will be the resultant of contributions from both of these atoms. Notably, the final state created by the process of X-ray absorption differs from the GS in that it has a missing 1s electron (a hole) localized on a specific oxygen atom. In addition, the core-hole creation results in a significant modification of electron-density in the vicinity of the excited atom O(x), resulting, in accordance with the tight-binding framework, in an enhanced contribution to the occupied PDOS and a downward shift in the energy of those orbitals, due to strong, attractive Coulomb interactions with the core hole. Concomitantly, the contributions of the excited atom to the unoccupied PDOS, due to orbitals of mixed character with neighboring atomic sites may be reduced. A comparison of the PDOS of individual atoms corresponding to the ground and the FCH state is presented in Fig.S1. The FCH state is defined above and is the foundational self-consistent field from which the core-excited Kohn- Sham orbitals are obtained. The experimental O K-edge spectrum of BCM is presented in Fig. 8(a). As mentioned in the introduction, the goal then, is to extract meaningful electronic-structure information from the spectrum by associating electronic excitations to the salient spectral features. As a first step to this end, in Fig. 8(b) we show the simulated resultant O K-edge spectrum, as well as the individual contributions from OM and OS. As expected, OM, which is coordinated by two Mn atoms with opposite magnetic moments of comparable magnitude, produces relatively symmetric contributions to the absorption spectrum for the two spin channels (Fig. 8(c)). On the other hand, the spectral contributions of OS, which is coordinated by a Mn and a Ce atom having significant and negligible magnetic moments respectively, differ considerably between the spin channels. This asymmetry leads to a lower intensity of the first XAS peak in the resultant spectrum of OS. From Table 2, OS can be seen to have a slightly higher Lowdin magnetic moment, indicating a stronger spin-polarization, than OM. The exchange interaction arising from this higher spin-polarization lowers the conduction orbitals of the majority spin channel associated with OS, as evident from the slightly lower energy of the first XAS peak of OS (compared to OM) in the down spin channel. It is important to note that the appearance of the simulated spectrum is heavily dependent on the broadening used for generating it. A spectral peak which is well-separated in energy from the rest of the features will typically experience a substantial lowering of intensity with increment in broadening. In Fig. 8 (b)-(c), a uniform broadening of 0.2 eV is used, while the spectra simulated with higher broadening energies are shown in Fig. S2 in the Supplementary Materials. In particular, Fig. S2 reveals that the relative intensities of the net simulated spectrum depend on the broadening. For higher broadening values, the relative intensity of the intense peak A diminishes in comparison with the others. Additionally, the features at 528.9 eV and 529.7 eV, which are present between A and B in in the simulated spectrum (black line in Fig. 8(b)), but not visible in the experimental counterpart (Fig. 8(a)), vanish for higher values of broadening. Peak O atom Ligand atom Note A’ OS MnS (OS-2p+MnS-3d) orbital in majority spin-channel A OM Mn (OM-2p+Mn-3d) orbital in majority spin-channel. Both up and down orbitals contribute, since OM has two neighboring Mn atoms with opposite spin-polarization. B O Mn (OS-2p+MnS-3d) orbital in the minority channel. (OM- 2p+Mn-3d) orbital in both spin channels. D OS Ce, Mn OS-2p orbital mixed with Ce-4f and Mn-3d E O Ce Highly delocalized orbital showing mostly (O-2p+Ce-4f) character. the experimental O K-edge spectrum. Mn/O atom without a subscript indicates substantial contribution from both “middle” (M) and “side” (S) atoms. The utility of computation in the analysis of x-ray spectroscopy can be appreciated from Table 1 which maps the low-energy spectral peaks to the orbitals of the excited electron. The peaks in region I of the spectrum (see Fig. 8(a)) arise mostly from mixing of O-2p with Mn-3d orbitals while the contribution of Ce-4f is noticed in region II. A more detailed visual description of the associated orbitals is provided by the relevant isovalue plots of Fig. 8(d)-(m). The orbital plot in panel (d) of Fig. 8 reveals that, in accordance with our theoretical model, the first peak of the OM K-edge (contributing to peak A) in the up spin channel originates from a final state where the excited electron resides in an orbital with substantial contribution from the 3d orbital of MnM, which has a net positive spin-polarization. Panel (e) shows that the down spin counterpart essentially involves the 3d orbital of the neighboring MnS atom, which has a net negative spin-polarization. Similar to the intense first peak, for OM, the feature at ~530.5 eV (contributing to peak B) can be associated with an orbital with mixed O-2p and Mn-3d character (panel (f)) which, for brevity, has been plotted for the up-spin channel only. However, unlike the orbital associated with the first peak (i.e., panel (d)), this orbital corresponds to the minority spin channel of the relevant Mn atom and consequently has a higher energy, more delocalization and lower intensity. Note that, while both panel(d) and (f) correspond to peaks in the up-spin spectrum, the contributing Mn atom for panel (d) is the MnM, which has a positive spin-polarization while that for panel (f) is the MnS, which has a negative spin-polarization. The orbital associated with the higher energy peak at ~532.2 eV (panel (g), peak E), which shows even more delocalization, can be seen to contain appreciable contribution from the Ce-4f orbitals. Similar to the OM spectrum, the first peak of the OS spectrum (contributing to peak A’) in the down spin channel originates from mixing of O-2p with the 3d orbital of the neighboring MnS atom, which has a negative spin-polarization (panel (h) in Fig. 8). By contrast, for the up spin contributions in the OS spectrum, as already shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 7, the lack of exchange interaction pushes the minority (up) spin MnS-3d orbitals to higher energy, and the first OS K-edge peak in this spin-channel (at ~529 eV, between A and B), in fact, arises primarily from an unoccupied orbital with heavy contributions from Ce-4f, as evident from panel (i) in Fig. 8. This explains the relatively higher energy and lower intensity of this peak, in comparison with the down-spin counterpart. The up-spin peak at ~530.4 eV originates from an orbital similar in characteristics to the one responsible for the peak at ~530.5 eV for the OM spectrum, as can be seen by noting the similarity between panels (f) and (j). The higher-energy resultant peak at ~531.8 eV (peak D) contains appreciable contribution from both spin channels of the OS XAS spectrum. The comparability of the energy and the intensity of these two peaks corresponding to different spin channels can be attributed to the fact that they are associated with unoccupied orbitals containing contributions mostly of 4f orbitals of the neighboring Ce atom, which has negligible magnetic moment (panels (k) and (l)). Panels (d), (e) and (h) reveal that all of the intense low-energy XAS peaks contain substantial contribution from a 3d orbital of a Mn atom coordinated with the core- excited oxygen O(x) [note that in panels (d) and (e), this is an OM atom while in panel (h), this is an OS atom]. However, the 2p contribution of O(x) is noticeably lower than that of other (i.e., not core-excited) O atoms coordinated with the aforementioned Mn. This result is somewhat counterintuitive, since we might expect the core-hole to attract the promoted electron mostly to the O(x) atom. However, as a purely quantum-mechanical effect, the presence of a core-hole would lower the onsite energy of O(x), resulting in a reduction of its relative contribution to the anti- bonding orbitals responsible for these spectral peaks. By contrast, we see the largest 2p contribution for the O atom on the opposite side of the Mn atom from the core-excited O(x), due to its farther distance from the core hole [evident in panels (d), (e) and (h)]. Notably, the MBXAS method captures the contributions of both the excited and occupied valence orbitals to these spectral features and leads to strong XAS intensities which would be underestimated with single-particle core- hole approaches. In short, the O K-edge spectrum of the pristine BCM crystal is generated from a non-trivial combination of contribution from the two different spin-channels of the two inequivalent O sites: OM and OS. As summarized in Table 1, the low-energy features result mostly from promoting the O 1s electron to orbitals of mixed O-2p and Mn-3d character, while the presence of Ce-4f is noticed at relatively higher energies. (4) The Reduced BCM Crystal As mentioned in the introduction, for the STCH operation, BCM is exposed to high-temperature in an inert atmosphere, resulting in removal of oxygen atoms and it is this reduced phase that takes part in H2 generation by splitting the H2O molecule. This prompts us to investigate the electronic structure of the thermally- reduced BCM crystal. In particular, owing to the high electronegativity of the O atom, bonding between O and metallic ligands typically involves concentration of electronic population around the former. It is then instructive to probe how the excess electronic population available in the system as a result of the oxygen- removal, arranges itself. On the experimental front, as shown in Fig. 13, O K-edge XAS reveals a marked reduction in the first-peak intensity in the reduced crystal in comparison with the pristine counterpart. A detailed theoretical analysis is required to shed light on the origin of such reduction. For a vacancy at the OM site, the formation energy (2.7 eV) is seen to be lower than that for a vacancy at the OS site (3.3 eV), which indicates a higher probability for oxygen-removal from the OM site. This conclusion is also supported by experimental XAS studies presented in ref.20, which reports substantial change in the Mn L-near- edge spectrum as a function of temperature, implying a progressive reduction of the Mn atom. On the contrary, no major energy-shift is noted in the Ce M-edge spectrum. Therefore, in the rest of the paper, the theoretical treatment of electronic structure and XAS will be limited to a reduced structure with a vacancy at the OM site. Fig. 9 Top left panel shows a diagrammatic representation of the reduced crystal structure with the oxygen-vacancy at an OM site indicated by a dashed circle. The Mn atoms affected most drastically by the removal of OM are marked by ‘e-’, indicating the presence of excess electronic population (i.e., they are nominally reduced to Mn3+). The bottom left panel shows, for clarity, the relative positions of atoms close to the vacancy. Various atoms, which are subjected to further analysis, have been marked by colored arrows with labels in the right-hand-side panel. In the labels, the superscript red., which is short for “reduced” (dist., which is short for “distant”) denotes an atom located near (far from) the OM vacancy. The structure of the reduced crystal (provided in the Supplementary Materials) is obtained by relaxing the ionic coordinates in presence of the oxygen vacancy. From polarization of the atoms nearest the oxygen vacancy (both Mn and O) are noticeably larger than their counterparts in the pristine crystal. We label the e- e- MnS (red.) MnM (red.) OM (red.) OM (red.) MnM(dist.) MnS(dist.) OM (dist.) OS (dist.) OS (red.) corresponding Mn atoms as MnS(red.) and MnM(red.). Due to the vacancy, they are coordinated with 5 (as opposed to 6) oxygen atoms. We would expect that the removal of an O atom would leave behind two electrons on Mn sites. In fact, it is these neighboring Mn atoms, as well as the O atoms coordinated with them which gain electron density (Table 2), and so, we label them as reduced (red.). On the other hand, the more distant (dist.) atoms in the supercell show much smaller deviations in their electron populations. Thus, the excess electronic population available in the system as a result of oxygen-removal, remains local to the site of reduction. A combination of localized orbitals and dielectric screening leads to the effect of the oxygen-vacancy diminishing with increasing distance. Atom Total Population Spin Up Spin Down Polarization Pristine MnS [C] MnM [A] OS [D] OM [B] Reduced MnS(dist.) MnM(dist.) OS(dist.) OM(dist.) MnS(red.) MnM(red.) OS(red.) OM(red.) OM(red.) total electron population (column 2), spin-up population (column 3), spin-down population (column 3) and polarization (column 4) of valence electrons, calculated using Lowdin’s scheme of population analysis. For the pristine crystal, the atoms are labeled (A-D) in accordance with Fig. 1 while for the reduced structure, the color-convention used in Fig. 11 is maintained. Fig. 10 Mn-3d PDOS plots contrasting contributions of atoms from the reduced crystal to those of atoms from the pristine one. The top (bottom) panel corresponds to the middle, i.e. M (side, i.e. S) site. The VBM is set to zero. Fig. 10 showcases a comparison of the 3d PDOS of different Mn atoms: MnM(red.) the site of reduction). As expected, the PDOS of the distant atoms, MnM(dist.) and MnS(dist.), bear noticeable resemblance with their counterparts from the pristine structure, while those of the reduced atoms, MnM(red.) and MnS(red.), differ appreciably. From Table 2, it can be noted that, owing to their coordination with MnM(red.) -3d MnM(dist.) -3d Mn(pristine)mid-3d MnS(red.) -3d MnS(dist.) -3d Mn(pristine)side-3d Energy (eV) PDOS fewer O atoms, the reduced Mn atoms have higher valence electronic population. This enhanced occupation elevates the unoccupied orbitals to higher energy and shifts their weight off the reduced Mn sites, as evident from the higher energy and lower intensity of the relevant Mn PDOS-peaks, respectively. For the pristine crystal, Fig. 3 reveals that for both of the Mn sites (i.e., MnM and MnS), the unoccupied edge of the PDOS corresponds to the respective majority spin channels. Therefore, after the thermal reduction, the excess electron available to MnM(red.) and MnS(red.) can be expected to go to the majority spin channel. This is consistent with Table 2, which shows that the absolute values of the polarization of the reduced Mn atoms are higher than those of the pristine counterparts. In Fig. 10, this can be associated with the isolated PDOS contribution in the majority spin channel at the Fermi level (0 eV). (5) O K-edge XAS of the reduced structure Fig. 11 O K-edge XAS of different oxygen sites of the reduced crystal. The left (right) panels correspond to OM (OS) sites. In each panel, the shaded plots show the up and down spin contributions of the relevant O atom, the solid black line shows the spin- summed spectrum, while the broken blue line represents the spectrum of an OM / OS atom from the pristine crystal. OM(red.) up/down OM(red.) TOT. O(pristine)mid TOT. OM(red.) up/down OM(red.) TOT. O(pristine)mid TOT. OS(red.) up/down OS(red.)TOT. O(pristine)side TOT. OM(dist.) up/down OM(dist.) TOT. O(pristine)mid TOT. OS(dist.) up/down OS(dist.) TOT. O(pristine)side TOT. Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra corresponding to core-excitation of different inequivalent oxygen sites is displayed in Fig. 11, along with counterparts from the pristine crystal, to facilitate comparison. Once again, the spectra of the distant atoms are very similar to those from the pristine crystal while those of O atoms close to the vacancy-site differ substantially. For OM(red.), the up and down-spin spectra do not display any drastic asymmetry since both of its neighboring Mn atoms are 5-fold coordinated due to the neighboring vacancy (i.e., they are MnS(red.) and MnM(red.)). However, the increased electron population on these reduced Mn atoms raises the energy of their 3d orbitals, leading to a higher energy-difference between the corresponding Mn-3d and the O-2p levels, effectively making the bonding more ionic (due to decreased orbital mixing). In accordance with the tight- binding formalism, this results in a reduced O-2p contribution to the anti-bonding orbitals (see schematic in Fig. 12). Therefore, the intensity of the resultant OM(red.) spectrum is lower than the OM counterpart from the pristine crystal. On the other hand, the OM(red.) atom is coordinated with two Mn atoms among which, only MnM(red.), which has a positive spin-polarization, experiences a major enhancement in electron population. Mixing between OM(red.)-2p and MnM(red.)-3d orbitals is primarily responsible for the up-spin spectrum of OM(red.). Therefore, for OM(red.), the first peak of the up-spin spectrum exhibits a noticeably higher energy and lower intensity compared to the down-spin counterpart. The energy-shift between the first peaks corresponding to these two spin-channels leads to a substantial reduction in the intensity of the resultant peak for OM(red.), as can be seen by comparing the panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 11. The peak intensity for OS(red.) is also lowered in comparison with that of pristine OS, although this lowering is less pronounced since, in the pristine as well as in the reduced crystal, only the first peak originates from mixing with Mn orbitals. The second peak, which corresponds to a different spin channel and is much lower in intensity, results mostly from mixing with Ce orbitals and therefore, does not experience any major change upon reduction. The up-spin peak of OM(red.), the down-spin peak of OS(red.), and both peaks of OM(red.) are associated with orbitals resulting from the mixing of O-2p with the 3d orbital of the reduced (i.e., 5 fold coordinated) Mn atom(s). The blueshift of these peaks, with respect to their counterparts in the pristine spectrum is consistent with previous reports21 and expected from the tight-binding consideration. As discussed above, for all three O atoms near the site of reduction, i.e., for atoms OM(red.) , OM(red.) and OS(red.) , the first peak of the spectrum shows a reduction in intensity. Therefore, the resultant O K-edge spectrum of the reduced crystal should exhibit lowering of the first peak intensity, although the exact ratio can be expected to depend on the percentage of oxygen-vacancies formed in the crystal. However, as shown in Fig. 13, at least in qualitative terms, the experimental O K-edge spectrum of reduced BCM corroborates the aforementioned conclusion of intensity-lowering. Fig 12 Schematic diagram showing a reduction in the O-p contribution to the anti- bonding orbital resulting from a higher population of Mn. To facilitate comparison, the O-p level is kept at the same energy. This effect is further exaggerated by the core-excited state, which draws down the O 2p orbital energies and enhances the ionicity, further reducing O character in the antibonding orbital. O-p Mn-d Mn-d Mn-d Bonding Bonding Anti-bonding Anti-bonding O-p Increment in electronic population of Mn Fig 13 Experimental O K-edge absorption spectra of pristine and reduced BCM. As a consequence of the reduction, in general the electronic population increases in the vicinity of the site of reduction. From the consideration of classical Coulombic interaction, this can be expected to result in a diminished contribution from the local DOS of these atoms to the low-energy conduction orbitals of the system. However, as we have seen in the case of the pristine crystal, quantum mechanical effects associated with orbital-mixing (within the tight-binding framework) can play a crucial role in deciding the character of the final orbital. In order to investigate further how the interplay of the O-2p and Mn-3d orbitals results in a reduction in the peak intensities for the O(red.) atoms, we compare, for the reduced crystal, Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) Pristine Reduced A. the PDOS of MnS(dist.)-3d and OS(dist.)-2p as a consequence of core- exciting the OS(dist.) atom (note that Fig. 11 indicates that this should be relatively similar to the pristine counterpart). B. the PDOS of MnS(red.)-3d and OS(red.)-2p as a consequence of core- excitation of the OS(red.) atom, against For the final core-excited state corresponding to case [A], (case[B]), let us denote the KS orbital responsible for generating the peak at 9.94 eV (10.34 eV) as φ5 (φ3). OS(dist.)-2p orbitals are responsible for the corresponding first-peaks in the absorption spectra shown in Fig. 11. The computed values of the aforementioned contributions reveal that 8[:;] [=] = 0.86 while 8[C] [=] = 2.3. In other words, creation of the oxygen-vacancy results in a lowering of the contribution of the 2p orbital of the core-excited OS atom at the conduction band- edge. Conversely, the contribution of the MnS 3d orbital is enhanced. We note here that the difference in the Lowdin population of the MnS(red.) atom in case [B] (i.e., excitation of OS(red.)) is 0.06 while that between the corresponding core-excited oxygens is 0.01. The higher contribution of the 2p orbital of the excited oxygen far from the site of oxygen-vacancy essentially points to the fact that, owing to the higher electronic population of Mn(red.) [see Tab. 2], the difference in the onsite accordance with the tight-binding prescription, in an anti-bonding orbital with mixed MnS-3d and OS-2p character, the OS-2p contribution would be relatively lower in case [A]. This effect is demonstrated schematically in Fig. 12. The lower OS- 2p contribution in case [A] would, in turn, result in a reduction in the intensity of the corresponding XAS peak. To summarize, a qualitative theoretical analysis combining first-principles calculations and a tight-binding model reveals that the lowering of the first-peak intensity in the reduced crystal originates from a combination of two effects: 1. Lifting of degeneracy between the up and the down spin peaks for OM(red.), as shown in Fig. 11, and 2. Reduction in the O-2p contribution to the unoccupied orbitals, as illustrated schematically in Fig. 12. Fig. 14 Top panel shows the experimental O K-edge spectra of the pristine and the reduced crystal (same as Fig. 13). Bottom panel shows the simulated spectrum of the pristine crystal in black solid line (same as that shown in black line in Fig. 8(b). The broken blue line in the bottom panel shows a model spectrum calculated approximately for the reduced triple. Further details are provided in the text Fig. 14 shows, along with the experimental counterparts, the simulated O K-edge spectrum for pristine BCM and a model spectrum for the reduced crystal. In the A B C D Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) Experiment Theory latter, we have accounted, in an approximate manner, only for the O atoms coordinating the reduced triple (see Fig. 9 in the main manuscript). More the actual spectrum of the reduced crystal will contain contributions from all O atoms present in the crystal, not just the O atoms coordinating the reduced triple. The contributions coming from all O atoms occupying inequivalent sites in the reduced crystal will, in principle, be different. Therefore, the final spectrum will depend, in a complicated manner, not only on the density but also on the distribution of the defects. If the thermal reduction results in removal of two oxygens coordinating the same triple, the spectra would likely be significantly different. Note, for example, that the first-peak of the experimental absorption spectra for the pristine and the reduced crystal are coincident on the energy-axis. On the other hand, in the O K-edge EELS spectra reported in , a noticeable blueshift is reported with increasing thermal reduction, especially at 700° C. As discussed in section (5), such a blueshift is expected in the spectral contribution of the O(red.) atoms. Similarly, owing to the change in the anti-bonding orbital as well as spin-splitting, the O(red.) K-edge spectra will experience a reduction in the intensity of the first peak. The degree of prominence of such features in the net experimental spectrum will, however, be dictated by the density and distribution of the oxygen vacancies and by the probe-depth and resolution of the experiment. Notably, the measured overall red-shift in the spectral features at and above 536 eV is reproduced in our simulations. Conclusion In conclusion, with a combination of theoretical and experimental studies, in this paper we present a detailed description of the electronic structure of the BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ crystal in its pristine and reduced form. The electronic structure is probed experimentally with the help of O K-edge XAS, which shows a substantial reduction in the first-peak intensity as a result of oxygen-removal. On the theory front, DFT based first-principles calculations are performed to obtain the PDOS and to plot, in real-space, the occupied and the unoccupied orbitals. On the basis of these ab initio results, we propose a simple scheme of orbital-mixing between the O and the ligand orbitals consistent with the tight-binding model and the crystal field theory. Furthermore, using state-of-the-art spectroscopic simulations using the MBXAS method, we provide an in-depth analysis of the O K-edge spectrum by associating the spectral peaks with the relevant unoccupied electronic orbitals. We show that the low-energy peaks can mostly be attributed to O-2p and Mn-3d mixing, while the presence of Ce-4f orbitals are observed only at relatively higher energy. For the reduced crystal, our calculations reveal that, owing to dielectric screening, the change in electron-density is heavily localized around the site of reduction. At atomic sites distant from the oxygen-vacancy, the density is practically identical to that of the pristine counterpart. Finally, the simulated spectra replicate the qualitative lowering of the K-edge intensity for O atoms close to the vacancy-site. Within the tight-binding formalism, this can be explained in terms of the reduction in the relative contribution of these O atoms to the frontier unoccupied orbitals. (1) Rao, C. N. R.; Dey, S. Solar Thermochemical Splitting of Water to Generate Hydrogen. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2017, 114 (51), 13385–13393. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1700104114. (2) Nakamura, T. Hydrogen Production from Water Utilizing Solar Heat at High Temperatures. (3) Steinfeld, A. Solar Thermochemical Production of Hydrogen––a Review. Solar Energy 2005, 78 (5), 603–615. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2003.12.012. (4) McDaniel, A. H. Renewable Energy Carriers Derived from Concentrating Solar Power and Nonstoichiometric Oxides. Current Opinion in Green and Sustainable Chemistry 2017, 4, 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2017.02.004. (5) Chueh, W. C.; Falter, C.; Abbott, M.; Scipio, D.; Furler, P.; Haile, S. M.; Steinfeld, A. High- Flux Solar-Driven Thermochemical Dissociation of CO 2 and H 2 O Using Nonstoichiometric Ceria. Science 2010, 330 (6012), 1797–1801. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1197834. (6) Chueh, W. C.; Haile, S. M. A Thermochemical Study of Ceria: Exploiting an Old Material for New Modes of Energy Conversion and CO 2 Mitigation. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A. 2010, 368 (1923), 3269–3294. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2010.0114. (7) Siegel, N. P.; Miller, J. E.; Ermanoski, I.; Diver, R. B.; Stechel, E. B. Factors Affecting the Efficiency of Solar Driven Metal Oxide Thermochemical Cycles. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 2013, 52 (9), 3276–3286. https://doi.org/10.1021/ie400193q. (8) Cheng, W.-H.; de la Calle, A.; Atwater, H. A.; Stechel, E. B.; Xiang, C. Hydrogen from Sunlight and Water: A Side-by-Side Comparison between Photoelectrochemical and Solar Thermochemical Water-Splitting. ACS Energy Lett. 2021, 6 (9), 3096–3113. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsenergylett.1c00758. (9) McDaniel, A. H.; Miller, E. C.; Arifin, D.; Ambrosini, A.; Coker, E. N.; O’Hayre, R.; Chueh, W. C.; Tong, J. Sr- and Mn-Doped LaAlO3−δ for Solar Thermochemical H2 and CO Production. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6 (8), 2424. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ee41372a. (10) Yang, C.-K.; Yamazaki, Y.; Aydin, A.; Haile, S. M. Thermodynamic and Kinetic Assessments of Strontium-Doped Lanthanum Manganite Perovskites for Two-Step Thermochemical Water Splitting. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2 (33), 13612–13623. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TA02694B. (11) Sai Gautam, G.; Stechel, E. B.; Carter, E. A. Exploring Ca–Ce–M–O (M = 3d Transition Metal) Oxide Perovskites for Solar Thermochemical Applications. Chem. Mater. 2020, 32 (23), 9964–9982. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c02912. (12) Emery, A. A.; Saal, J. E.; Kirklin, S.; Hegde, V. I.; Wolverton, C. High-Throughput Computational Screening of Perovskites for Thermochemical Water Splitting Applications. Chem. Mater. 2016, 28 (16), 5621–5634. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b01182. (13) McDaniel, A. H.; Ambrosini, A.; Coker, E. N.; Miller, J. E.; Chueh, W. C.; O’Hayre, R.; Tong, J. Nonstoichiometric Perovskite Oxides for Solar Thermochemical H2 and CO Production. Energy Procedia 2014, 49, 2009–2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.213. (14) Vieten, J.; Bulfin, B.; Huck, P.; Horton, M.; Guban, D.; Zhu, L.; Lu, Y.; Persson, K. A.; Roeb, M.; Sattler, C. Materials Design of Perovskite Solid Solutions for Thermochemical Applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 2019, 12 (4), 1369–1384. https://doi.org/10.1039/C9EE00085B. (15) Barcellos, D. R.; Coury, F. G.; Emery, A.; Sanders, M.; Tong, J.; McDaniel, A.; Wolverton, C.; Kaufman, M.; O’Hayre, R. Phase Identification of the Layered Perovskite Ce x Sr 2– x MnO 4 and Application for Solar Thermochemical Water Splitting. Inorg. Chem. 2019, 58 (12), 7705–7714. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.inorgchem.8b03487. (16) R. Barcellos, D.; Sanders, M. D.; Tong, J.; McDaniel, A. H.; O’Hayre, R. P. BaCe 0.25 Mn 0.75 O 3−δ —a Promising Perovskite-Type Oxide for Solar Thermochemical Hydrogen Production. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11 (11), 3256–3265. https://doi.org/10.1039/C8EE01989D. (17) Liang, Y.; Prendergast, D. Quantum Many-Body Effects in x-Ray Spectra Efficiently Computed Using a Basic Graph Algorithm. Phys. Rev. B 2018, 97 (20), 205127. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.97.205127. (18) Liang, Y.; Vinson, J.; Pemmaraju, S.; Drisdell, W. S.; Shirley, E. L.; Prendergast, D. Accurate X-Ray Spectral Predictions: An Advanced Self-Consistent-Field Approach Inspired by Many- Body Perturbation Theory. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017, 118 (9), 096402. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.118.096402. (19) Hoffmann, R. How Chemistry and Physics Meet in the Solid State. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1987, 26 (9), 846–878. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.198708461. (20) Trindell, J. A.; McDaniel, A. H.; Ogitsu, T.; Ambrosini, A.; Sugar, J. D. Probing Electronic and Structural Transformations during Thermal Reduction of the Promising Water Splitting Perovskite BaCe 0.25 Mn 0.75 O 3. Chem. Mater. 2022, acs.chemmater.2c00731. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.2c00731. (21) Roychoudhury, S.; Qiao, R.; Zhuo, Z.; Li, Q.; Lyu, Y.; Kim, J.-H.; Liu, J.; Lee, E.; Polzin, B. J.; Guo, J.; Yan, S.; Hu, Y.; Li, H.; Prendergast, D.; Yang, W. Deciphering the Oxygen Absorption Pre-Edge: A Caveat on Its Application for Probing Oxygen Redox Reactions in Batteries. ENERGY & ENVIRONMENTAL MATERIALS 2021, 4 (2), 246–254. https://doi.org/10.1002/eem2.12119. Supplementary Materials for “Investigating the Electronic Structure of Prospective Water-splitting Oxide BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ Before and After Thermal Reduction” Subhayan Roychoudhury§, Sarah Shulda¶, Anuj Goyal¶, Robert Bell¶, Sami Sainio‡, Nicholas Strange‡, James Eujin Park#, Eric N. Coker#, Stephan Lany¶, David Ginley¶, and David Prendergast§ § The Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley CA 94720, USA ¶National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA ‡SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA 94025 #Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185, USA Details of XAS Experiment: X-Ray absorption spectroscopy data was acquired at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL). For analysis of the oxygen K-edge, collected on beam line 10-1, a thin layer of BCM powder was spread on carbon tape. Total fluorescence yield spectra were obtained with a silicon diode AXUV100. An oxygen reference spectrum was collected simultaneously with data collection at the oxygen edge for both (reduced and oxidized) samples. The sample data was put on an absolute energy grid for direct comparison by aligning the refence spectra and shifting the sample data correspondingly. Specific to this beamline, an agglomerate of chemical species resides permanently within the beam path for reference collection. Two spectra at three different spots were collected and averaged for each sample. Alignment and averaging were carried out in Athena1. Normalization was carried out with Igor Pro (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR, USA). O1s spectra were base line corrected by subtracting the minimum pre-edge value to bring pre- edge to 0 and then were divided by the average of the region after the main features (after 547eV). In-situ heating experiments at the Mn K-edge and Ce L- edges were carried out on beamline 4-1 using an in-situ chamber fabricated at Sandia National Laboratory. All data was collected in fluorescence using a Ge array fluorescence detector. Three spectra were collected, normalized, aligned, and then averaged for each sample. For normalization, the pre-edge was fit to a line and the extended region fit to a 3-term quadratic polynomial. Reference foils were collected simultaneously with sample data acquisition to enable accurate alignment of all spectra (to place all spectra on an absolute energy grid). Data normalization, alignment, and averaging was carried out in Athena1. Computational Details: DFT based first-principles calculations of electronic structure are performed with the Quantum Espresso software package. Plane-wave energy cutoff of 35 eV and 280 eV are used for wavefunction and energy, respectively. PBE exchange- correlation functional and Ultrasoft pseudopotentials have been used throughout. In calculations of the x-ray excited states, the core-excited oxygen atom is represented by a modified pseudopotential which encodes the effects of the core- hole. Hubbard U values of 3.9 eV and 5.4 eV are used for the Mn-3d orbitals and the Ce-4f orbitals, respectively. In order to mitigate the effects of the interaction between the periodic images of the core-excited atom, we use a large supercell in our XAS calculations (parameters provided below). Therefore, the self-consistent field calculations are performed at the k=0 point only. A uniform (i.e., independent of the incident frequency) broadening of 0.2 eV is used to generate the spectra. Results obtained using other energies for broadening are shown in Fig. S2. The relative alignment of the spectra of different O atoms is determined with the help of the total energies of the FCH states and the energies of the lowest unoccupied orbitals. If, for the FCH state corresponding to core-excitation of the i-th (j-th) O atom, Ei (Ej) is the sum of the total energy and the KS energy of the lowest unoccupied orbital, then the onset-energy for the spectrum of the i-th O atom will be higher than that of the j-th O atom by (Ei - Ej). Fig. S1 Figure showing the PDOS of Mn and O atoms before and after the X-ray absorption process. Panel (a) and panel (b) show, respectively, the GS 2p PDOS of an OM and an OS atom along with the 3d PDOS of the neighboring atoms. Panel (c) (panel(d)) shows, for the FCH state obtained by core-exciting an OM (OS) atom, the 2p PDOS of the core-excited atom OM(x) (OS(x)), along with the 3d PDOS of the neighboring Mn atoms. Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) GS GS FCH [OM(x)] FCH [OS(x)] OM(2p) MnM(3d) MnS(3d) OS(2p) MnS(3d) OM(x)(2p) MnM(3d) MnS(3d) OS(x)(2p) MnS(3d) (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. S2 O K-edge spectrum of the pristine BCM crystal using different energies for broadening. Energy (eV) Intensity (a.u.) Fig. S3 The green and orange lines show, at the conduction band edge, the PDOS, respectively, of MnS(red.)-3d and OS(red.)-2p corresponding to the SCF resulting from core-excitation of the OS(red.) atom. The brown and the red lines show the conduction band-edge PDOS of MnS(dist.)-3d and OS(dist.)-2p for the SCF resulting from core- excitation of the OS(dist.) atom. The OS(red.)-2p orbital generates the first-peak in the OS(red.) K-edge spectrum shown in Fig. 11 (bottom right panel) while the OS(dist.)-2p orbital is responsible for the OS(dist.) K-edge first-peak in Fig. 11 (top tight panel). Structure of the Crystal Superell Parameters Lattice Parameter, a0 : 38.5438 a.u. Crystal axes in units of a0 9.7 9.8 9.9 10 10.1 10.2 10.3 10.4 10.5 PDOS Energy (eV) MnS(dist.) OS(dist.) MnS(red.) OS(red.) Ionic coordinates of the pristine crystal in Angstrom (Mn1 and Mn2 atoms are spin- polarized along opposite directions) : Ionic coordinates of the reduced crystal in Angstrom (Mn1 and Mn2 atoms are spin- polarized along opposite directions) : (1) Ravel, B.; Newville, M. ATHENA , ARTEMIS , HEPHAESTUS : Data Analysis for X-Ray Absorption Spectroscopy Using IFEFFIT. J Synchrotron Rad 2005, 12 (4), 537–541.