Ab initio study of metastable occupation of tetrahedral sites in palladium hydrides and its impact on superconductivity Antonella Meninno1,2∗ and Ion Errea1,2,3 1Centro de F ́ısica de Materiales (CSIC-UPV/EHU), Manuel de Lardizabal Pasealekua 5, 20018 Donostia/San Sebasti ́an, Spain 2Fisika Aplikatua Saila, Gipuzkoako Ingeniaritza Eskola, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Europa Plaza 1, 20018 Donostia/San Sebasti ́an, Spain and 3Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), Manuel de Lardizabal Pasealekua 4, 20018 Donostia/San Sebasti ́an, Spain A recent experimental work on palladium hydrides suggested that metastable structures with hy- drogen atoms occupying tetrahedral sites could lead to superconductivity above 50 K, a huge increase compared to the 10 K critical temperature of the stable structure with all hydrogen atoms occu- pying octahedral sites. By generating many structures with hydrogen atoms randomly occupying the octahedral and tetrahedral sites of the face-centered cubic lattice and calculating their energy at different theoretical levels from first principles, we determine that metastable structures with partial or full occupation of tetrahedral sites are possible, even when the ionic quantum zero-point energy and anharmonicity are included in the calculations. Anharmonicity is crucial in palladium hydrides when hydrogen atoms occupy octahedral sites and, in fact, makes the structure with full octahedral occupation the ground state. Despite the metastable existence of structures with full or partial tetrahedral sites occupation, the superconducting critical temperature is reduced with the number of tetrahedral sites occupied. Our calculations discard that the occupation of tetrahedral sites can increase the critical temperature in palladium hydrides. I. INTRODUCTION The discovery of superconductivity above 200 K at megabar pressures in hydrogen-based compounds, beat- ing all the records previously set by the cuprates, is one of the greatest discoveries in physics of the last years [1–6]. The question whether stable or metastable hydrides with a high superconducting critical temperature (Tc) exist also at ambient pressure has to be answered now. There are hydrogen-based superconductors at ambient pressure such as PdH [7–10] and Th4H15 , but all of them have low Tc values, not surpassing ∼ 10 K. Interestingly, Syed et al., in a work that remains unconfirmed, have claimed that metastable phases of PdH grown using a fast-cooling technique can yield much higher superconducting critical temperatures, even reaching values above 50 K . If confirmed, that would mean high-Tc hydrides can exist at ambient pressure. Palladium hydrides have been largely studied since their discovery , for instance, as hydrogen storage ma- terials. In fact, palladium has a large capacity to absorb considerable quantities of hydrogen [14–16]. It is possi- ble to synthesize compounds with different values of the H/Pd ratio, labeled as x, with proportions that reach as maximum the stoichiometric condition (x = 1). PdHx becomes superconducting with x > 0.80, and the critical temperature rises as x is increased, reaching a value of 8- 9 K in the stoichiometric limit [7–10]. Interestingly, the superconducting critical temperature of PdH increases the heavier the mass of the hydrogen , a strongly anomalous isotope effect that was explained due to the ∗ ameninno001@ikasle.ehu.es presence of strong anharmonic hydrogen lattice vibra- tions . The general consensus is that the ground state struc- ture of stoichiometric PdH is formed by hydrogen atoms occupying the octahedral interstitial sites of the face cen- tered cubic (fcc) palladium lattice. This statement is supported by early neutron diffraction experiments both on the hydride and the deuteride , as well as the agreement between the theoretical ab initio anharmonic phonon calculations and the experimental phonon spectra obtained with inelastic neutron scattering and Raman experiments [19–24]. The fact that the super- conducting properties, including the inverse isotope ef- fect, are explained by ab initio theoretical calculations assuming the octahedral occupation further sustains this idea . However, more recent powder neutron diffrac- tion experiments have observed partial occupation of the interstitial tetrahedral sites in the deuteride compound . First-principles calculations within density- functional theory (DFT) show that both octahe- dral and tetrahedral configurations are local energy min- ima, where the octahedral configuration is slightly fa- vored with respect to the tetrahedral one. Similar DFT calculations determine, on the contrary, that tetrahedral site occupation is preferred energetically at high hydro- gen concentration . The question of where the hydrogen atoms sit in PdH is of particular importance because the main hypothesis to explain the experiments in Ref. is that the fast cooling technique yielded metastable PdH and PdD com- pounds with partial or full tetrahedral site occupation and high superconducting critical temperatures. The en- ergetic comparison between different possible sites has not been performed fully including the lattice zero-point energy and anharmonicity, which is crucial in this system arXiv:2209.14773v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 29 Sep 2022 2 , beyond simplified models . In order to clarify the possibility of having stable or metastable occupation of tetrahedral sites in PdH and its impact on superconduc- tivity, here we present ab initio structural relaxations of several PdH structures with mixed octahedral and tetra- hedral site occupations including the quantum lattice zero-point energy within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approximation (SSCHA) [29–32]. Our results suggest that metastable full or partial tetrahedral site oc- cupation of interstitial sites is possible in PdH, but that it does not enhance the superconducting critical temper- ature. The manuscript is organized as follows. In Sec. II we describe the details of the ab initio calculations, in Sec. III we present the results of our work, and in Sec. IV we summarize the main conclusions. II. METHODS AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS In the present analysis we work always with the stoi- chiometric ratio x = 1. In order to study the energies of configurations with tetrahedral site occupation, we have constructed a 2 × 2 × 2 supercell starting from the primi- tive fcc lattice, i.e. with 8 Pd atoms, and randomly place 8 hydrogen atoms between the octahedral and tetrahe- dral sites. We classify the structures by the number of occupied octahedral sites in the beginning. In any con- figuration, if n hydrogen atoms occupy octahedral sites (with n from 0 to 8), then 8 − n hydrogen atoms occupy tetrahedral sites. Note that per Pd atom in the fcc lat- tice there is one octahedral site and 2 tetrahedral sites. The structure with full octahedral occupation, n = 8, has a space group symmetry Fm ̄3m and all positions are fixed by symmetry. Configurations with partial or full tetrahedral occupation have a lower symmetry and, in most of the cases, atoms are no longer fixed to a specific lattice site and can thus relax. We have performed these relaxations both in the classical case, assuming that ions are classical objects and therefore adopt the positions given by the local minima of the Born-Oppenheimer en- ergy surface V (R), and in the quantum case within the SSCHA. The SSCHA is a variational method that minimizes the free energy F[R, Φ] = ⟨K + V (R)⟩ ̃ρR,Φ − TSion[ ̃ρR,Φ] (1) of the system as a function of the centroid positions R and auxiliary force constants Φ that parametrize the ionic density matrix ̃ρR,Φ [29–32]. In Eq. (1) K is the ionic kinetic energy operator, Sion[ ̃ρR,Φ] the ionic en- tropy associated to ̃ρR,Φ, and ⟨⟩ ̃ρR,Φ denotes the quan- tum statistical average taken with ̃ρR,Φ. The SSCHA assumes that the probability distribution function de- fined by ̃ρR,Φ is a Gaussian centered at the R posi- tions and has a width related to Φ. At the minimum of F[R, Φ], the obtained centroid positions R determine -0.1 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0 2 4 6 8 #5 #5 #5 #3 #3 #3 #4 #4 #4 #1 #1 #1 #2 #2 #2 Energy/PdH [eV] n No relaxation Internal relaxation Cell relaxation -20 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 0 2 4 6 8 #5 #5 #5 #3 #3 #3 #4 #4 #4 #1 #1 #1 #2 #2 #2 Pressure [kbar] n No relaxation Internal relaxation Cell relaxation (bottom panel) for structures with hydrogen atoms at random interstitial sites. The structures are classified according to the number of occupied octahedral sites at the beginning of the calculation, n. The data in orange refers to the initial non- relaxed structures, while in black we show the data for the internal relaxed structures (internal relaxation) keeping the unit cell unchanged. The data in blue corresponds to the classical relaxation in which the unit cell is allowed to change (cell ralaxation). In each class of data, we have marked with numbers the energies and pressures of the structures that we study with the SSCHA method a posteriori, which are marked with a square and not a dot. The energies are measured from the energy of the structure with full octahedral occupation, n = 8. the renormalized average positions of the ions includ- ing ionic quantum effects and anharmonicity at a non- perturbative level. Classical structural relaxations on the Born- Oppenheimer energy surface were performed with DFT making use of the plane-waves Quantum ESPRESSO package . The exchange-correlation functional was approximated with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) parametrization . Brillouin zone integrals in the DFT self-consistent calculations were performed with a 12×12×12 k-point grid for the 2 × 2 × 2 supercell containing 16 atoms. We used a kinetic energy cutoff for the wave functions of 55 Ry and of 550 Ry for charge density. Projector-augmented wave pseudopotentials from the Quantum ESPRESSO library were used , with 10 electrons in the valence for Pd. SSCHA quantum anharmonic structural relaxations were performed on the same 2 × 2 × 2 supercell with 16 atoms. The SSCHA minimization requires the calcula- tion of atomic forces on different random configurations generated according to ̃ρR,Φ. These forces were calcu- lated ab initio with DFT, with the same parameters used 3 for the classical relaxations. Due to the reduced symme- try of many of the structures analyzed, a large number of random configurations were needed to converge the SS- CHA minimization, in the order of 10000 per compound for the less symmetric cases. We have calculated the phonon spectra of the struc- tures relaxed at the quantum level with the SSCHA both at the harmonic level and the anharmonic level. The electron-phonon interaction is also estimated at the harmonic and at the SSCHA levels for these structures. The harmonic calculations have been performed within density-functional perturbation theory (DFPT) in a 2 × 2 × 2 q-point grid of the 16 atoms supercell. The harmonic Eliashberg function α2F(ω) has been ob- tained with electron-phonon matrix elements calculated in the 2 × 2 × 2 q-point grid, a 30 × 30 × 30 k-point grid for the Brillouin zone integrals on the electronic states, and a 0.002 Ry Gaussian smearing for the double Dirac delta on the Fermi surface. In order to obtain the an- harmonic α2F(ω) in the same 2 × 2 × 2 q-point grid of the 16 atom supercell, we interpolate the difference between the Γ point SSCHA auxiliary dynamical matrix and the harmonic result at this point to the finer 2×2×2 grid. Adding the harmonic result back to the interpo- lated result, we have obtained the anharmonic phonons in the 2×2×2 grid. The anharmonic α2F(ω) is obtained by combining the calculated electron-phonon matrix el- ements, with the eigenvalues and eigenfrequencies of the dynamical matrix defined by the SSCHA auxiliary force constants. Considering the lack of symmetry in many of the studied structures, a large number of SSCHA con- figurations are needed to converge the calculation of the Hessian of the SSCHA free energy , and, thus, we use the eigenvalues of the dynamical matrix defined by the auxiliary force constants Φ to build the anharmonic α2F(ω) and not the eigenvalues defined by the Hessian of the free energy. The anharmonic Tc calculated with one or other phonons is not expected to be very differ- ent, as it happens in LaH10 . The superconducting critical temperature was obtained by solving the Allen- Dynes modified equation with different values of the so-called Coulomb pseudopotential μ∗. III. RESULTS We start our analysis of possible metastable states with partial tetrahedral sites occupation by creating configu- rations in the 2×2×2 supercell by randomly occupying tetrahedral and octahedral interstitial sites in the fcc Pd lattice as described above, assuming a lattice parameter of 7.814 a0, the equilibrium lattice parameter obtained in the Born-Oppenheimer classical energy surface for PdH with full octahedral occupation within PBE and with- out considering the zero point motion. For each initial number of atoms in octahedral sites, we create 10 ran- dom structures. As shown in Fig. 1, these structure have a wide range of Born-Oppenheimer energies, with differences up to almost 0.4 eV per PdH. This shows that arranging H atoms at different interstitial sites can con- siderably change the total energy of the system, showing that H-H and Pd-H interactions are strongly dependent on the site of hydrogen atoms. For this lattice parameter (7.814 a0), the structure with lowest Born-Oppenheimer energy is the one with full octahedral occupation (n = 8). It is interesting to remark that, as illustrated in the bot- tom panel of Fig. 1, these random structures have a very different pressure, which increases with the number of H atoms occupying tetrahedral sites, reaching a pressure of 160 kbar for the fully tetrahedral structure (n = 0). Thus, structures with tetrahedral sites occupied have a larger lattice parameter. As mentioned above, once tetrahedral interstitial sites start being occupied, the symmetry of the crystal is re- duced and atoms are not fixed to their sites by symme- try anymore. We first relax these structures to the Born- Oppenheimer energy minima only modifying the internal positions, without modifying the fcc primitive lattice vec- tors and keeping the 7.814 a0 lattice parameter. These reduces considerably the energies of the structures with tetrahedral sites occupied (n < 8) with respect to the full octahedral occupation, but still the full octahedral site structure remains the lowest energy one. However, considering that the n < 8 structures still are subject to a positive pressure with this unit cell, the energy is not the appropriate thermodynamic quantity for the compar- ison. We thus fully relax these structures to the Born- Oppenheimer minima with a target pressure of 0 kbar, with a tolerance of about 10 kbar. Most of the cell relax- ations are performed by only adjusting the length of the lattice parameters, keeping fcc lattice vectors. In order to study the possibility of symmetry breaking of the cell, we also relaxed some structures allowing full adjustment of the lattice vectors with no restrictions. After the cell relaxations the pressure of all structures is comparable and the energy becomes the right thermodynamic vari- able. Interestingly, structures with partial or even full tetrahedral occupation have a lower energy than the full octahedral structure, remarking that tetrahedral and oc- tahedral occupation of interstitial sites are very compet- itive in energy, as previously described in the literature . The evolution of the classical relaxation of some of these structures is illustrated in Fig. 2. The structures change strongly from their initial starting point, which addresses the shallowness of the energy barriers between different interstitial sites . Some of the calcula- tions show that, despite departing with some H atoms at octahedral sites, the final structures only contain H atoms at tetrahedral sites, like those labeled as #2, #3, and #5. Structures #1, #3, #4, and #5 were relaxed keeping the fcc cell vectors and the lattice parameters increased between a 1.5% and 2.5% depending on the case. The structural modifications mainly involve hydro- gen atoms in these cases, as Pd atoms remain with an ar- rangement that is not far from the perfect fcc. Consider- ing that H atoms are invisible to x-ray diffraction experi- ments, distinguishing these structures from the full octa- 4 Structure No relaxation Internal relaxation Cell relaxation SSCHA relaxation #1 #2 #3 #4 #5 to right the non-relaxed starting structure (No relaxation), the relaxed structure without modifications of the cell (Internal relaxation), the relaxed structure obtained by also relaxing the unit cell (Cell relaxation), and the structure obtained with the quantum relaxation given by the SSCHA (SSCHA relaxation). We mark in red the hydrogen atoms in octahedral sites at the beginning of the calculation and in green the ones in tetrahedral sites. The atoms keep their initial color for the other relaxations. The bonds plotted have a cutoff distance of ∼ 4.7a0. hedral configuration would be difficult by x-ray, only an expansion of the lattice should be detected for those cases with occupied tetrahedral sites. For structure #2 the sit- uation is different, as the unit cell vectors are allowed to fully change: at the end of the classical cell relaxation a monoclinic lattice is obtained, with two lattice vectors that dilate by factors of 1.4% and 2.4%, respectively, and the other vector that contracts by a factor of 0.5%. The angles shift to 59◦, 74◦ and 60◦ between relaxed unit cell vectors. Due to the lattice change, the structure should be distinguishable from the Fm ̄3m structure by x-ray diffraction. Considering the large anharmonicity at play in PdH, at least in the fully octahedral configuration , we fur- ther relax some of the structures obtained after the cell Born-Oppenheimer classical relaxation considering ionic quantum effects and anharmonicity within the SSCHA. Due to the large computational effort to structurally re- 5 lax in the quantum energy landscape these structures that lack symmetry, we limit ourselves to relax the five representative structures labeled from #1 to #5 in all fig- ures. Despite ionic quantum effects and anharmonicity can impact the cell parameters , consider- ing the additional large computational effort required to relax the cell parameters for these systems with no sym- metry, here we do not relax the unit cell further and just relax the internal centroid positions R in the quantum energy landscape. However, the stress tensor calculated including ionic quantum effects in these structures shows that there is a weak anisotropy in the stress tensor for any of the five structures, irrespective of whether the cell remains fcc-like or not. This suggests that fcc lat- tices can be realized in this system even if the symmetry is broken by the interstitial sites occupied by hydrogen, supporting the treatment given to the cell relaxation. The impact of ionic quantum effects on the centroid positions is structure dependent. While some structures are radically changed by quantum effects, others do not exhibit drastic changes (see Fig. 2). Structure #1, which starts with 6 H atoms in octahedral sites and 2 in tetrahe- dral sites, deforms considerably in the classical relaxation with fixed cell and relaxing the cell, but still keeps hy- drogens at the same interstitial sites. This is changed by the quantum SSCHA relaxation, which shifts the atoms in tetrahedral sites to octahedral sites, recovering the full octahedral configuration. Structure #2, which also starts with 6 octahedral and 2 tetrahedral sites, keeps those occupations after the classical internal relaxation, but the cell relaxation pushes all atoms into tetrahedral sites. The posterior quantum SSCHA relaxation barely affects the structure, keeping all the H atoms at tetra- hedral sites. Structure #3, starting with four octahedral and four tetrahedral sites, already with the first internal classical relaxation transforms into a full tetrahedral oc- cupation, which does not evolve further after the classical cell and the quantum SSCHA relaxations. Structure #4, which start as well with an equal occupation of octahe- dral and tetrahedral sites, is particularly interesting as each relaxation induces a large change in the position of hydrogen atoms. Remarkably, ionic quantum effects sta- bilize a structure with mixed occupation of tetrahedral and octahedral sites. Finally, structure #5, which start with the occupation of 6 tetrahedral and 2 octahedral sites, is similar to structure #2 since already at the in- ternal relaxation all H atoms shift to a tetrahedral site and remain unaltered by the subsequent relaxations. All these calculations show that the quantum energy land- scape in the PdH system is complex and many possible metastable states are possible also when the zero point energy and anharmonicity are considered in the calcu- lations. Regardless of the initial occupation of intersti- tial sites, our calculations show that stable or metastable states with full tetrahedral or octahedral occupations, as well as with mixed occupation of these sites, are possible. Our SSCHA calculations can also analyze which of these states is the ground state structure once the ionic zero point energy and anharmonicity is considered in the -0.1 0 0.05 0.1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 #5 #5 #4 #4 #3 #3 #2 #2 #1 #1 Energy/PdH [eV] n Cell relaxation SSCHA relaxation classical relaxation including the unit cell (Cell relaxation) and with the quantum relaxation within the SSCHA (SSCHA relaxation) for the five selected structures. The zero of the en- ergy is taken to be the energy of the structure with 8 occupied octahedral sites. The number on the right of each data point indicates the structure. The structure are characterized by n, the initial number of occupied octahedral sites. calculations. As shown in Fig. 3, despite structures #2, #3, and #5 have a lower Born-Oppenheimer en- ergy than the high-symmetry full octahedral structure, after the SSCHA relaxations the energy including ionic quantum anharmonic effects of these structures becomes larger. Consistently, structure #1, which evolves into the full octahedral occupation, reaches the same energy as the high symmetry n = 8 case. Thus, our calculations suggest that the structure with full occupation of octahe- dral sites is the ground state, as reported experimentally , thanks to lattice quantum effects and anharmonic- ity. However, metastable states with full or partial occu- pation of tetrahedral sites exist within 0.1 eV per PdH. The reason why quantum effects affect one structure more than others is reflected in the phonon spectra shown in Fig. 4. For the final structure obtained after the SSCHA relaxation we calculate the phonon spectra in the harmonic approximation and from the SSCHA aux- iliary dynamical matrices. Structures #2, #3, and #5 are barely affected by anharmonicity, while structures #1 and #4 are strongly anharmonic. This is consistent with the fact that the latter structures are the only ones that are considerably modified by quantum anharmonic effects. Interestingly, structure #1 has large imaginary phonon modes in the harmonic approximation, as it has previously been described for the high-symmetry Fm ̄3m structure . The same occurs to structure #4, which also has H atoms in octahedral sites. The analysis of the phonon spectra clearly indicates thus that anharmonicity is related to octahedral sites and not so much to tetrahe- dral sites, for which the potential seems rather harmonic. Hydrogen vibrations in tetrahedral sites are much harder, with energies above approximately 25 THz, while hydro- gen atoms in octahedral sites vibrate with energies be- tween approximately 10 and 20 THz. This is the reason why the structure with mixed octahedral and tetrahedral occupation (#4) has the broadest range of phonon fre- quencies. The differences between the structures and the 6 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 a*/2 Γ b*/2 c*/2 Γ #1 Frequency [THz] Harmonic Anharmonic 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 a*/2 Γ b*/2 c*/2 Γ #2 Frequency [THz] Harmonic Anharmonic 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 a*/2 Γ b*/2 c*/2 Γ #3 Frequency [THz] Harmonic Anharmonic -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 a*/2 Γ b*/2 c*/2 Γ #4 Frequency [THz] Harmonic Anharmonic 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 a*/2 Γ b*/2 c*/2 Γ #5 Frequency [THz] Harmonic Anharmonic anharmonic calculations for the five selected structures in the structure obtained with the SSCHA relaxation. The vectors a∗, b∗, and c∗ are the basis vectors of the recipro- cal lattice. 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 #1 α2F(ω), λ(ω) Frequency [THz] α2F(ω) λ(ω) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 #2 α2F(ω), λ(ω) Frequency [THz] α2F(ω) λ(ω) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 #3 α2F(ω), λ(ω) Frequency [THz] α2F(ω) λ(ω) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 #4 α2F(ω), λ(ω) Frequency [THz] α2F(ω) λ(ω) 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 #5 α2F(ω), λ(ω) Frequency [THz] α2F(ω) λ(ω) Eliashberg function α2F(ω) and integrated electron-phonon coupling constants λ(ω) for the five se- lected structures in the structure obtained with the SS- CHA relaxation. Anharmonic phonons are used in this calculation. 7 Structure Harmonic Tc (K) SSCHA Tc (K) Initial octahedral Final octahedral μ∗ = 0.085 μ∗ = 0.130 μ∗ = 0.085 μ∗ = 0.130 #1 × × 17.7 11.5 6 8 #2 5.5 3.2 6.1 4.0 6 0 #3 2.2 0.9 5.9 4.3 4 0 #4 × × 12.2 8.7 4 Mixed #5 1.5 0.4 4.9 2.6 2 0 quantum SSCHA relaxation, computed with harmonic dynamical matrices and SSCHA auxiliary dynamical matrices. We also note the number of octahedral occupied positions before any relaxation and after the final SSCHA relaxation. Structures #1 and #4 do not have a harmonic value due to the presence of imaginary phonon frequencies at this level of theory. lack of degeneracies in the phonon spectra are a conse- quence that all structures are not identical as no symme- tries have been imposed. The existence of metastable states with full and partial occupation of tetrahedral sites suggests that it may be possible to synthesize these structures with fast-cooling techniques, as suggested by Syed et al. . It has to be seen, however, whether these structures do increase the superconducting critical temperature with respect to the stable full octahedral configuration, as hypothesized in Ref. . We calculate here the electron-phonon in- teraction and the Tc for the five structures analyzed pre- viously, with the aim to address this important point. Fig. 5 shows the Eliashberg function, α2F(ω), and the integrated electron-phonon coupling constant, λ(ω), for the anharmonic SSCHA calculation. From the figures we can deduce that the contribution of the high-energy H-character modes to the electron-phonon coupling con- stant is only sizable when octahedral sites are occupied, such as in structures #1 and #4. It is thus not surpris- ing that the largest calculated Tc among these structures is the one with full octahedral occupation (#1), with Tc around 11.5 K with μ∗ = 0.13, followed by the one with mixed occupation (#4), with Tc around 8.7 K for the same value of the Coulomb pseudopotential (see Table I). With the same parameters, the structures with full tetrahedral occupation have a lower critical temperature, between 2.6 and 4.3 K. These show that the metastable occupation of tetrahedral sites is not beneficial for super- conductivity and that the highest critical temperature is attained with the stable structure with full octahedral occupation. The critical temperature calculated for the full octahe- dral configuration here is overestimated with respect to previous calculations also including anharmonic effects . We attribute these differences to the fact that the lattice vectors here have not been relaxed in the quantum energy landscape, so that the lattice parameters in the calculations are different; a different exchange-correlation functional is used here; and the calculation here is per- formed in a non-symmetrized structure, not exactly with the Fm ̄3m symmetry, in a 2×2×2 supercell. The pre- vious calculations, thus, are performed in a more con- trolled way and are thus more reliable with respect to the absolute value of the calculated Tc, but the result obtained here is solid: full or partial metastable occupa- tion of tetrahedral sites reduces the critical temperature. IV. CONCLUSION By analyzing many possible occupations of interstitial sites in palladium hydrides within DFT including ionic quantum and anharmonic effects, we conclude that, de- spite the configuration with all hydrogen atoms in octa- hedral sites is the ground state, partial and full tetrahe- dral sites can be occupied metastably. This opens the door to synthesizing structures with partial or full tetra- hedral occupation, as suggested by recent experiments . However, contrary to the hypothesis pre- sented in Ref. , we demonstrate here that the occupa- tion of tetrahedral sites does not increase the critical tem- perature of PdH, it suppresses it. Our results underline that quantum effects and anharmonicity are crucial in the thermodynamical (meta)stability of PdH structures, specially with respect to vibrations around the octahe- dral sites. The experiment measuring Tc values above 50 K in metastable PdH phases is questioned by our theoretical calculations. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS A.M. acknowledges the support of Red Espa ̃nola de Su- percomputaci ́on (RES) for CPU time (grant agreements FI-2020-1-0008 and FI-2021-2-0016) and PRACE for ac- cess to Joliot-Curie Rome at TGCC, France. We have received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 re- search and innovation programme (grant agreement No A. Drozdov, M. Eremets, I. Troyan, V. Ksenofontov, and S. I. Shylin, Conventional superconductivity at 203 kelvin at high pressures in the sulfur hydride system, Nature 8 M. Somayazulu, M. Ahart, A. K. Mishra, Z. M. Geballe, M. Baldini, Y. Meng, V. V. Struzhkin, and R. J. Hemley, Evidence for superconductivity above 260 k in lanthanum superhydride at megabar pressures, Physical Review Let- A. Drozdov, P. Kong, V. Minkov, S. Besedin, M. Ku- zovnikov, S. Mozaffari, L. Balicas, F. Balakirev, D. Graf, V. Prakapenka, et al., Superconductivity at 250 k in lan- thanum hydride under high pressures, Nature 569, 528 E. Snider, N. Dasenbrock-Gammon, R. McBride, X. Wang, N. Meyers, K. V. Lawler, E. Zurek, A. Sala- mat, and R. P. Dias, Synthesis of yttrium superhydride superconductor with a transition temperature up to 262 k by catalytic hydrogenation at high pressures, Phys. Rev. P. Kong, V. S. Minkov, M. A. Kuzovnikov, A. P. Droz- dov, S. P. Besedin, S. Mozaffari, L. Balicas, F. F. Bal- akirev, V. B. Prakapenka, S. Chariton, D. A. Knyazev, E. Greenberg, and M. I. Eremets, Superconductivity up to 243 k in the yttrium-hydrogen system under high pres- sure, Nature Communications 12, 5075 (2021). I. A. Troyan, D. V. Semenok, A. G. Kvashnin, A. V. Sadakov, O. A. Sobolevskiy, V. M. Pudalov, A. G. Ivanova, V. B. Prakapenka, E. Greenberg, A. G. Gavriliuk, I. S. Lyubutin, V. V. Struzhkin, A. Bergara, I. Errea, R. Bianco, M. Calandra, F. Mauri, L. Monacelli, R. Akashi, and A. R. Oganov, Anomalous high-temperature superconduc- tivity in yh6, Advanced Materials 33, 2006832 (2021), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/adma.202006832. T. Skoskiewicz, Superconductivity in the palladium- hydrogen and palladium-nickel-hydrogen systems, phys- ica status solidi (a) 11, K123 (1972). B. Stritzker and W. Buckel, Superconductivity in the palladium-hydrogen and the palladium-deuterium sys- tems, Zeitschrift f ̈ur Physik A Hadrons and nuclei 257, J. E. Schirber and C. J. M. Northrup, Concentration de- pendence of the superconducting transition temperature in pdhx and pddx, Phys. Rev. B 10, 3818 (1974). J. E. Schirber, J. M. Mintz, and W. Wall, Superconduc- tivity of palladium tritide, Solid State Communications C. B. Satterthwaite and I. L. Toepke, Superconductivity of hydrides and deuterides of thorium, Phys. Rev. Lett. H. Syed, T. Gould, C. Webb, and E. Gray, Superconduc- tivity in palladium hydride and deuteride at 52-61 kelvin, arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.01774 (2016). T. Graham, On the relation of hydrogen to palladium, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London , 212 (1869). G. Alefeld and J. V ̈olkl, Hydrogen in metals i-basic prop- erties, Berlin and New York 28 (1978). Y. Fukai, The metal-hydrogen system: basic bulk proper- ties, Vol. 21 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2006). F. A. Lewis, The palladium/hydrogen system, (1967). I. Errea, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, First-principles the- ory of anharmonicity and the inverse isotope effect in superconducting palladium-hydride compounds, Physical review letters 111, 177002 (2013). J. Worsham, M. Wilkinson, and C. Shull, Neutron- diffraction observations on the palladium-hydrogen and palladium-deuterium systems, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 3, 303 (1957). J. M. Rowe, J. J. Rush, H. G. Smith, M. Mostoller, and H. E. Flotow, Lattice dynamics of a single crystal of pdd0.63, Phys. Rev. Lett. 33, 1297 (1974). J. M. Rowe, J. J. Rush, J. E. Schirber, and J. M. Mintz, Isotope effects in the pdh system: Lattice dynamics of pdt0.7, Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 2955 (1986). A. Kolesnikov, I. Natkaniec, V. Antonov, I. Belash, V. Fe- dotov, J. Krawczyk, J. Mayer, and E. Ponyatovsky, Neu- tron spectroscopy of mnh0.86, nih1.05, pdh0.99 and har- monic behaviour of their optical phonons, Physica B: Condensed Matter 174, 257 (1991). R. Sherman, H. K. Birnbaum, J. A. Holy, and M. V. Klein, Raman studies of hydrogen vibrational modes in palladium, Physics Letters A 62, 353 (1977). D. K. Ross, V. E. Antonov, E. L. Bokhenkov, A. I. Kolesnikov, E. G. Ponyatovsky, and J. Tomkinson, Strong anisotropy in the inelastic neutron scattering from pdh at high energy transfer, Phys. Rev. B 58, 2591 M. Chowdhury and D. Ross, A neutron scattering study of the vibrational modes of hydrogen in the ˆI2-phases of pd-h, pd-10ag-h and pd-20ag-h, Solid State Communica- tions 13, 229 (1973). M. Pitt and E. M. Gray, Tetrahedral occupancy in the pd-d system observed by in situ neutron powder diffrac- tion, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 64, 344 (2003). K. G. McLennan, E. M. Gray, and J. F. Dobson, Deu- terium occupation of tetrahedral sites in palladium, Phys. Rev. B 78, 014104 (2008). C. Els ̈asser, K. Ho, C. Chan, and M. F ̈ahnle, Vibrational states for hydrogen in palladium, Physical Review B 44, R. Caputo and A. Alavi, Where do the h atoms reside in pdh x systems?, Molecular Physics 101, 1781 (2003). I. Errea, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Anharmonic free energies and phonon dispersions from the stochastic self- consistent harmonic approximation: Application to plat- inum and palladium hydrides, Phys. Rev. B 89, 064302 R. Bianco, I. Errea, L. Paulatto, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Second-order structural phase transitions, free energy curvature, and temperature-dependent anhar- monic phonons in the self-consistent harmonic approxi- mation: Theory and stochastic implementation, Physical Review B 96, 014111 (2017). L. Monacelli, I. Errea, M. Calandra, and F. Mauri, Pres- sure and stress tensor of complex anharmonic crystals within the stochastic self-consistent harmonic approxi- mation, Phys. Rev. B 98, 024106 (2018). L. Monacelli, R. Bianco, M. Cherubini, M. Calandra, I. Errea, and F. Mauri, The stochastic self-consistent har- monic approximation: calculating vibrational properties of materials with full quantum and anharmonic effects, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 33, 363001 (2021). P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ- cioni, I. Dabo, et al., Quantum espresso: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simula- tions of materials, Journal of physics: Condensed matter P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, et al., Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with quantum espresso, Journal 9 of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 465901 (2017). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Physical review let- ters 77, 3865 (1996). A. Dal Corso, Pseudopotentials periodic table: From h to pu, Computational Materials Science 95, 337 (2014). S. Baroni, S. de Gironcoli, A. Dal Corso, and P. Gi- annozzi, Phonons and related crystal properties from density-functional perturbation theory, Rev. Mod. Phys. F. Giustino, Electron-phonon interactions from first prin- ciples, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015003 (2017). I. Errea, F. Belli, L. Monacelli, A. Sanna, T. Koretsune, T. Tadano, R. Bianco, M. Calandra, R. Arita, F. Mauri, and J. A. Flores-Livas, Quantum crystal structure in the 250-kelvin superconducting lanthanum hydride, Nature P. B. Allen and R. Dynes, Transition temperature of strong-coupled superconductors reanalyzed, Physical Re- view B 12, 905 (1975). M. Blanco-Rey, J. I. Juaristi, R. D ́ıez Mui ̃no, H. F. Bus- nengo, G. J. Kroes, and M. Alducin, Electronic friction dominates hydrogen hot-atom relaxation on pd(100), Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 103203 (2014). P. Hou, F. Belli, R. Bianco, and I. Errea, Quan- tum anharmonic enhancement of superconductivity in p63/mmc sch6 at high pressures: A first-principles study, Journal of Applied Physics 130, 175902 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0063968. P. Hou, F. Belli, R. Bianco, and I. Errea, Strong anhar- monic and quantum effects in pm3n alh3 under high pres- sure: A first-principles study, Phys. Rev. B 103, 134305