1 Communication / Letter NMR surface relaxivity in a time-dependent porous system Neil Robinson, Razyq Nasharuddin, Einar O. Fridjonsson and Michael L. Johns* Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Perth WA 6009, Australia *Corresponding Author: Professor Michael L. Johns Chair of Chemical and Process Engineering The University of Western Australia Postal Address: Department of Chemical Engineering The University of Western Australia 35 Stirling Highway (M050) Perth WA 6009 Australia Phone: +61 (08) 6488 5664 Email: michael.johns@uwa.edu.au Fluid Science and Resources Research Group: www.fsr.ecm.uwa.edu.au ORCID: Neil Robinson Einar O. Fridjonsson Michael L. Johns 2 Abstract We demonstrate an unexpected decay-recovery behaviour in the time-dependent 1H NMR relaxation times of water confined within a hydrating porous material. Our observations are rationalised by considering the combined effects of decreasing material pore size and evolving interfacial chemistry, which facilitate a transition between surface-limited and diffusion-limited relaxation regimes. Such behaviour necessitates the realisation of temporally evolving surface relaxivity, highlighting potential caveats in the classical interpretation of NMR relaxation data obtained from complex porous systems. 3 Main Text While functional porous materials underpin a vast array of processes of importance to the energy, environment, chemical and construction sectors, characterisation of key structural and interfacial properties within such systems is severely hampered by their optically opaque nature. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation measurements (also termed nuclear spin relaxation measurements) provide a versatile and non-destructive approach with which to probe the dynamics of spin-bearing fluids within porous materials , and have been applied widely to the study of both equilibrium fluid properties (informing pore size distributions , adsorption phenomena and diffusive exchange processes ) and to obtain time-resolved insight into evolving material structures (such as cements [9–13]). In this letter we expand upon the established interpretation of NMR relaxation data when probing such time-resolved material properties, elucidating the uniquely coupled sensitivity of such measurements to the temporal evolution of both pore structure characteristics and surface chemistry properties simultaneously. For fluid-saturated porous media, expressions for the dependence of observed 1H (proton) longitudinal (T1) and transverse (T2) NMR relaxation behaviour on pore structure and interfacial chemistry are well-known, taking the general form : 1 Ti ≈ 1 Ti,bulk + ( d 2αρi + d2 8αD) −1 , (1) wherein i ∈ {1,2}, and where additional terms may be required to fully account for observed T2 relaxation rates in the presence of magnetic susceptibly contrast across the solid/fluid interface ; such effects are mitigated in this work by performing our measurements at low magnetic field . Here, Ti are the observed (measured) time constants and Ti,bulk represent the time constants for the unrestricted bulk fluid. Terms within parentheses then describe the extent to which pore structure and interfacial chemistry perturb the observed relaxation characteristics: d is the pore diameter, α is a dimensionless shape parameter (taking values of 1, 2 or 3 for planar, slit or cylindrical pores, respectively), and D is the self-diffusion coefficient of the confined fluid. The terms ρi are the (spatially averaged) surface relaxivities of the solid/fluid interface, which may be modelled as ρi = λ Ti,surf ⁄ , where Ti,surf are the relaxation time constants within an adsorbed surface layer of thickness λ. Such terms describe enhanced rates of relaxation which occur at solid/fluid interfaces both due to a reduction in molecular mobility within the adsorbed surface layer and through dipolar proton-electron interactions between adsorbate-bound 1H and paramagnetic species on the pore surface . Established limiting cases for such relaxation dynamics exist. In the limit D d ⁄ ≪ ρi for instance, surface relaxation rates are significantly more rapid than the rates of diffusive transport across the pores, with Equation (1) reducing to: 4 1 Ti ≈ 1 Ti,bulk + 8αD d2 . (2) Conversely, in the limit D d ⁄ ≫ ρi, diffusion across the pore is sufficiently more rapid than the rates of enhanced surface relaxation at the pore surface, with Equation (1) reducing to: 1 Ti ≈ 1 Ti,bulk + 2αρi d . (3) Such limits are referred to according to the overall rate controlling process; Equation (2) therefore describes diffusion-limited relaxation, while Equation (3) describes surface-limited relaxation. Here, we discuss data which for the first time permits clear identification of a temporal transition between these limiting regimes within an evolving three-dimensional porous micro-structure. water within the hydrating engineering material cemented paste backfill (CPB) [20–22]. This porous material comprised a mixture of spherical fly ash particles, minerals tailings, Ordinary Portland cement and water (see Supplementary Information for extended details of materials preparation), with the solids containing 7.9 wt%, 3.2 wt%, and 2.6 wt% Fe2O3, respectively, as measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), wherein paramagnetic Fe3+ ions provide the dominant source of relaxation sinks for adsorbed water at the pore surface. NMR measurements were performed under ambient conditions using inversion recovery and CPMG (Carr-Purcell Meiboom-Gill) NMR pulse sequences , respectively, with the resulting data inverted to produce probability density distributions of observed T1 and T2 times via Tikhonov regularisation [26–28] (see Supplementary Information for extended NMR methods, including Refs. [29–33]). Acquired T1 distributions (Figure 1a) show a large primary peak, typical of systems in which sufficiently slow T1 relaxation characteristics allow extensive diffusive mixing between water confined within different pore sizes . Acquired T2 distributions (Figure 2a), which are naturally more sensitive to local pore geometry than T1 due to shorter relaxation times, reveal multiple relaxation environments, indicative of water confined within a hierarchically porous cement structure. Such distributions are consistent with established models of cement hydration , with the assignment of these relaxation peaks to specific hydrating pore structures detailed elsewhere . 5 Relaxation data was acquired over the first 28 days of material hydration. Colour bars define the probability density of each relaxation distribution. In this letter we consider only the modal relaxation times from each inverted distribution, termed 〈T1〉 and 〈T2〉, respectively, which are dominated by the most populous pore structures within the hydrating material under study (capillary pores in traditional cement chemistry notation ). In recent work investigating the hydration behaviour of a similar material in the absence of fly ash particles, a clear mono-exponential relationship was observed between these modal time constants and hydration time th, which defines the experimental period across which the material is allowed to evolve. This relationship took the form 〈Ti〉sl = ai exp(−bith) + ci , where bi are the observed material hydration rates, ai provides a scaling factor, and ci are offset parameters necessary to account for non-zero pore sizes at long th; the subscript ‘sl’ indicates that surface-limited relaxation is assumed within this system . Fitting 〈Ti〉sl against th then enables the extraction and comparison of material hydration rates bi, facilitating quantitative contrast between different material formulations, preparation procedures, and hydration conditions. Rather than the expected mono-exponential decay behaviour, however, a clear decay-recovery process (subscript ‘dr’) is observed for each data set which may be modelled as: 〈Ti〉dr = ai ′ exp(−bi ′th) − ai exp(−bith) + ci. (4) We rationalise this bi-exponential behaviour through consideration of a transition between the diffusion- and surface-limited relaxation processes described in Equations (2) and (3). In our chosen material the use of fly ash introduces a high Fe2O3 content (7.9 wt% as measured by ICP-OES), providing a significantly increased 6 paramagnetic Fe3+ concentration ([Fe3+]) compared to that present in previous relaxation investigations of similar hydrating materials . Surface relaxivity values ρi = λ Ti,surf ⁄ are sensitive to [Fe3+] via the established expressions : 1 T1,surf = β[3J(ωI) + 7(ωS)] (5) 1 T2,surf = β where the spectral density functions J(ωx) = τm ln[1 + ωx2τm 2 (τm 2 ⁄τs2 ) + ωx2τm 2 ⁄ ] (with x ∈ {I, S}) capture the relationship between surface 1H relaxation rates and the dynamics of adsorbed water molecules at the internal pore surfaces of the hydrating material . Here, the correlation times τm and τs are the translational correlation time of water molecules between paramagnetic relaxation sinks, and the surface residence time before desorption, respectively, while the frequencies ωI and ωS are obtained via ωx = γxB0, where γI and γS are the proton and electron gyromagnetic ratios, respectively . Importantly, the prefactor is given by β ∝ σδ−4γI 2γS 2ħ2S(S + 1), where σ is the density of paramagnetic surface species of spin S at the pore surface (and hence assumed directly dependent on [Fe3+] for our system; S = 5 2 ⁄ for Fe3+); δ is the distance of closest approach between adsorbate molecule and surface spins, while ħ is the reduced Plank constant . Godefroy et al. demonstrated a dependence between [Fe3+] and limiting relaxation regime for a series of model porous structures comprising silicon carbide grains , evidencing a clear transition between diffusion-limited and surface-limited relaxation upon material cleaning to reduce [Fe3+]. In the present work we conjecture than the temporal evolution of our hydrating porous material serves to facilitate this transition. Specifically, the dissolution-precipitation reactions responsible for cement hydration processes lead to the deposition of calcium silicate hydrate (C-S-H in cement chemistry notation) adlayers at the material pore surface , which is expected to both decrease the capillary pore size and limit access to the highly paramagnetic fly ash particles upon increasing hydration time. We support this interpretation in Figure 2 via scanning electron microscope (SEM) imaging of a sample of our hydrating material, which clearly demonstrates the time-dependent deposition of C-S-H across fly ash particle surfaces during the hydration period investigated. At short th we therefore interpret our observed relaxation behaviour as dominated by interactions with high [Fe3+] fly ash particles (Figure 2c); following Equation (5) these interactions facilitate large ρi values, causing pore water to undergo diffusion-limited 1H relaxation (subscript ‘dl’) according to Equation (2). A result of the above interpretation is that a square dependence on pore size is expected during pore structure evolution at short th, of the form Ti ∝ d2. Given the established mono-exponential decay relationship between 〈Ti〉sl and th in the absence of fly ash co-binder (of the form 〈Ti〉sl~d~ exp(−bith) ), 7 an initial decay of the form 〈Ti〉dl~d2~exp(−2bith) is then expected from our present data; this rapid decay processes is accounted for by the primed components of our bi-exponential model expression in Equation (4). As a simple visual comparison, blue dotted decay curves within Figures 2a and 2b show a scaled mono- exponential fit to our 〈T1〉 and 〈T2〉 data at th < 10 days (with decay rates constrained to equal those obtained from our full fit to Equation (4) described below), while fitted relaxation data obtained from a comparable hydrating material in the absence of highly paramagnetic fly ash are shown in purple (data obtained from reference ; further details are provided in the Supplementary Information). Enhanced relaxation time decay rates are clearly evident in the presence of fly ash (blue dotted curves), providing support for the expectation of comparably large ρi values, and hence for the interpretation of diffusion-limited relaxation at short th. Note that given these two hydrating materials are likely characterised by different pore structures and surface relaxivities, quantitative comparisons between the relaxation time values exhibited by these two systems are not possible, and we make no attempt to ascribe a physical interpretation to the convergence of these curves at short th, which can only be coincidental. 8 investigated here over 28 days. Error bars indicate ± 1 standard deviation (n = 3), while data points without error bars were acquired only once. Red curves indicate a fit to Equation (4) with bi ′ = 2bi. Blue curves show mono-exponential fits to data at th <10 days, while grey curves represent the deconvoluted recovery components of Equation (4), respectively. Purple curves show fitted mono-exponential decay data obtained from similar hydrating systems in the absence of highly paramagnetic fly ash , demonstrating reduced decay rates relative to our data at short th. Bottom panels illustrate SEM images of fly ash particles; (c) shows fly ash particles in the absence of any cement hydration products (th = 0), while (d) and (e) evidence surface C-S-H adlayer formation following 7 and 14 days of hydration, respectively. 9 Following nucleation at the solid/liquid interface, C-S-H deposits continue to grow across the available pore surfaces according to established mechanisms of cementitious hydration . The evolution of such adlayers is demonstrated for the present system in Figures 2d and 2e, which reveal the difference in adlayer growth following th = 7 days and th = 14 days, respectively. As C-S-H adlayers cover the internal surfaces of the hydrating pore network, dipolar interactions between the high concentration of fly ash-bound Fe3+ and 1H spins associated with confined pore water will be reduced, decreasing the spatially averaged surface relaxivity ρi of the capillary pore structures; such continued adlayer growth is therefore fundamental in initiating the proposed transition between diffusion- and surface-limited relaxation. An associated transition time may be estimated and will be associated with the shortest measured 〈T1〉 and 〈T2〉 times, which in the present work occur at th ≈ 7 days. While the continuous temporal growth and deposition of surface adlayers serves to reduce the material pore sizes over time, this process continues to be convoluted with the above reduction in ρi. Such pore size changes do not lead to a continuous reduction in 〈Ti〉dr as would occur within systems exhibiting classical surface-limited relaxation wherein ρi values are assumed time-independent (dρi dth ⁄ ≈ 0). Rather, we interpret the observed increase in 〈Ti〉dr with increasing th as a direct consequence of the coupling between pore structure evolution and decreasing ρi; this 〈Ti〉 recovery process is deconvoluted in grey within Figures 2a and 2b and is accounted for by the second exponential term of Equation (4). A consequence of the above discussion is that we may now directly interpret bi within Equation (4) as material hydration rates, which are equated with the rate of changing surface relaxivity under surface-limited conditions. Appropriate fitting of our data to this expression with the constraint bi ′ = 2bi was performed (red curves in Figures 2a and 2b), yielding hydration rates b1 = 0.16 ± 0.02 day-1 and b2 = 0.15 ± 0.02 day-1. Remarkably, these values are in excellent agreement with previously observed CPB hydration rates of 0.08 – 0.2 day-1 obtained in the absence of fly ash . This result provides both confidence in the above data interpretation and suggests that the assumption of dρi dth ⁄ ≈ 0 in the absence of fly ash is reasonable. We note for completeness that while b1 ≈ b2 here, such equivalence is not necessarily expected given the differing sensitivities of 〈T1〉 and 〈T2〉 to the fine structure of hierarchical pore networks within hydrating cement-like materials (demonstrated in Figure 1). In summary, this work has demonstrated the measurement of nuclear spin relaxation phenomena within a dynamic and temporally evolving three-dimensional porous structure exhibiting changes to both pore size and pore surface chemistry. Our observations provide clear evidence that the 1H NMR relaxation characteristics of water confined within such systems can exhibit sensitivity to both phenomena simultaneously, and that our measured relaxation data is susceptible to the resulting temporal changes in pore structure surface relaxivity. We anticipate the consideration of such time dependent surface relaxation phenomena will be critical in avoiding the erroneous interpretation of time-resolved relaxation data obtain from complex porous materials, 10 especially when considering systems containing potentially high concentrations of paramagnetic species, or in reactive (catalytic) systems, where e.g. the coking of polar pore surfaces is expected through the formation of reaction by-products. Acknowledgements The authors thank Prof Andy Fourie (The University of Western Australia) for providing materials. R.N. acknowledges support from an Australian Government Research Training Scholarship and N.R. acknowledges support from the Forrest Research Foundation. The authors further acknowledge use of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at The University of Western Australia Centre for Microscopy, Characterisation and Analysis. 11