arXiv:2210.05099v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 Oct 2022 New Gd-based magnetic compound GdPt2B with a chiral crystal structure Yoshiki J. Sato1,2,∗ Hikari Manako1, Yoshiya Homma2, Dexin Li2, Ryuji Okazaki1, and Dai Aoki2 1Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan 2Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Oarai, Ibaraki 311-1313, Japan (Dated: October 12, 2022) Herein, we report the discovery of a novel Gd-based magnetic compound GdPt2B with a chiral crystal structure. X-ray diffraction and chemical composition analyses reveal a CePt2B-type crys- tal structure (space group: P6422) for GdPt2B. Moreover, we successfully grew single crystals of GdPt2B using the Czochralski method. Magnetization measurements and the Curie–Weiss analysis demonstrate that the ferromagnetic interaction is dominant in GdPt2B. A clear transition is ob- served in the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity, magnetic susceptibility, and specific heat at TO = 87 K. The magnetic phase diagram of GdPt2B, which consists of a field-polarized fer- romagnetic region and a magnetically ordered region, resembles those of known chiral helimagnets. Furthermore, magnetic susceptibility measurements reveal a possible spin reorientation within the magnetically ordered phase in magnetic fields perpendicular to the screw axis. The results demon- strate that GdPt2B is a suitable platform for investigating the competing effects of ferromagnetic and antisymmetric exchange interactions in rare-earth-based chiral compounds. I. INTRODUCTION Novel spin textures in inorganic chiral materials, such as magnetic skyrmion and chiral soliton lattice [3–5], have received considerable attention because of their applicability to novel electronic devices. Gener- ally, these characteristic spin textures are closely related to the symmetry of the crystal structure. In noncen- trosymmetric crystal structures, an antisymmetric ex- change interaction–the Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya (DM) in- teraction –affects the magnetic ground state. More- over, competition between the exchange and DM inter- actions occasionally induces characteristic spin textures in chiral crystals. In this paper, we report the discovery of a novel Gd- based compound GdPt2B with a chiral crystal structure. For the 4f 7 configuration of trivalent Gd ion with a half- filled 4f shell, Hund’s rule yields S = 7/2 and L = 0. The quenched orbital momentum results in relatively weak spin-orbit coupling in trivalent Gd (and divalent Eu) compounds and may lead to interesting spin textures, as observed in 3d magnets. For instance, the anoma- lous Hall effect induced by topological spin textures has been reported in Gd/Eu-based frustrated magnets [8–10] and Eu-based chiral helimagnets . However, Gd- based intermetallic compounds with chiral crystal struc- tures are rarely reported. Therefore, GdPt2B can provide a useful platform for exploring interesting spin textures induced by the antisymmetric exchange interaction. As discussed in Section III, X-ray diffraction revealed that GdPt2B crystallizes in a CePt2B-type hexagonal structure [space group: P6222 or P6422, see Figs. 1(a) ∗ yoshiki_sato@rs.tus.ac.jp and 1(b)]. To date, a series of RPt2B compounds with the CePt2B-type structure has been reported for Y , La , Ce , Pr , Nd , Tm , Yb , and Lu . The RPt2B compounds have the same point group D6 as the typical monoaxial chiral helimagnets CsCuCl3 and Cr1/3NbS2 . As shown in Fig. 1(a), Gd ions form a helical arrangement along the axis, which can be regarded as a screw axis. The Gd–Pt and boron layers are stacked alternately along the axis, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Previously, we suc- ceeded in growing single crystals of NdPt2B using the Czochralski method . Therefore, in addition to the synthesis of the polycrystal, we grew single crystals of GdPt2B using the Czochralski method. Additionally, this study investigates the electrical transport, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties of GdPt2B single crystals. GdPt2B exhibits a phase tran- sition at TO = 87 K. The temperature dependence of magnetization indicates that the magnetic transition is neither a simple ferromagnetic nor an antiferromag- netic transition, whereas the Curie–Weiss analysis sug- gests that the ferromagnetic interaction is dominant in GdPt2B. A magnetic phase diagram is constructed from magnetic and thermodynamic measurements, and the magnetic ordering state of GdPt2B is examined. II. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS GdPt2B polycrystals were synthesized via arc-melting using a tetra arc furnace under an argon atmosphere (99.9999 % purity). The starting materials include stoi- chiometric amounts of Gd (99.9 % purity), Pt (99.95 % purity), and B (99.9 % purity). The ingot was flipped and remelted five times to ensure homogeneity. A part 2 of crystal structures were constructed using the VESTA. (c) Single crystals of GdPt2B grown using the Czochralski method. (d) Laue photograph of a GdPt2B single crystal. (e) Plot of observed squared structure factors ⟨Fobs⟩2 of GdPt2B single crystal as a function of calculated squared structure factors ⟨Fcalc⟩2 on a logarithmic scale. (f) Plot of variations of lattice parameters and volume of RPt2B compounds. (g) X-ray diffraction powder pattern of GdPt2B single crystals. Rwp is the weighted profile R factor. of the synthesized polycrystals was used in single crystal growth. Single crystals of GdPt2B were grown using the Czochralski method. The single crystal was pulled from the melting ingot using a tungsten seed at a speed of 12 mm h−1. The Czochralski process was performed in a tetra arc furnace under an argon atmosphere (99.9999 % purity). The obtained single crystals are shown in Fig. 1(c). Single crystals of GdPt2B are stable in air. The single crystals were oriented using a Laue camera (Photonic Science Laue X-ray CCD camera) and cut us- ing a spark cutter for subsequent measurements. The Laue photograph of the GdPt2B single crystal is shown in Fig. 1(d). The crystal structure of GdPt2B was determined us- ing a single-crystal X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Xta- LAB mini II) with Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 ̊A). The measured GdPt2B single crystals were mounted on a plastic fiber. The data were collected at 296 K us- ing a ω − 2θ scan. After the single-crystal x-ray diffrac- tion (XRD), the homogeneity and single-phase nature of the grown single crystal were confirmed via powder XRD (Rigaku RINT2500V) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 ̊A). The chemical composition and homogeneity of the obtained single crystals were investigated through the in- ductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Two samples (labeled as sample 1 and sam- ple 2) were obtained from different parts of the grown single crystal and analyzed. The electrical resistivity was measured using a four- probe DC method in a Gifford–McMahon refrigerator. Magnetization measurements were performed using a commercial SQUID magnetometer (QD MPMS) at tem- peratures down to 2 K and in magnetic fields up to 2 T. The specific heat was measured using a relaxation method in magnetic fields using a quantum design Dy- naCool physical properties measurement system (QD PPMS). III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION First, we discuss the crystal structure analysis of GdPt2B using powder and single-crystal XRD. The crys- tal structure of GdPt2B was determined through single- crystal XRD. The crystal structure was solved using SHELXT and refined using SHELXL software . The crystal data, structural refinement, and atomic pa- rameters of the GdPt2B single crystals are summarized in Tables I and II. GdPt2B crystallizes in the CePt2B-type crystal struc- ture (hexagonal P6422 space group), which was deter- mined using a direct method. To determine the unit cell, 831 reflections were acquired. The 2θ range for de- termining the unit cell ranged from 8.7◦ to 66.3◦. An empirical absorption correction and correction for sec- ondary extinction were applied. The data were cor- 3 obtained from single-crystal XRD. Empirical formula GdPt2B Formula weight Crystal system hexagonal Space group a ( ̊A) c ( ̊A) Volume ( ̊A3) Formula units per cell (Z) 3 Number of measured reflections (total) 1766 Number of measured reflections (unique) 257 Cut off angle (2θmax) R1 (I > 2.00σ(I)) R (All reflections) wR2 (All reflections) Goodness of fit Flack parameter Max Shift/Error in Final Cycle GdPt2B. GdPt2B Atom Site x y z Beq Gd 3c 1/2 0 0 Pt 6i 0 B 3d 1/2 0 1/2 0.7(4) rected for the Lorentz and polarization effects. The crys- tal structure was successfully refined using anisotropic displacement parameters, and the R-factors were suffi- ciently small: R1 = 2.4% for I > 2.00s(I) and wR2 = 5.26%. The equivalent isotropic atomic displacement pa- rameter is defined as Beq = 8 3π2[U11(aa∗)2 + U22(bb∗)2 + 2U23(bb∗cc∗) cos a], where Uij is summarized in Table III. a, b, and c are the real-space cell lengths. a∗, b∗, and c∗ denote the reciprocal-space cell lengths. The Flack pa- rameter is used to determine the absolute structure of the noncentrosymmetric crystal structure. The obtained Flack parameter was nearly zero, indicating that the present absolute structure (P6422) is correct. Figure 1(e) shows the observed squared structure factors ⟨Fobs⟩2 as a function of calculated structure factors ⟨Fcalc⟩2 using space group P6422. eters (a and c) and volume V of the RPt2B (R = La, Ce, Pr, Nd, and Gd) compounds. The lattice parame- ters of LaPt2B have been reported in Ref. , and other data were obtained through single-crystal XRD. The lat- tice parameter (a) and the volume (V ) monotonically decrease. Comparing GdPt2B with LaPt2B, a and V decreased by 3.2% and 6%, respectively. The decrease in the unit cell volume is known as lanthanoid contrac- tion. In contrast to the cases of a and V , the lattice parameter c did not change significantly, and the degree of the change was less than 0.1%. Anisotropic changes in the lattice parameters of RPt2B were unusual. The anisotropic change in the lattice parameters of RPt2B has also been reported by powder XRD measurements of polycrystalline samples . In another example of rare-earth platinum boride RPt3B, the changes in a and c were isotropic in the tetragonal structure . The anisotropic change in the lattice parameters of RPt2B indicates a characteristic metallic bonding in this system. The powder XRD patterns of crushed single crystals of GdPt2B are shown in Fig. 1(g). The observed peaks are well indexed to the CePt2B-type structure, which is consistent with the crystal structure determined through the single-crystal XRD. Rietveld analysis was performed using the RIETAN-FP. The weighted profile and the unweighted profile R-factors were obtained to be Rwp = 8.39% and Rp = 6.21%, respectively. The lattice param- eters obtained by the Rietveld analysis were consistent with those determined by the single-crystal XRD. Note that we also performed powder XRD measurements on the as-cast polycrystalline samples and obtained a single- phase XRD pattern. This indicates that GdPt2B is a congruently melting compound. In addition to powder and single-crystal XRD, we ex- amined the chemical composition of the obtained single crystal through ICP-AES. The chemical compositions of sample1 and sample 2 are listed in Table IV. The chem- ical composition ratio was approximately Gd:Pt:B = 1:2:1, and no sample dependence of the chemical compo- sition was observed. The results of the chemical compo- sition analysis demonstrated the stoichiometric composi- tion and the uniformity of the composition of GdPt2B single crystals, even considering the errors associated with the spectroscopy and the preparation of sample so- lutions. As we have shown, we succeeded in obtaining single- crystalline samples of GdPt2B. Then, the basic phys- ical properties of the GdPt2B single crystals are pre- sented. Figure 2(a) shows the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ of GdPt2B for J || [11 ̄20] (in- plane). In this study, we selected four-axis notation to indicate the crystallographic axes, as shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a). GdPt2B exhibited metallic behavior similar to that of other RPt2B systems. The ratio of the electri- cal resistivity at 300 K to that at the lowest temperature, namely the residual resistivity ratio, is approximately 3.5. ρ(T ) shows a clear anomaly at approximately TO = 87 K. dρ/dT also shows a clear jump at TO. The magnetism in metallic rare-earth compounds is expected to be based on the Ruderman–Kittel–Kasuya– Yosida (RKKY) interaction, and the ordering tempera- ture could be proportional to the de Gennes factor (g − 1)2J(J + 1), where g is the Landé g-factor. Khan et al. examined the relationship between the transition tem- perature of RPt2B (R: Ce, Nd, Tm, Yb) and the de Gennes factor . Here, we added the GdPt2B data to the plot of the ordering temperatures of RPt2B as a func- 4 GdPt2B Atom U11 U22 U33 U12 U13 U23 Gd 0 0 Pt B 0 0 analysis. GdPt2B single crystal Sample No. (meas.) Gd (at. %) Pt (at. %) B (at. %) Sample1 (1st) 25.4 49.4 25.2 Sample1 (2nd) 25.5 49.5 25.0 Sample2 (1st) 25.4 49.4 25.2 Sample2 (2nd) 25.5 49.4 25.1 ity ρ(T ) (red, left axis) and its temperature derivative dρ/dT (blue, right axis) of GdPt2B for the electrical current J || [11 ̄20]. (b) Plot of the ordering temperatures of RPt2B as a function of de Gennes factor (g − 1)2J(J + 1). tion of the de Gennes factor, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The transition temperature of GdPt2B deviates from the re- ported scaling behavior. A similar deviation from the de Gennes scaling has been reported for RAuIn and RNiAl compounds, and the effect of the d-electrons of transi- tion metal elements on the valence band spectra has also been reported in these systems . The energy band structure may affect the magnetism of the RPt2B series. Furthermore, the de Gennes scaling is often affected by the crystalline electric field (CEF). As observed in RPtGe compounds , the CEF effect may affect the transition temperatures of RPt2B compounds other than GdPt2B. To investigate the magnetic properties and transition at TO of GdPt2B, we measured the temperature depen- dence of the magnetization for H || [10 ̄10] (in-plane) and ture dependence of magnetization M for H || [10 ̄10] (in- plane). As shown in the inset of Fig. 3(a), M(T ) exhibits a rapid increase below approximately 100 K, followed by a peak structure at TO in lower magnetic fields. This be- havior indicates that the ground state of GdPt2B is close to a ferromagnetic state but not a simple ferromagnetic ground state. A small bifurcation was observed between the field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) curves below TO. Furthermore, M(T ) exhibits a broad maxi- mum at Tmax ∼ 50 K in both the FC and ZFC curves. The peak at TO and the broad maximum at Tmax shift to lower temperatures with increasing field. In contrast to the temperature dependence of magne- exhibits the nearly ferromagnetic behavior. The peak structure was not observed in the magnetization of H || . As shown in the inset of Fig. 3(b), M(T ) in- creases abruptly below TO. Broad maximum of magne- tization was absent for H || in the ordered phase. The bifurcation between the FC and ZFC curves was also observed in out-of-plane M(T ) below TO, although the difference was smaller compared to that of the Gd-based ferromagnet. The sharp increase in the magnetiza- tion at TO becomes broad in higher magnetic fields, sim- ilar to the case with ferromagnets, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The characteristic anisotropic behavior of M(T ) indi- cates that the magnetic ground state of GdPt2B is nei- ther simple ferromagnetic nor antiferromagnetic. verse susceptibility 1/χ ≡ H/M for H || [10 ̄10] and || . The anisotropy in the magnetic susceptibility is quite small in the paramagnetic region of GdPt2B be- cause of the configuration of the Gd3+ ion (S = 7/2, 5 (a) Temperature dependence of the magnetization M for H || [10 ̄10] (in-plane) measured at various magnetic fields. The inset shows an enlarged view of M(T ) below the transition temperature TO in the low magnetic field of 0.005 T. Both field-cooled (FC) and zero-field-cooled (ZFC) data are shown. (b) Temperature dependence of M for H || (out-of-plane) measured at 0.01, 0.05, and 0.5 T. The inset shows FC and ZFC data of M(T ) measured at 0.01 T. L = 0). The small magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the paramagnetic state has been reported for other S = 7/2 systems. GdPt2B exhibits the Curie–Weiss behavior above 200 K. As shown in Fig. 4, the mag- netic susceptibility data are fitted to the expression of χ = C/(T − θ), where C and θ are the Curie constant and the Weiss temperature, respectively. We estimate the effective moment from the Curie–Weiss analysis as μeff = 7.87 μB per Gd for H || [10 ̄10] and μeff = 7.97 μB per Gd for || . The obtained μeff is in reasonable agreement with the theoretical value of 7.94 μB for free- ion Gd3+ . We obtained the Weiss temperature θ = 98.8 K for both principal axes, indicating that the inter- action between the Gd-ions is ferromagnetic in GdPt2B. The solid lines represent a least-squared fit obtained with the Curie-Weiss law above 200 K. As mentioned previously, M(T ) and 1/χ(T ) data demonstrate that the ferromagnetic interaction is domi- nant in GdPt2B. Therefore, we measured the isothermal M(H) curves to investigate the hysteresis loop behav- ior, as shown in Figs. 5(a)–(c). The measurement was curves measured at several constant temperatures for H || [10 ̄10]. (c) M(H) curves measured at several constant tem- peratures for H || . performed by sweeping the magnetic field from −2 T to 6 2 T after zero-field cooling of the sample. The arrows in Fig 5(a) indicate the measurement sequences. Despite the dominant ferromagnetic interaction, no signs of spon- taneous magnetization were observed. The M(H) curves change linearly with the sweeping magnetic field in the lower field region, regardless of the field direction. In con- trast to the small magnetic anisotropy in the paramag- netic state, significant magnetic anisotropy was observed at temperatures below TO. The saturated magnetic mo- ment was approximately 7 μB/Gd for both [10 ̄10] and axes. The magnetization saturates at approxi- mately 0.5 T for H || , whereas M(H) reaches 7 μB/Gd at 2 T for H || [10 ̄10]. As shown in Fig. 5 (b), the isothermal M(H) curve measured at 50 K exceeded the M(H) curve measured at the lowest temperature in the magnetic field range below 0.7 T for H || [10 ̄10]. This is consistent with the temperature-dependent mea- surements. Meanwhile, the isothermal magnetization curves measured at various constant temperatures ex- hibit a nearly ferromagnetic behavior for H || , as shown in Fig. 5 (c). Hysteresis loop behavior in M(H) was absent for both principal crystallographic axes over the entire temperature range below the ordering temper- ature. To clearly detect the phase transitions, we investi- gated the thermodynamic properties. Figure 6(a) shows the temperature dependence of the specific heat C of GdPt2B. C(T ) exhibits a clear jump at TO = 87 K. Applying the magnetic field along the [10 ̄10] axis, the anomaly shifts to lower temperatures in magnetic fields of up to 0.2 T, as shown in Figs. 6(b) and 6(c). The field dependence of the anomaly in C(T ) at TO is consis- tent with that of the peak structure in M(T ). In higher magnetic fields above 0.25 T, a broad maximum corre- sponding to the crossover between the paramagnetic and field-polarized ferromagnetic states was observed at Tco. Notably, the anomaly at TO coexists with the broad max- imum at Tco in a magnetic field of 0.2 T, as shown in Fig. 6(c). This behavior also indicates that the magnet- ically ordered phase is neither simple ferromagnetic nor antiferromagnetic phases. C(T ) shows no apparent anomaly at Tmax ∼ 50 K, where the magnetic susceptibility exhibits a broad max- imum for H || [10 ̄10]. Note that the electrical resistivity also exhibited no clear anomalies at Tmax. The absence of an anomaly in the specific heat indicates that the broad maximum in the magnetic susceptibility at Tmax is not due to a phase transition. The broad maximum at Tmax suggests the occurrence of spin reorientation in the mag- netically ordered phase. A similar anomaly in M(T ) de- rived from spin reorientation has been reported in sev- eral systems, such as Tb5Si2Ge2 and YBaCo4O8 . Further studies using microscopic probes are required to confirm the origin of the broad anomaly in M(T ). We constructed magnetic field–temperature (H–T ) phase diagrams from the magnetization and thermody- namic measurements of H || [10 ̄10] and || , as shown of GdPt2B. (b) C(T ) measured in zero field and constant magnetic fields for H || [10 ̄10]. (c) C(T ) measured at 0.15, 0.2, 0.25, and 0.3 T. The specific heat data are shifted vertically for clarity. TO and Tco are indicated by arrows. (d) C(T ) measured at 0, 0.05, and 0.1 T for H || in Figs. 7(a) and (b). The H–T phase diagram com- prises field-polarized ferromagnetic and magnetically or- dered regions below TO under a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the screw axis (i.e., H || in-plane). The transition temperature TO determined by magnetization measurements and that determined by specific heat mea- surements were consistent with each other. TO shifts to lower temperatures under higher external magnetic fields. However, the crossover between the paramagnetic and field-polarized ferromagnetic states at Tco moves to higher temperatures with increasing magnetic fields. The in-plane H–T phase diagram of GdPt2B is reminiscent of known chiral helimagnets such as Cr1/3NbS2 , B20-type helimagnets , and rare-earth based chiral helimagnet YbNi3Al9 . In contrast to the case of H || [10 ̄10] (H ⊥ screw axis), the H–T phase diagram for H || (H || screw axis) is simple and resembles a ferromagnetic H–T phase di- agram. Fig. 6(d) shows the temperature dependence of the specific heat of GdPt2B for H || . Similar to the behavior observed in the magnetization, the phase transition at TO becomes crossover at magnetic fields as small as 0.1 T. In our magnetization and specific heat measurements, it was difficult to define the magnetically ordered region for H || . Electrical transport mea- 7 dashed lines in the phase diagrams are guides to the eyes. surements in magnetic fields may be suitable for detect- ing phase boundaries, as reported for the monoaxial chi- ral helimagnet Cr1/3NbS2 . Herein, we discuss the magnetically ordered state of GdPt2B below TO. The temperature dependence of the magnetization exhibits a peak only for a magnetic field perpendicular to the screw axis. The peak structure in M(T ) and its anisotropy of GdPt2B are similar to the magnetic behavior in the monoaxial chiral helimag- net Cr1/3NbS2 and molecule-based chiral magnet of the peak structure in M(T ) of the Dzyaloshinskii– Moriya helimagnets is attributed to the commensurate- incommensurate (C-IC) transition . Kishine et al. provided a theoretical interpretation of the peak forma- tion in M(T ) by averaging the projection of the spin onto the field direction over the period of the chiral soliton lat- tice . The peak structure of M(T ) appears to occur due to the C-IC phase transition in GdPt2B. Note that no metamagnetic transition-like anomaly, which is often observed in helical magnets, was observed in the magnetization curve of GdPt2B. In monoaxial chi- ral helimagnets, a steep increase in the magnetization associated with the formation of the chiral soliton lat- tice was observed under magnetic fields perpendicular to the screw axis . The magnetization process of GdPt2B and its anisotropy are rather similar to those pn](S)-pnH0.6, which does not show a steep upturn in magnetization under magnetic fields perpendicular to the screw axis . The strength ratio between the DM and exchange interactions, namely D/J, plays a crucial role in forming the chiral soliton lattice under external fields. The D/J ratio varies with the system, and whether clear formation of the chiral soliton lattice is observed could depend on the material. The absence of anomalies in the M(H) curves of GdPt2B could be related to the ratio of the strength of the exchange interaction to the strength of the DM interaction. Notably, the formation of chi- ral soliton lattice differs depending on the strength of the exchange interaction in the doped-YbNi3Al9 system . Moreover, the spin reorientation for H || [10 ̄10] con- tributes to the magnetization process at temperatures be- low Tmax ∼ 50 K. Further experiments, such as neutron scattering and/or resonant X-ray diffraction, are needed to reveal the detailed properties of the magnetically or- dered state in GdPt2B. IV. CONCLUSIONS This paper reported the discovery of a new Gd-based magnetic compound GdPt2B with the CePt2B-type chi- ral crystal structure (space group: P6422, point group: D5 6). The crystal structure and single-phase nature were analyzed by combining X-ray diffraction and chemical composition analysis. Additionally, we reported the growth of single crystals of GdPt2B using the Czochral- ski method. The physical properties of GdPt2B single crystals were examined by means of electrical resistivity, magnetization, and specific heat measurements. A clear phase transition was observed in ρ(T ), M(T ), and C(T ) at TO = 87 K. Interestingly, M(T ) exhibited the charac- teristic peak structure at TO for H ⊥ screw axis, whereas the peak structure was absent for H || screw axis. We constructed H–T phase diagrams from the magnetization and thermodynamic measurements. Based on the mag- netization behavior and H–T phase diagrams, GdPt2B could be a chiral helimagnet. Our results demonstrate that GdPt2B is a suitable platform for investigating the competing effects of ferromagnetic and antisymmetric ex- change interactions in Gd-based chiral compounds. 8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank Y. Haga, S. Ohara, F. Honda, Y. Shimizu, A. Nakamura for discussions. We also thank F. Sakamoto (Analytical Research Core for Advanced Materials, Institute for materials Research, Tohoku Uni- versity) for ICP-AES analysis. We acknowledge all the support from the International Research Center for Nu- clear Materials Science at Oarai (IMR, Tohoku Univer- sity). This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (JP22K20360, JP19H00646, JP20K20889), Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Research Fellow (JP19J20539), GIMRT Pro- gram (202205-IRKAC-0049), and DIARE research grant. S. Mühlbauer, B. Binz, F. Jonietz, C. Pfleiderer, A. Rosch, A. Neubauer, R. Georgii, and P. Böni, Sci- ence 323, 915 (2009). X. Z. Yu, Y. Onose, N. Kanazawa, J. H. Park, J. H. Han, Y. Matsui, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Tokura, Nature 465, 901 Y. Togawa, T. Koyama, K. Takayanagi, S. Mori, Y. Kousaka, J. Akimitsu, S. Nishihara, K. Inoue, A. S. Ovchinnikov, and J. Kishine, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, S. Ohara, S. Fukuta, K. Ohta, H. Kono, T. Yamashita, Y. Matsumoto, and J. Yamaura, JPS. Conf. Proc. 3, T. Matsumura, Y. Kita, K. Kubo, Y. Yoshikawa, S. Michimura, T. Inami, Y. Kousaka, K. Inoue, and S. Ohara, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 86, 124702 (2017). I. Dzyaloshinsky, J. Phys. Chem. Solids 4, 241 (1958). T. Moriya, Phys. Rev. 120, 91 (1960). T. Kurumaji, T. Nakajima, M. Hirschberger, A. Kikkawa, Y. Yamasaki, H. Sagayama, H. Nakao, Y. Taguchi, T. Arima, and Y. Tokura, Science 365, 914 M. Hirschberger, T. Nakajima, S. Gao, L. Peng, A. Kikkawa, T. Kurumaji, M. Kriener, Y. Yamasaki, H. Sagayama, H. Nakao, K. Ohishi, K. Kakurai, Y. Taguchi, X. Yu, T. Arima, and Y. Tokura, Nat. Com- mun. 10, 5831 (2019). T. Shang, Y. Xu, D. J. Gawryluk, J. Z. Ma, T. Shi- roka, M. Shi, and E. Pomjakushina, Phys. Rev. B 103, M. Kakihana, D. Aoki, A. Nakamura, F. Honda, M. Nakashima, Y. Amako, S. Nakamura, T. Sakakibara, M. Hedo, T. Nakama, and Y. ̄Onuki, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. Y. ̄Onuki, M. Kakihana, W. Iha, K. Nakaima, D. Aoki, A. Nakamura, F. Honda, M. Nakashima, Y. Amako, J. Gouchi, Y. Uwatoko, S. Nakamura, T. Sakakibara, T. Takeuchi, Y. Haga, H. Ikeda, H. Harima, M. Hedo, and T. Nakama, JPS Conf. Proc. 30, 011008 (2020). M. Dias, O. L. Sologub, L. C. J. Pereira, and A. P. Gonçalves, J. Alloys. Compd. 438, 62 (2007). O. L. Sologub, K. Hiebl, and P. S. Salamakha, Solid State Commun. 127, 379 (2003). O. Sologub, P. Salamakha, H. Noël, M. Potel, M. Almeida, and C. Godart, J. Alloys. Compd. 307, Y. J. Sato, F. Honda, A. Maurya, Y. Shimizu, A. Naka- mura, Y. Homma, D. X. Li, Y. Haga, and D. Aoki, Phys. Rev. Mater. 5, 034411 (2021). R. T. Khan, G. Hilscher, H. Michor, E. Bauer, O. So- logub, P. Rogl, and G. Giester, J. Phys. Conf. Series R. T. Khan, F. Kneidinger, G. Hilscher, A. Sidorenko, O. Sologub, H. Michor, E. Bauer, P. Rogl, and G. Gi- ester, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 27, 146001 (2015). A. F. Wells, J. Chem. Soc. 0, 1662 (1947). K. Adachi, N. Achiwa, and M. Mekata, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 49, 545 (1980). T. Moriya and T. Miyadai, Solid. State. Commun. 82, T. Miyadai, K. Kikuchi, H. Kondo, S. Sakka, M. Arai, and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 52, 1394 (1983). K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Cryst. 44, 1272 (2011). G. M. Sheldrick, Acta Cryst. A71, 3 (2015). G. M. Sheldrick, Acta Cryst. C71, 3 (2015). O. L. Sologub, K. Hiebl, P. S. Salamkha, and H. Ipser, J. Alloys and Compd. 360, 54 (2003). F. Izumi and K. Momma, Solid. State. Phenom. 130, 15 L. Gondek, Żukrowski, M. Bałanda, D. kaczorowski, and A. Szytuła, Mater. Sci. -Pol. 72, 815 (2008). B. Penc, S. Baran, M. Hofmann, J. Leciefewicz, M. Ślaski, and A. Szytuła, J. Alloys. Compd. 299, 79 S. Stein, L. Heletta, and R. Pöttgen, Z. Naturforsch. B S. Nakamura, N. Kabeya, M. Kobayashi, K. Araki, K. Katoh, and A. Ochiai, Phys. Rev. B 98, 054410 A. Maurya, A. Thamizhavel, S. K. Dhar, and P. Bonville, Sci. Rep. 5, 12021 (2015). J. Jensen and A. R. Mackintosh, Rare Earth Magnetism: Structures and Excitations (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1991) p. 57. J. P. Araújo, A. M. Pereira, M. E. Braga, R. P. Pinto, J. M. Teixeira, F. C. Correia, J. B. Sousa, L. Morellon, P. A. Algarabel, C. Magen, and M. R. Ibarra, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter. 17, 4941 (2005). N. Marcano, P. A. Algarabel, L. F. Barquín, J. P. Araujo, A. M. Pereira, J. H. Belo, C. Magén, L. Morellón, and M. R. Ibarra, Phys. Rev. B 99, 054419 (2019). A. K. Bera, S. M. Yusuf, and S. Banerjee, Solid State Sci. 16, 57 (2013). C. Dhanasekhar, A. K. Das, A. Das, S. K. Mishra, R. Rawat, and A. Venimadhav, Euro Phys. Lett. 127, N. J. Ghimire, M. A. McGuire, D. S. Parker, B. Sipos, S. Tang, J.-Q. Yan, B. C. Sales, and D. Mandrus, Phys. Rev. B 87, 104403 (2013). D. A. Mayoh, J. Bouaziz, A. E. Hall, J. B. Staunton, M. R. Lees, and G. Balakrishnan, Phys. Rev. Research E. Turgut, M. J. Stolt, S. Jin, and G. D. Fuchs, J. Appl. 9 R. Miyazaki, Y. Aoki, R. Higashinaka, H. Sato, T. Ya- mashita, and S. Ohara, Phys. Rev. B 86, 155106 (2012). H. Ninomiya, T. Sato, K. Inoue, and S. Ohara, Physica Y. Togawa, Y. Kousaka, S. Nishihara, K. Inoue, J. Akim- itsu, A. S. Ovchinnikov, and J. Kishine, Phys. Rev. Lett. Y. Togawa, T. Koyama, Y. Nishimori, Y. Matsumoto, S. McVitie, D. McGrouther, R. L. Stamps, Y. Kousaka, J. Akimitsu, S. Nishihara, K. Inoue, I. G. Bostrem, V. E. Sinitsyn, A. S. Ovchinnikov, and J. Kishine, Phys. Rev. J. Kishine, K. Inoue, and Y. Yoshida, Prog. Theor. Phys. Suppl. 159, 82 (2005). A. Zheludev, S. Maslov, G. Shirane, Y. Sasago, N. Koide, and K. Uchinokura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 4857 (1997). A. Zheludev, S. Maslov, G. Shirane, Y. Sasago, N. Koide, and K. Uchinokura, Phys. Rev. B 57, 2968 (1998).