Mapping the Pathways of Photo-induced Ion Migration in Organic-inorganic Hybrid Halide Perovskites Taeyong Kim,1, 2 Soyeon Park,3 Vasudevan Iyer,4 Qi Jiang,3 Usama Choudhry,1 Gage Eichman,4 Ryan Gnabasik,1 Benjamin Lawrie,4, 5, ∗ Kai Zhu,3, † and Bolin Liao1, ‡ 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA 2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, Republic of Korea 3National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA 4Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37830, USA 5Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37830, USA (Dated: October 11, 2022) 1 arXiv:2210.04426v1 [physics.app-ph] 10 Oct 2022 Abstract Organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) exhibiting exceptional photovoltaic and optoelec- tronic properties are of fundamental and practical interest, owing to their tunability and low manufacturing cost. For practical applications, however, challenges such as material instability and the photocurrent hysteresis occurring in perovskite solar cells under light exposure need to be understood and addressed. While extensive investigations have suggested that ion migration is a plausible origin of these detrimental effects, detailed understanding of the ion migration pathways remains elusive. Here, we report the characterization of photo-induced ion migration in OIHPs using in situ laser illumination inside a scanning electron microscope, coupled with secondary electron imaging, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy and cathodoluminescence with varying pri- mary electron energies. Using methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3), formamidinium lead iodide (FAPbI3) and hybrid formamidinium-methylammonium lead iodide as model systems, we observed photo-induced long-range migration of halide ions over hundreds of micrometers and elucidated the transport pathways of various ions both near the surface and inside the bulk of the OIHPs, in- cluding a surprising finding of the vertical migration of lead ions. Our study provides insights into ion migration processes in OIHPs that can aid OIHP material design and processing in future applications. Keywords: hybrid perovskites, ion migration, electron microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, cathodoluminescence ∗ lawriebj@ornl.gov † kai.zhu@nrel.gov ‡ bliao@ucsb.edu 2 I. INTRODUCTION Rapid progress has been made in the past decade in improving the power conversion effi- ciency of photovoltaic cells based on organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs). Recent reports have described power conversion efficiencies exceeding 25% [1–4]. The remarkable performance has been attributed to OIHPs’ unique optoelectronic properties such as a di- rect band gap and sharp absorption edge near visible wavelengths [5–7], large photocarrier diffusion lengths and high tolerance to defects and grain boundaries , which are key factors for photovoltaic cells [12–14]. Additionally, OIHPs have shown other in- teresting properties, such as their tunability , moderate mobilities of charge carriers and ions , strong polaronic coupling , and a prominent photostriction effect . Coupled with their cost-effective low-temperature solution processability , these unusual optoelectronic properties suggest wide-ranging practical optoelectronic applications of OIHPs beyond solar cells. In addition to investigations of device efficiency optimization, extensive prior studies have focused on understanding and improving the stability of OIHPs , which is a crucial limiting factor for long-term practical applications. It has been well established experi- mentally that many extrinsic factors can lead to degradation in these hybrid perovskite materials , including exposure to moisture and oxygen , thermal decom- position , and light-induced chemical reactions . Corresponding strategies have been developed to counter some of the degradation factors, e.g. OIHP encapsulation to avoid exposure to moisture or oxygen . Many of the instability factors are related to the weak chemical bonds and strongly anharmonic lattice dynamics in OIHPs that also lead to ultralow thermal conductiv- ity and facile ion migration induced by temperature , electric field , or light . Since temperature gradients, electric fields, and light exposure are unavoidable in the normal operation of solar cells, it is recognized that ion migration processes play an essential role in OIHP-based devices . In this light, recent studies have observed ion-migration occurring in OIHPs and its impact on the material morphology , composition and device stability . In addition, these studies have reported that the ion migration might cause the abnormal photocurrent hysteresis effect, which, in turn, affects fill factors and solar cell device performance . Unlike extrinsic factors such as moisture and oxygen, ion 3 migration is intrinsic in OIHPs, likely linked to certain strongly anharmonic lattice vibration modes involving the mobile ions , and, therefore, requires more sophisticated mitigation strategies . On the other hand, ion migration represents a possible mechanism for the large static dielectric constant in OIHPs that can effectively screen charged defects and benefit charge transport. Some studies have also suggested that the redistribution of ions as a result of migration can lead to optimized p-i-n structures or healed charge trapping centers and improve the device performance. Besides, efficient ion migration in OIHPs also implies potential applications of these materials as ionic conductors . These exam- ples highlight the importance of understanding the ion migration processes in OIHPs . Previous works have reported light-induced migration of ions such as the halide anion = Formamidinium) [34, 42–44]. In parallel, prior computational studies have shown that the migration rate is determined by the activation energy and that I− is more likely to migrate owing to its lowest activation energy among other constituent ions (I−: 0.08 - 0.58 eV in Refs. [45–48]; MA+: 0.46 - 0.84 eV in Refs. [45–48]; Pb2+: 0.8 - 2.31 eV in Refs. ). Experimental measurements have corroborated this, with the diffusivity of I− (∼ 10−12 to ∼ 10−9 cm2 s−1 ) far exceeding that of organic cations (MA: ∼ 10−16 to ∼ 10−11 cm2 s−1 ). In most previous experimental studies, the Pb2+ ion was assumed to be immobile up to the available detection limits . Despite the abundant previous literature on photo-induced ion migration in OIHPs, the detailed microscopic migration pathways of various ions remain unclear. In particular, ion migration both parallel to the sample surface (lateral ion migration) and perpendicular to the sample surface (vertical ion migration) can occur given the light intensity variation along the lateral direction and the finite optical absorption depth into the sample. Therefore, experimental tools that are sensitive to the distribution of ions along both the lateral and vertical directions are highly desirable. In this work, we focus on photo-induced ion migration in OIHPs. We incorporated a laser source in situ into a scanning electron microscope (SEM) and combined secondary electron imaging (SEI), energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and cathodoluminescence (CL) with different primary electron (PE) energies to directly map the three-dimensional (3D) ion migration pathways in two archetypal OIHPs, MAPbI3, FAPbI3 and their hybrid. We demonstrated that both lateral and vertical migrations of various ion species driven by 4 light exposure can be mapped in this manner, which further correlate to the optoelectronic properties of OIHPs. This information is critical for designing more stable and efficient devices based on OIHPs. II. RESULTS A. Probing ion distribution within different depths Our experimental setup for the SEI and EDS measurements is hosted at the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB) and is identical to that described in Ref. , and the principle of operation is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1A. An optical beam from a fiber laser (Clark-MXR IMPULSE, photon energy: ∼ 2.4 eV; repetition rate: 5 MHz) was coupled into the SEM sample chamber and focused onto the sample, with a beam diameter of 50 μm. To examine the impact of the photo-induced ion migration, the optical power and the exposure time were varied, ranging from ∼ 2.5 to ∼ 6.7 mW (optical fluence: ∼ 39.8−106.6 μJ cm−2), and from 5 to 180 minutes, respectively. These optical parameters for the SEI and EDS measurements were chosen to minimize the laser-induced heating effect, and we estimated that the highest laser-induced temperature rise in our experiment was within 30 K (see Supporting Information Sec. V). Then, changes in the secondary electron (SE) emission and the elemental composition induced by the optical exposure were mapped in situ with concurrent SEI and EDS mapping. The depth-dependent ion distribution was probed by comparing the response to PEs with different kinetic energies (30 keV and 5 keV) and different penetration depths into the sample. The CL measurements coupled with in situ light-exposure were conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), and the corresponding experimental details are given in Methods. The procedure for sample fabrication is also described in Methods. The structure of the sample stack is illustrated in the inset of Fig. 1D. A high vacuum of 1 × 10−6 torr was maintained inside the SEM chambers for all measurements reported here, thus minimizing the influence of moisture or oxygen. Representative EDS spectra of a pristine FAPbI3 sample deposited on a fluorine-tin-oxide (FTO) coated glass are given in Fig. 1B (the MAPbI3 spectra is given in the Supporting Information Sec. I). In the EDS spectra, peaks corresponding to characteristic X-ray lines of various chemical elements can be seen. The intensity of these characteristic peaks also depends on the PE kinetic energy used. 5 With 30-keV PEs, peaks near 1.74 keV, 2.35 keV, 3.44 keV, and 3.94 keV were prominent, which were characteristic X-ray emissions from silicon (Kα band), lead (Mα band), tin (Lα band) and iodine (Lα1 band) [52–55]. Lead and iodine were from the FAPbI3 layer, while tin and silicon only existed in the substrate, signaling a deep penetration of the 30-keV PEs. In contrast, with 5-keV PEs, we found that the tin and iodine bands were suppressed, the lead band remained, while other lower-energy peaks emerged near 277 eV, 392 eV, and 525 eV, corresponding to the characteristic X-ray emissions from carbon, nitrogen and oxygen . Additional EDS spectra with intermediate PE energies (10 keV and 20 keV) are shown in the Supporting Information Sec. I. To quantitatively understand the probing depth of PEs with different kinetic energies, we conducted Monte Carlo simulations of the PE trajectories with 30-keV and 5-keV kinetic energies and the results were shown in Fig. 1C and D. The detailed parameters used in our simulation were described in the Supporting Information Sec. II. As shown in Fig. 1C and D, many of the 30-keV PEs penetrated the entire FAPbI3 layer and into the substrate, while those at 5 keV were mostly confined within 200 nm near the surface of FAPbI3. This indicates that the EDS spectra obtained with PEs with different kinetic energies are sensitive to ion distributions at different depths into the sample. Additionally, we note here that the self-absorption depth of the X-ray photons emitted inside the samples was comparable to or greater than the sample thickness, except for those X-ray photons emitted from carbon, nitrogen and oxygen (see the Supporting Information Sec. IV for further details), indicating that our measurement was sensitive to the PE penetration depth rather than the X-ray absorption depth except for carbon, nitrogen and oxygen. Our experimental configuration permitted us to characterize the photo-induced ion move- ment along with their impact on the SE yield in an in situ manner. Figure 2 shows several SE images of FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 samples, which were taken after the laser beam exposure (optical fluence: 106.6 μJ cm−2 for both FAPbI3 and MAPbI3) at the center of the field of view for variable laser dwell times. As shown in Fig. 2A, for FAPbI3, the SE image contrast became brighter after the laser exposure for 5 minutes. Further exposure of up to 20 minutes led to the bright contrast expanding beyond the laser spot size. Under prolonged optical exposure of ≳ 30 minutes, an area with dark contrast emerged near the center of the beam area, forming a ring-shaped profile that was surrounded by bright contrast at the outer region. We also observed that additional optical exposure caused further expansion of the 6 Schematic illustration of the experimental setup and sample structure. (A) Illustration of the SEM experimental platform incorporating an in situ laser beam with SEI and EDS detectors. (B) The measured EDS spectra of FAPbI3 without light exposure at the primary electron energies of 30 keV (blue line) and 5 keV (red line). The corresponding elements are annotated near each characteristic peak. Also shown are the simulated trajectories of primary electrons with energies of (C) 30 keV, and (D) 5 keV. While the primary electrons can penetrate the entire sample stack at 30 keV, those at 5 keV are mostly confined within 200 nm near the FAPbI3 surface. The interfaces between FAPbI3 and fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO), and between FTO and the glass substrate are labeled with gray lines. The inset in (D) shows the structure of the FAPbI3 sample stack. bright ring, while the surrounding bright contrast area far exceeded the size of the optical beam. In contrast, the SE images of MAPbI3 after light exposure exhibited a slower tem- poral evolution of the bright contrast, likely due to a larger bandgap in MAPbI3 and, thus, a weaker optical absorption. The size of the area with bright contrast after longer exposure times was observed to be comparable to the optical beam size. At lower optical fluences, 7 qualitatively similar contrast in SE images was seen, although the required exposure time was much longer (see the Supporting Information Sec. I for additional data). We can fur- ther correlate the observed bright SE contrast with the ion distribution measured in situ by EDS. In particular, the X-ray counts corresponding to the characteristic iodine line at 3.94 keV (probed by 30-keV PEs) and lead line at 2.35 keV (probed by 5-keV PEs) were mea- sured along a horizontal line across the center of the area exposed to the optical beam and were given as red dashed lines in Fig. 2A and B. In general, we observed a decrease of iodine counts within the area exposed to light, and the area with an iodine deficiency increased with prolonged light exposure. Particularly in FAPbI3 (Fig. 2A), the iodine concentration profile agreed well with the spatial extent of the bright contrast, suggesting long-ranged migration of iodine ions far outside the illuminated region. However, the iodine concentration profile is less consistent with the bright ring contrast observed in FAPbI3. In contrast, although the lead concentration profile did not correlate to the overall spatial range of the bright contrast, a two-peak structure developed in FAPbI3 after 30-minute light exposure that matches the bright ring-shaped contrast, indicating a lead-rich phase was responsible for the significantly enhanced SE emission from the ring-shaped area. With our current technique, however, the precise composition of this lead-rich phase could not be determined, since the 30-keV PEs probed the iodine concentration inside the entire thickness of the sample, not only at the surface. B. Quantification of ion migration processes We can quantify the ion migration processes by carefully examining the ion distributions mapped by EDS after different light exposure times. We first focus on the iodine ions, which are known to be the most mobile species in OIHPs. In Fig. 3A, we show the changes in the characteristic iodine X-ray photons at 3.94 keV from FAPbI3 near the illuminated region. The changes in the counts were calculated relative to the value measured in the pristine region without light exposure. The changes in counts were measured using EDS with 30-keV PEs and plotted as a function of the distance from the center of the optical beam and after different light exposure durations. A reduction of the iodine X-ray counts was observed in the illuminated region, signaling a deficiency of iodine as a result of light exposure. Furthermore, the iodine deficiency kept increasing and its spatial distribution 8 Secondary electron images with line profiles of iodine and lead distribution after optical beam exposure. (A) SE images of FAPbI3 after laser illumination for 5 to 60 minutes. (B) SE images of MAPbI3 after laser illumination for 10 to 90 minutes. The red dashed lines (orange solid lines) indicate the X-ray counts for iodine (lead) at 3.94 keV (2.35 keV) across the illuminated area as measured using EDS. The iodine line was probed by 30-keV PEs and the lead line was probed by 5-keV PEs. For all the data presented here, an optical fluence of ∼ 106.6 μJ cm−2 was used. kept expanding as a function of exposure time. Since the 30-keV PEs probed the entire sample thickness, the observed iodine deficiency indicated the amount of iodine inside the sample was reduced, likely due to the decomposition of FAPbI3 and the formation of I2 vapor escaping to the vacuum . In addition, the expanding spatial profile of the iodine deficiency signals migration of iodine ions over a lengthscale of a few hundred micrometers, significantly exceeding the optical beam size, driven by the iodine concentration gradient due to the I2 escaping from the surface. From the time dependence of the spatial profile of the iodine deficiency, we can estimate the diffusivity of iodine ions, as shown in Fig. 3B. The extracted iodine ion diffusivity is around 3.5 × 10−10 cm2 s−1, which is within the range of previously reported values . A detailed analysis of the diffusion process was described in the Supporting Information Sec. III. Next, we focus on the lead ions, whose distribution can be mapped by PEs with both 30-keV and 5-keV kinetic energies. As shown in Fig. 3C and D, the lead ion distribution probed by 30-keV PEs remained almost unchanged as a result of light exposure, while its distribution probed by 5-keV PEs showed a significant increase with light exposure. Since 9 the 30-keV PEs can probe the entire sample thickness and the 5-keV PEs only probe near the sample surface, this surprising finding implied that the migration of lead ions mainly occurred along the vertical direction, namely moving from inside the sample towards the sample surface. More interestingly, the lead distribution near the surface as probed by the 5-keV PEs showed a double-peak structure after a long exposure, consistent with the bright ring contrast observed in the SE images shown in Fig. 2A. As discussed before, this suggests that a lead-rich phase is responsible for the enhanced SE emission in the bright ring region. Another surprising finding was the observed migration of silicon and tin ions from the substrate, as shown in Fig. 3E and F. While a small trace of silicon was detected with the 5-keV PEs (as shown in Fig. 1B), the silicon distribution did not change appreciably due to the light exposure (See the Supporting Information Sec. I for additional data). However, the silicon and tin distributions as probed by the 30-keV PEs showed a significant increase with prolonged light exposure, suggesting increased silicon and tin concentration deep inside the bulk of the FAPbI3 sample. This can be induced by the isovalent lead vacancies created deep inside the bulk of the FAPbI3 sample after the lead ions migrated towards the sample surface. This observation implies that ion migration can lead to unwanted interactions between the OIHPs and the charge transport layers that can be detrimental to solar cells based on OIHPs . Lastly, we also observed a decrease of nitrogen, carbon and oxygen concentration near the sample surface as probed by 5-keV PEs due to light exposure (See the Supporting Information Sec. I for additional data). However, we could not quantify the diffusivity of the organic ions due to the relatively low EDS sensitivity and, thus, a low signal-noise ratio. Based on the observations described above, we summarize the microscopic picture of photo-induced ion migration in FAPbI3 schematically in Fig. 4. Photo-induced decomposi- tion of FAPbI3 into PbI2 and, further, into I2 vapor leads to an iodine deficiency near the surface, which creates an iodine concentration gradient that drives the diffusion of iodine ions towards the surface. The lateral iodine concentration gradient created by the Gaussian distribution of the laser beam intensity further induces iodine ion migration towards the center of the laser illuminated area. In the meantime, lead ions also migrate from the bulk towards the surface. Since lead cannot escape the sample surface in vapor form, the accu- mulation of lead near the center of the illuminated area starts to drive lead ions to move outwards near the surface after longer light exposure, creating the double-peak lead concen- 10 EDS elemental analysis of FAPbI3 after optical exposure. An optical fluence of ∼ 106.6 μJ cm−2 was used for this dataset. (A) The change in the X-ray counts corresponding to iodine as probed by 30-keV PEs. The change in counts was calculated relative to the value measured from pristine areas without light exposure. (B) The corresponding fitted radii of the iodine deficiency distributions versus the exposure times measured by 30-keV PEs. The error bar indicates numerically determined 95% confidence intervals. Also shown are the measured EDS linescan datasets for (C) lead measured by silicon measured by 30-keV PEs. tration profile that corresponds to the bright ring contrast in SE images. As a consequence of lead ion migration, the lead vacancies left behind deep inside the sample bulk induce the migration of isovalent tin and silicon ions from the substrate into the sample, creating new defects and phases that might be detrimental to OIHP-based devices. 11 Schematic illustration of the photo-induced ion migration pathways in OIHPs. Iodine ions migrate from the bulk towards the surface due to photo-induced decomposition and I2 escaping to the vacuum. Lead ions migrate vertically toward the surface. At the same time, elements in the substrate such as tin and silicon penetrate across the sample/substrate interface. Right panel indicates schematically the PE penetration depths through the specimen, which depends on the PE kinetic energy. C. Correlating ion migration with cathodoluminescence We note here that Barb ́e et al. observed a light-induced ring-shaped area with enhanced photoluminescence in MAPbI3 and they attributed it to the formation of a thin layer (< 20 nm) of PbI2 using Raman spectroscopy. However, no photoluminescence near the bandgap of PbI2 (∼ 520 nm to 540 nm) was observed. To further examine the correlation between light exposure and the optoelectronic properties of OIHPs, we conducted in situ CL measurements of a hybrid OIHP, 97% FAPbI3 with 3% MAPbBr3. For this measurement, a femtosecond laser with 495 nm wavelength and 1.25 mW average power was focused to a 5 μm spot (optical fluence: 80 μJ cm−2) on the sample using a parabolic mirror in the SEM. The laser-induced temperature rise in this case was around 90 K due to the small beam size (see Supporting Information Sec. V for details). Despite similar optical fluences, the higher steady-state temperature rise in this case could also induce ion migration thermally. The same parabolic mirror was used to collect CL generated by the perovskite 12 Cathodoluminescence analysis of 97% FAPbI3/3% MAPbBr3 after in situ pulsed laser exposure. Correlated SE images (first row) and CL NMF decomposition (row 2 to 4) for (a) the pristine sample and the same sample after (B) 5 minutes of optical exposure, (C) 10 minutes of optical exposure, (D) 20 minutes of optical exposure, (E) 30 minutes of optical exposure, and (F) 60 minutes of optical exposure. The two spectral components of each NMF decomposition are illustrated in the second row, and the intensity maps associated with each of those components are illustrated in the third and the fourth row, respectively. The color bars represent the absolute CL counts and highlight the increase in band-edge CL intensity as a function of increased laser exposure time. film. Notably, substantial research efforts in recent years have probed ion migration and perovskite decomposition under optical and electron-beam excitation and in the presence of various environmental factors [43, 60–62]. However, under the electron-beam conditions used here (5-keV PE and 7 pA of beam current), we have not observed any electron-beam induced degradation . While environmental degradation limited CL characterization of the pure FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 films (see Supporting Information Sec. I for more data), the hybrid film exhibited a bright CL band near 800 nm consistent with near band-edge luminescence. The correlated SE and CL images acquired as a function of laser exposure time are shown 13 in Fig. 5. We used non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to decompose the hyperspectral CL images into representative spectral components. The calculated explained variance ratio (EVR) is greater than 90% with two spectral components for all of the spectrum images, and it is greater than 99% with two spectral components for all of the images acquired after laser exposure. The two spectral components for each image are shown in the second row of Fig. 5, while the spatial distribution of CL corresponding to the two spectral components are presented in row 3 and 4. A few critical features are visible in Fig. 5. First, the surface morphology exhibits substan- tial microstructuring after laser exposure, and the size of the microstructured area increases with increasing laser exposure time. Second, CL NMF decomposition component 1 is con- sistent with excitonic luminescence, and component 2 is consistent with near-band-edge CL from an intermediate phase that results from partial degradation of the film . Criti- cally, we did not observe any substantial CL band from PbI2 near 520 nm to 540 nm, and we did not observe any statistically significant increase in the intensity of the intermediate phase CL as a function of laser exposure or position. However, while the band-edge luminescence is completely suppressed in the microstructured area, the band-edge CL intensity increases by up to a factor of 20 in the bright ring surrounding the laser spot (with a monotonic increase in CL intensity as a function of laser exposure time). Thus, we can conclude that (a) the ion migration induced by laser exposure does not introduce any near-surface PbI2 or partially decomposed hybrid perovskite phases with any statistical significance, (b) the ion migration completely suppresses band-edge luminescence inside the bright ring, and (c) the ion migration substantially enhanced the luminescence intensity within the bright ring in a manner that is determined by the laser exposure time. We observed similar results using a continuous-wave laser source at 532 nm for light exposure (see Supporting Information Sec. I for further details). Interestingly, we also observed a partial recovery of the excitonic CL emission near 800 nm in an environmentally degraded FAPbI3 sample after light exposure (see Fig. S10 in the Supporting Information), suggesting a beneficial impact of light-induced ion migration in degraded OIHP samples. 14 D. Summary In summary, we utilized an in situ laser source incorporated into an SEM to directly map lateral and vertical photo-induced ion migration pathways in OIHPs with SEI, EDS and CL. We observed long-ranged iodine migration far beyond the illuminated region, a surprising vertical migration of lead ions and cross-boundary migration of silicon and tin ions from the substrate. CL analysis indicated significantly enhanced band-edge emission in a bright ring surrounding the laser spot with complete suppression of band-edge emission within the ring. No increase in luminescence due to partially degraded perovskite phases or to PbI2 band-edge emission was observed. These results highlight the ubiquity of photo-induced ion migration processes in OIHPs and their potential impact on the material quality and device performance. While this understanding of photo-induced ion migration is certainly critical to the development of mitigation strategies to suppress unwanted ion migration, the ob- servation of 20-fold enhancement in band-edge luminescence also highlights an opportunity to improve perovskite device performance through controlled ion migration. Our work also demonstrated that multi-modal optoelectronic spectroscopies that combine laser and con- verged electron-beam excitations in situ with variable PE energies and interaction volumes can be a valuable tool to study microscopic ion transport in emerging materials. III. METHODS A. Sample Fabrication This section presents the method of fabrication for the samples considered in this study. The FTO-coated glass substrates were washed with the detergent aqueous solution, deionized wa- ter, and 2-propanol in the ultrasonic bath for 15 mins sequentially. Then the FTO substrate was treated with UV-ozone for 20 mins just before the perovskite precursor deposition. To prepare the 1.5M MAPbI3 precursor solution, equal molar ratios of methylammonium iodide (MAI, GreatCell Solar, 99.99%) and PbI2 (TCI, 99.99%) were dissolved in dimethyl- formamide (DMF, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.8%) with a volume ratio of 4:1. To prepare the 1.4M FAPbI3 precursor solution, equal molar ratios of formanidium iodide (FAI, GreatCell Solar, 99.99%), and PbI2 were dissolved in DMF and DMSO with a volume ratio of 8:1. The perovskite precursor solution was 15 spin-coated onto the FTO substrates at 4000 rpm for 30 s, and 0.6 ml of diethyl ether was dripped onto the substrate at the time of 15 s to the end. The as-spun films were annealed at 100 ◦C for 10 mins and 150 ◦C for 20 mins for MAPbI3 and FAPbI3, respectively. B. SEM and EDS Measurement Secondary electron imaging and EDS measurements reported in this work was conducted inside a ThermoFisher Quanta 650 FEG SEM hosted at the University of California Santa Barbara. The secondary electrons were detected using a standard Everhart-Thornley detec- tor, while the EDS spectra were collected using a ThermoFisher UltraDry 30 EDS detector and interpreted using the ThermoFisher Pathfinder software. A high vacuum of 1×10−6 torr was maintained inside the SEM chamber for all measurements. The laser beam was gener- ated from a Yb-doped-fiber laser (Clark-MXR IMPULSE) with a fundamental wavelength of 1030 nm, an average pulse width of 150 fs and a repetition rate of 5 MHz. The fundamental wavelength was converted to 515 nm using a BBO crystal and used as the source for light exposure. The laser beam was fed into the SEM chamber through a transparent viewport on the chamber wall. A fresh area on the sample was used for every light exposure test. After the sample was exposed to light with a controlled intensity for a given amount of time, a secondary electron image was taken with an accelerate voltage of 5 keV and a beam current of 300 pA. A low beam current was used to minimize electron-beam-induced damage to the sample. A dwell time of 1 μs at each pixel was used to form the image. Then EDS line scans across the center of the light-exposure area at every ∼ 7 μm were taken with a beam current of 300 pA. 100 linescans (100 ms per scan) were taken and averaged to minimize electron-beam induced damage, while enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio. The change in the absolute count of X-ray photons emitted from the exposed area was calculated as compared to the pristine background area. C. Cathodoluminescence Cathodoluminescence (CL) measurements were performed with a Delmic Sparc CL collection module in a ThermoFisher Quattro environmental SEM hosted in the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory. A parabolic mirror 16 was used to collect CL generated under electron-beam excitation and to deliver the laser to the sample. A retractable mirror was inserted to direct free-space coupled laser sources to the parabolic mirror and retracted to allow for in situ CL characterization using an Andor Kymera spectrograph. Either a variable power 532 nm Cobolt CW laser source or a 495 nm pulsed laser source generated from the second harmonic of a Mai Tai Ti:Sapphire laser with 100 fs pulse duration, 80 MHz repetition rate, and 1.25 mW average power were focused to a spot size of 5 microns by the parabolic mirror. After variable laser exposure times with the retractable mirror inserted, the mirror was retracted, and CL spectrum images were acquired with the electron-beam conditions described in the manuscript. Because the SEM and the adjacent optics table are independently floated, an Aligna active beam stabilization system was used to dynamically correct for any movement of the SEM relative to the optics table. Blind non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) performed with scikit-learn was used to track changes in the CL spectrum images as a function of laser exposure time.