1 CMOS based high-resolution dynamic X-ray imaging with inorganic perovskite Yanliang Liua, Chaosong Gaob, Jiongtao Zhua, Xin Zhanga, Meng Wub, Ting Sua, Jiahong Wanga, Zonghai Shenga, Wenjun Liua, Tongyu Shia, Xingchen Hea, Dong Lianga, Hairong Zhenga, Xue-Feng Yua, Xiangming Sunb, Yongshuai Gea aShenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China bCentral China Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei, China Y.Liu and C.Gao made equal contribution to this work. Email: xf.yu@siat.ac.cn, xmsun@phy.ccnu.edu.cn, ys.ge@siat.ac.cn Abstract: High-resolution dynamic X-ray detector is crucial for time-resolved digital radiography (DR) imaging and fast 3D medical computed tomography (CT) imaging. Recently, perovskites have become promising alternatives to conventional semi-conductor materials, e.g., Si, a-Se and CdTe, for direct X-ray detection. However, the feasibility of their combination with high- speed pixelated complementary metal-oxide-semi- conductor (CMOS) arrays remains unknown. This work originally reports an innovative direct-conversion X-ray detector fabricated with 300 micrometer thick inorganic perovskite film printed on a tailored CMOS array. In-house measurements demonstrate that the CsPbBr3 film has excellent optoelectric properties of a μτ product of 3.40×10-5 cm2 V–1, and the X-ray detector exhibits high sensitivity of 9341 μC Gyair–1 cm–2, and low detection limit of 588 nGyair s–1. This CMOS X-ray imaging detector achieves a high spatial resolution up to 5.5 lp/mm (close to the resolution limit of 6.0 lp/mm), and >300 frame per second (fps) readout speed. DR image of a resolution pattern phantom and a anesthesia mice, CT images of a biological specimen are acquired for the first time. 2 Since its discorvery in 1895, X-ray imaging has shown superb performance in unveiling the anatomical sturctures of the human body. By far, X-ray imaging has been widely used in many medical applications, such as the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular and cancer diseases1,2. In order to generate sufficient X-ray imaging information for clinicians to make precise diagnoses, usually, X-ray detectors with unique features such as high spatial resolution, fast imaging speed are highly demanded. In addition, to minimize its cancerous damage to human body, its low dose X-ray imaging performance is also an important factor to be considered to use as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) radiation dose3. Over the past two decades, dedicated academic and clinical investigations have been performed to develop the most appropriate X-ray detectors for ultra-high quality medical imaging. Results demonstrate the direct-conversion type X-ray detectors made of semi-conductor materials show better spatial and temporal resolution at low radiation dose X-ray imaging than the indirect- conversion ones made of scintillator materials4. However, the current semi-conductor materials used in commercial direct-conversion type X-ray detectors are less satisfactory for generic X- ray imaging purposes. For example, the amorphous selenium (a-Se)5,6 only works at low energy X-ray photons (<40 keV) due to its low stopping power (Z=34), which are merely restricted for breast imaging. Moreover, the cadmium zinc telluride (CdZnTe)7 or cadmium telluride (CdTe) crystals have shown its advancements in fabricating high-energy (>140 keV) X-ray detectors with energy-resolving capability. However, the CdZnTe/CdTe are are difficult to grow into large dimensions, and thus are hard to be used for large area X-ray imaging. The high cost also prohibits their wide spreads in medical X-ray imaging applications. In addition, the requirement of flip chip assembly using Indium solder bumps to interconnect the CdZnTe/CdTe crystal slab to the back-end ASIC readout circuit complicates the detector fabrication as well. As an emerging candidate, metal halide perovskites8,9,10,11, e.g., single crystal, polycrystalline wafer and solvent-processed thick film, show excellent potentials in realizing high-sensitive 3 (≥50000 μC Gyair-1cm-2) direct X-ray detection, such as high X-ray absorption, high charge carrier mobility (μ) and long carrier lifetime (τ). By integrating with pixelated sensor arrays, prototypes of perovskite-based X-ray imaging detectors have been successfully fabricated. In 2017, Park et.al. first reported the promise of high-resolution X-ray imaging with blade-coating CH3NH3PbI3 films on a large-scale thin-film transistor (TFT) backplane12. In 2021, Sarah et.al. reported a two- step procedure to manufacture X-ray detector with microcrystalline CH3NH3PbI3 on TFT backplane13. Recently, Tang et.al. fabricated a flat-panel X-ray imager by combination of soft- presssing CH3NH3PbI3 films and TFT backplane14. Technically, the direct-conversion perovksite X-ray detectors having the most ideal imaging performance should be fabricated upon the Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) sensors15, which have become the majority of consumer and prosumer cameras these days due to their much more distinct advantages16,17,18 in achieving ultra-high image resolution and data readout speed19. For example, the pixel size of CMOS sensor can be easily made smaller than 5 micrometers, whereas, the pixel size of TFT array is usually larger than 70 micrometers. Besides, the CMOS sensor also has stronger noise immunity and lower static power utilization. As a consequence, CMOS sensor arrays should be selected to completely fulfill the advancements of perovksites in achieving high-end direct-conversion X-ray imaging with unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution. Moreover, special electrical circuits can be designed and integrated into the CMOS pixel unit to surpress the leakage dark current of the perovksites20, which is still a remaining issue in developing X-ray imaging detector array21. Unfortunately, by far no such studies have been demonstrated on a CMOS sensor based perovskite X-ray detector. In this work, we report an innovative direct-conversion X-ray detector fabricated with 300 micrometer thick inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite film printed on a tailored CMOS sensor array22,23. The main structure of the X-ray imager was illustrated in Fig. 1a. As shown, certain electric field 4 is applied to propel the X-ray photon stimulated electrons within the perovskite to drift towards the signal collection electrode, namely, the CMOS pixel. The perovskite film covered CMOS device with total number of 72×72 pixels is depicted in Fig. 1b. The perovskite film was printed directly on the CMOS chip via the silk-screen priting process. The cross-section SEM image shows that such in-situ grown CsPbBr3 film has good affinity with the CMOS array, in which multi-layered parasitic capacitance with multifunctional complex circuits of amplifier and leakage current compensation are integrated to enhance high SNR signal detections. The detector could endure more than four months without significantly degrading its X-ray imaging performance, indicating a excellent working stability of CsPbBr3 film under X-ray exposure and high electric field conditions. This CMOS based direct-conversion X-ray detector can resolve objects with a very fine structure of 5.5 lp/mm, see Fig. 1c. It was obtained at a bias voltage of 15V, corresponding to an electric field of 0.05 V/um inside the perovskite film. This experiment was validated by a bar pattern plate having 33 groups of different Pb lines with varied widths and spacing distances. Since the limit spatial resolution of this CMOS array is found to be 6.0 lp/mm (corresponds to the 83.2 μm pitch dimension), therefore, this X-ray detector shows an unprecedented high-resolution imaging performance. For this special CMOS array, the gate voltage of the feedback transistor, denoted as V, controls the decay time of the Charge Sensitive Amplifier (CSA) for every single pixel (see Methods for details). To inhibit the pixel-by-pixel varied leakage current, especially to avoid the signal saturations, the gate voltage was adjusted according to the amplitude of the leakage current without turning on the X-ray beam. The 3D distribution map of the pixel response is illustrated in Fig. 1d. In general, the pixel response decreases as the used gate voltage increases. To suppress the internal dark current of the perovskite film, certain gate voltages are calibrated and adopted before X-ray exposures. For larger dark current signals, higher gate voltages are needed to maintain similar pixel responses. 5 Fig 1. | CMOS based perovskite X-ray detector. a, diagram of the X-ray imaging panel based on CMOS array. Electron-hole pairs are stimulated by the X-ray photons within the perovskite film. The electrons drift swiftly towards the CMOS pixel under the internal electric field. b, photograph of the CMOS based perovskite X-ray detector sealed inside a costumized Teflon holder. Desiccant beads are added to keep the detector away from moist air. c, the obtained X- ray image of a resolution pattern phantom. The bars with 5.5 lp/mm spatial resolution can be clearly distinguished. d, 3D response map of a single CMOS pixel versus the added gate voltage and the input dark current. The pixel response decreases as the gate voltage increases. For larger dark current signals, higher gate voltages are needed. The inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite thick film was fabricated through silk-screen priting process, see Fig.2a. First, a viscous CsPbBr3 precursor paste was prepared by mixing CsBr and PbBr2 c d a b X-ray Top electrode CsPbBr3 6 with equal molar mass in DMF/DMSO primary polar solvent through planetary ball milling. Second, the silk-screen prited CsPbBr3 precursor thick film was heated at 100 oC for 10 min to obtain an intermediate CsPbBr3 thick film, which still contains trace amount of residual DMSO according to the Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectra. Afterwards, the intermediate CsPbBr3 film was hot-pressed at 150 oC and 0.5 MPa through a self-desioned equipment.The hot-pressed CsPbBr3 thich film owns flat surface and compact internal structure in contrast to conventional CsPbBr3 film with rough surface and pinholes inFig.2b,c. In general, the hot-presseded CsPbBr3 thick film with compact and uniform surface has better capability to inhibit leak current, ionic migration, photo-induced carrier trapping, and recombination than the porous film that is produced without hot-pressing. Moreover, the heat-treated CsPbBr3 thick film shows significantly increased XRD intensity at the main (001), (011) and (002) peaks, suggesting better crystallinity in line with the SEM images in Fig.2d. Be aware that the thickness of CsPbBr3 film can be easily adjusted from tens to hundreds micrometers if repeating the silk-screen priting procedures. The CsPbBr3 film was X-rayed themselves, and their X-ray absorption can be adjusted by controlling the CsPbBr3 film thickness. For X-ray imaging, large-area fabrication of perovskite film is important, we therefore prepared a large area CsPbBr3 film of 10×10 cm by silk-screen printing on a ITO/glass substrate, the film exhibits compact and uniform morphology. In addition, the obtained CsPbBr3 film has excellent environmental stability with stable optical property and crystal structure, which is benefitial for enhancing the working stability of the X-ray detector. The steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) behaviors of the CsPbBr3 before and after the heating procedures were characterized with the purpose to elucidate their optical property (Fig.1e and Extended Data Fig. S). The treated CsPbBr3 film shows significantly higher PL intensity with PL peak red-shifted from 515 nm to 518 nm, indicating the reduced defects density and enhanced crystallinity. The measured TRPL values were fitted with exponential decay functions to measure the quenching (including charge transfer) and defects related fast decay process, i.e., short lifetime (τ1), the recombination related 7 slow decay process, i.e., long lifetime (τ2), and their occupation fractions A1 and A2. The CsPbBr3 before treating has a short lifetime τ1 =2.29 ns and a long lifetime τ2 =11.74 ns, the CsPbBr3 after treating has a short lifetime τ1 = 5.70 ns and a long lifetime τ2 = 33.07 ns, and the τave improved significantly from 6.80 to 25.92 ns, indicating reduced defect density and enhanced carrier transportation capability after treatment. The μτ product of the treated CsPbBr3 thick film is obtained by fitting the following Hecht equation from the measured voltage-dependent photocurrents: where I0 is the saturated current, L is the MAPbI3 wafer thickness, and V is the bias voltage. The μτ product of our CsPbBr3 film is determined to be 3.40×10-5 cm2 V−1, which is significantly higher than the amorphous selenium and thus can benefit the X-ray detection. Fig 2. | Inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite thick film. (a) Schematic illustration of the silk-screen priting CsPbBr3 film. (b) top-view and (c) cross-section SEM images of CsPbBr3 film. (d) XRD a Perovskite precursor paste Substrate b c d 10 20 30 40 50 Intensity (a.u.) 2 Theta (degree) CsPbBr3/cubic e CsPbBr3 Hot-pressed CsPbBr3 0 200 400 600 800 1000 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 PL intensity (a.u.) Times (ns) Treated CsPbBr3 CsPbBr3 0 10 20 30 40 50 10 -9 10 -8 10 -7 Photocurrent (A) Voltage (V) Model miutao (User) Equation Reduced Chi-Sqr Adj. R-Square Value Standard Error D1 a b c 0.05 0 f uτ= 3.40*10-5 cm2V–1 20 um 40 um 8 spectra of CsPbBr3 film. (e) TRPL spectra of CsPbBr3 film. (f) photoconductivity of the CsPbBr3 film. The experimental current density-voltage (J-V) curves of the CsPbBr3 thick film are shown in Fig.3a. From the top to the bottom, the device contains glass-ITO/SnO2/CsPbBr3/ Au. The dark current density is as low as 1.41×10-9 A mm-2 and the corresponding light current is up to 2.10×10-7 A mm-2 at the electric field of 80 V/mm, resulting a switch ratio of 150. Time-resolved current densities of the CsPbBr3 detector at various X-ray dose rates varied from 160 μGyair s−1 to 1620 μGyair s−1 are measured, see Fig 3b. As seen, the detector has a linear response to the X-ray dose rates, and owns smaller dark current densities and larger values of X-ray on-off ratios. Different current densities under varied dose rates are shown in Fig. 3c. It is estimated that the CsPbBr3 detector has a sensitivity of 1547, 4334, 7266 and 9341 μCGyair−1 cm−2 at electric fields of 20, 40, 60 and 80 V/mm, respectively. calculated, see Fig. 4d. Herein, Isignal denotes the signal, Inoise denotes the noise, Iphoto denotes the average current under X-ray irradiation, and Idark denotes the average dark current calculated from several parallel experiments at each bias. If assuming the minimum detective SNR=3, the lower limit-of-detection (LoD) of our CsPbBr3 detector is determined to be 588 nGyair s−1. 9 Fig 3. | Perovskite X-ray detector properties. (a) J-V characteristic and (b) X-ray response profiles of the CsPbBr3 detector. (c) X-ray current densities as a function of dose rate at different applied electric fields. (d) Dose rate dependent SNR of the CsPbBr3 detector. The 2D digital radiography (DR) and the 3D computed tomography (CT) imaging results of biological specimen are depicted in Fig. 4, correspondingly. First of all, a three-month old mice after anesthesia was scanned at 50 kVp tube voltage under three different dose levels using this perovskite CMOS detector. To compare, the same mice was also imaged with a commercial scintillator (CsI:TI) based indirect-conversion CMOS flat panel detector (Model: Dexela 2329 NDT, PerkinElmer, USA) under the same imaging condition. Overall, the DR images obtained from this novel direction-converson perovskite CMOS detector shows superior performance than 0 50 100 150 200 4 8 12 16 20 Current Density (μA cm-2) Time (s) 1620 μGyair s−1 1450 650 324 488 1300 1140 976 810 160 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 0 4 8 12 16 20 Current Density (μA cm-2) Dose rate (mGair/s) 0.1 1 10 100 1000 100 101 102 103 SNR Dose rate (μGyair/s) SNR=3 588 nGyair s−1 -100 -75 -50 -25 0 25 50 75 100 10 -11 10 -10 10 -9 10 -8 10 -7 10 -6 Current density (A mm -2) Electrical field (V mm -1) Dark current Light current a b c d Electrical field 80 V/mm 10 the conventional indirect-conversion CMOS detector. For example, the ribs and forehand bones can be clearly recognized, see Fig. 4a. Moreover, images obtained from the new detector also look much more crisp. This demonstrates that the perovskite CMOS detector has higher X-ray conversion efficiency, and thus is able to significantly reduce the imaging radiation dose level. Quantitatively, at leaset 70% radiation dose can be saved without dramatically degrading the image quality. Results show that a low detection limit of this CMOS detector in generating X-ray images is less than 50 nGyair (measured with 50 kV X-ray spectra). In Fig. 4c, line profiles of the ribs are compared. As seen, the developed new CMOS detector has better image contrast than the commercial COMS detector. To demonstrate its dynamic imaging capability, 3D CT imaging were performed on a chicken drumstick specimen with this perovskite CMOS detector, see results in Fig. 4b. In total, 180 projections were acquired in a sequence by rotating the sample continuously with two degree angular interval (see Methods for details). After that, CT images were reconstructed via the standard Feldkamp-Davis-Kress (FDK) algorithm with the Ramp filter24,25. As seen, the bony structures and the tissue edges can all be clearly recovered. To quantify the spatial resolution performance, the modulation transfer function (MTF) was measured with a 1.0 mm thick tungsten plate26, one of whose edges was manually tilted by 3.0 degrees relative to the vertical direction. The obtained MTF and normalized noise power spectra (NPS) plots are illustrated in Fig. 4d. In addition, the NPS curves were also characterized27 from the acquired 200 frames of object-free images (air scans), which have substracted the dark background and been gain corrected via the rounte signal processing procedure. Suprisingly, the NPS of this perovskite CMOS detector is almost flatten, indicating a negilible signal correlations (cross-talking) between neighbouring pixels. In other words, the movements of the stimulated electrons inside the material from X-ray photons are nicely confined by the electric field within a single pixel. 11 Fig 4. | Perovskite X-ray imaging results. a, the DR imaging result of a mice. Image in the first column is obtained from a commercial indirect-conversion CMOS X-ray detector (74.8 um pixel size). Images in the rest three columns are obtained from the new direct-conversion perovskite CMOS X-ray detector (83.2 um pixel size) at three dose levels. The sacle bar denotes 5.0 mm. b, the CT imaging results of a chicken drumettes specimen. The upper image shows one single CT image slice, and the lower image shows the 3D volume rendering effect. The sacle bar denotes 10.0 mm. c, the line profile comparison results of the highlighted region on the mice. As seen, the developed new CMOS detector has better image contrast than the commercial COMS detector (solid blue line). d, MTF and NPS plots of the new direct-conversion perovskite CMOS detector. The former detector was measured at 50 kVp with 1.0 mm aluminum filtration, and the 520 nGy 260 nGy 170 nGy 520 nGy a b c d 12 latter detector was measured with RQA3 beam quality (50 kVp with 10.0 mm aluminum filtration). In summary, we report an innovative CMOS based direct-conversion high-resolution dynamic X- ray imaging detector fabricated from inorganic perovskite. The 300 micrometer thick CsPbBr3 film was directly printed on the CMOS array via the silk-screen priting process. Experiments demonstrate that the CsPbBr3 film has excellent optoelectric properties of a μτ product of 3.40×10-5 cm2 V–1, high sensitivity of 9341 μC Gyair–1 cm–2, and low detection limit of 588 nGyair s–1. Both resolution pattern and W-plate imaging results show that this CMOS detector is able to achieve high spatial resolution up to 5.5 lp/mm, which is very close to its resolution limit of 6.0 lp/mm. In addition, signals collected from this CMOS detector are less correlated, and thus leading to an almost flatten NPS curve. Benefited by the >300 fps fast signal readout speed, samples with size larger than 60 mm×60 mm can be quickly scanned. Both DR and CT images are acquired for different biological specimen to demonstrate its high performance 2D and 3D bio-imaging capability. In conculusion, perovskites provide a completely new blueprint in developing the next generation X-ray imaging detector to reform the conventional bio-medical X-ray imaging applications. As the detector spatial resolution, readout speed and dose conversion efficiency become significantly increased, which have already been demonstrated in this study, the medical X-ray imaging would become more gentle and safe. In the near future, bio-medical X-ray imaging applications such as the small animal imaging, dental imaging and breast imaging would be greatly benefitted if assembling multiple CMOS detector components into a linear detector array or fabricating a large area flat panel from stitched CMOS arrays. 13