Revealing intrinsic superconductivity of the Nb/BiSbTe2Se interface Andrei Kudriashov,∗,† Ian Babich,† Razmik A. Hovhannisyan,† Andrey G. Shishkin,† Sergei N. Kozlov,† Alexander Fedorov,§ Denis V. Vyalikh,∥,⊥ Ekaterina Khestanova,# Mikhail Yu. Kupriyanov,@ and Vasily S. Stolyarov†,¶,△ †Advanced mesoscience and nanotechnology centre, Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 141700 Dolgoprudny, Russia ‡Fundamental Physical and Chemical Engineering Department, MSU, 119991 Moscow, Russia ¶Dukhov Research Institute of Automatics (VNIIA), Moscow 127055, Russia §Leibniz Institute for Solid State and Materials Research, P.O. Box 270116, D-01171 Dresden, Germany ∥Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), 20018 Donostia-San Sebastian, Basque Country, Spain ⊥IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, 48011 Spain #Department of Physics and Engineering, ITMO University, Saint Petersburg, Russia @Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, MSU, Moscow 119991, Russia △National University of Science and Technology MISIS, 119049 Moscow, Russia E-mail: andrei.kudriashov.97@gmail.com Abstract Typically, topological superconductivity is reachable via proximity effect by a direct depo- sition of superconductor (S) on top of a topo- logical insulator (TI) surface. Here we ob- served and analysed the double critical current in the Josephson junctions based on the topo- logical insulator in the fabricated planar Su- perconducting Quantum Interference Device. By measuring critical currents as a function of temperature and magnetic field, we show that the second critical current stems from the intrinsic superconductivity of the S/TI inter- face, which is supported by the modified Resis- tively Shunted Junction model and Transmis- sion Electron Microscopy studies. This complex structure of the interface should be taken into account when technological process involves Ar-plasma cleaning. Introduction The topology of electronic band structure plays a central role in explaining different physical 1 arXiv:2210.17369v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 31 Oct 2022 phenomena in condensed matter systems.1–3 The non-triviality of the band structure of some materials leads to the formation of new states of matter, such as topological insulators (TIs),4 Dirac or Weyl semimetals.5,6 Furthermore, such non-trivial bands have the potential to induce topological superconductivity via the proxim- ity effect.7–10 Therefore, the interface between topological insulator and superconductor plays an extremely important role in studying topo- logical superconductivity.11–13 Since the super- conducting order parameter is sensitive to mi- croscale structures around electrodes and their fabrication process, it is crucial to evaluate both the transport properties of superconduct- ing junctions and their local structure to estab- lish topological superconductivity. In this work, we demonstrate the double critical current in the Superconducting Quan- tum Interference Device (SQUID), fabricated by sputtering of Nb on top of the Fe-doped BiSbTe2Se flake. By analyzing those critical currents as a function of temperature and mag- netic field, we show that the second critical cur- rent stems from the intrinsic superconductivity of the S/TI interface, which is supported by the Restively Shunted Junction (RSJ) model and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) imaging. Our deep insight into the interface of the Bi-based TI junction provides a future qual- itative analysis of emergent unconventional SC states and an avoidance strategy for achieving a unitary topological superconducting state for further TI josepshonics. Results We studied Fe-doped 3D topological insula- tor BiSbTe2Se (Fe-BSTS), synthesized by the modified Bridgman method.14 High-resolution high angle annular dark field scanning trans- mission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image of the Fe-BSTS is shown in Figure 1a. The electron diffraction image corresponds to the rhombohedral crystal structure with lattice constants a = 4.2 Å and c = 29.7 Å, which is consistent with previous measurements of simi- lar TIs.14–16 Due to the optimized composition, a d e I (μA) V (mV) 0 -1 1 0 -1 -2 1 2 c b E-EF (eV) 0 -0.1 -0.2 0 -0.1 0.1 0 3 dV/dI (kΩ) C Iexc 1 nm H (G) 0.4 0.8 0 0 20 40 -20 -40 I (nA) I (nA) V (μV) 0 -20 -40 20 40 0 -20 -40 20 40 H=0.21 G Ic1 Ic2 60 -60 V (μV) 0 0.1 -0.1 0 planes perpendicular to direction of Fe- BSTS crystal. Inset shows the schematics of one unit cell. Green circles are Se/Te atoms, red ones - Bi/Sb. (b) ARPES data of Fe-BSTS taken at T = 1.4 K. (c) I(V ) characteristic of the SQUID taken at H = 0 G and T = 26 mK. Red dashed lines are linear fits of the high- voltage regions. Top inset shows the schemat- ics of the device. Bottom right inset shows the I(V ) characteristic of the device in low current region. (d) Color map of differential resistance dV/dI as a function of current and external magnetic field at T = 13 mK. Arrow represents the direction of current sweep. (e) I(V ) char- acteristic taken at H = 0.21 G (red dashed line in the color map) and T = 26 mK. the Fermi level in this material is located within the bulk band gap and 30 meV higher than the Dirac point, according to the angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), which is shown in Figure 1b. As a result, the low concen- tration of the bulk carriers leads to the surface dominated transport at low temperature.17 Thin flakes of Fe-BSTS were mechanically exfoliated from the bulk material, transferred to the Si/SiO2 substrate, and then SQUID on top of the flake was fabricated using a stan- dard technological process (See Section 1 of the 2 S S TI S` N dV/dI (kΩ) 0 4 a f e d c b Splitting I (nA) I (nA) Ic (nA) I (nA) H (G) H (G) T (K) H (G) Ic1=Ir1 Ic2 Ir2 Hysteresis the fitting lines. See the main text for details. (b) Color map of differential resistance dV/dI as a function of current and external magnetic field at T = 20 mK. (c) Color map of differential resistance dV/dI as a function of current and external magnetic field at T = 20 mK of the region, denoted in (b) by red rectangle. (d) Schematics of the single Josephson junction based on TI. Blue regions correspond to Nb (S), purple - extra superconducting layer (S′), yellow - topological insulator flake (TI) with surface state (N). (e) RSJ model of the single Josephson junction, taking into account extra superconducting region S′. (f) Color map of differential resistance dV/dI as a function of current and external magnetic field at T = 13 mK. The red lines are the fits of Ic1 and Ic2 by the modified RSJ model. Arrow represents the direction of the current sweep. 3 Supplemental Materials for details). Schematic drawing of the final device is shown in the inset of the Figure 1c. I(V ) characteristic at zero magnetic field and base temperature of our dilution refrigerator is shown in Figure 1c by the black line. The bot- tom right inset of Figure 1c is zoom of I(V ) curve in the range from -0.1 μA to 0.1 μA. It clearly demonstrates the single critical current, which is typical for Josephson junctions. I(V ) curve shows nonlinear behaviour when current is higher than the critical current, indicating the presence of excess current. The device is showing very pronounced os- cillations of the critical current in the external magnetic field perpendicular to the surface of the loop (Figure 1d). The period of these os- cillations is consistent with the flux quantum Φ0 = hc/2e per loop area. Distinctive feature of this device, which can be seen in Figure 1d is what we call "second critical current". When the external magnetic field corresponds to an integer number of flux quantum, there is only one step in the I(V ) characteristics, which is identified as critical current. Nevertheless, when the external mag- netic field is around Φ0/4, two clear steps in the I(V ) characteristics can be seen, which is pre- sented in the Figure 1e. We determinate the first step as Ic1 and the second step as Ic2. The temperature dependence of critical cur- rent Ic1, critical current Ic2 and retrapping cur- rent Ir2 at zero magnetic field is shown in Fig- ure 2a by red rectangles, blue circles and black circles, respectively. The hysteresis of the I(V) characteristic is clearly seen in the Figure 1d and Figure S3 of the Supplemental Materials. The black dashed line is the fit of Ic1(T) by the Kulik-Omelyanchuk model in the clean limit (KO-2).18 For details of this model and fitting procedure, see Section 4 of Supplemental Ma- terials and At large magnetic fields, instead of the stan- dard modulation of the critical current by the Fraunhofer dependence, a monotonic decrease of envelope curve of the critical current is ob- served (see Figure 2b and Figure S4). It sug- gests that the magnetic field acts as a pair breaking mechanism that suppresses the su- perconductivity in the surface states,19 making two critical currents split completely, as shown in Figure 2c. This indicates that the second critical current Ic2 comes from the properties of the single Josephson junction. Moreover, we have fabricated single Josephson junctions, which also demonstrate this feature (see Section 3 of Supplemental Material for details). Discussion Additional features on the I(V) character- istic are frequently observed in Josephson junctions based on topological insulators.20,21 There could be different explanations, such as Fiske steps,22 analogues of Shapiro steps,22,23 McMillan-Rowell24 or Tomasch25 resonances. We strongly believe that neither of these ex- planations fits our experimental results. First of all, our Josephson junctions are fairly over- damped and resonances such as Fiske can’t be observed in our system. Moreover, Shapiro like resonances with outer resonant system (sam- ple holder, for example) can not explain the hysteresis of the Ic2 we observed, as discussed bellow. Additionally, single Josephson junc- tions were measured in the same sample holder and they show different characteristic voltage, excluding the possibility of unwanted reso- nances in the sample holder. McMillan-Rowell or Tomasch resonances are also not the case of our setup as they appear in underdamped JJs with geometrical resonances of quasiparticle or superconducting Andreev states. Generally, a planar Josephson junction can be described as an SS′NS′S structure.26 Here, S corresponds to Nb, S′ is the region of TI under the superconducting electrode, and N is the sur- face state of the TI, as shown in the Figure 2d). Another explanation for the second feature on the I(V) characteristic is that Ic2 is related to the region S′ located between Nb and TI. We model our SQUID with an extra super- conducting layer S′ underneath the Nb con- tacts (Figure 2d) with a modified RSJ model. Its equivalent circuit is shown in Figure 2e. For bias currents below Ic2, a single JJ in the SQUID acts as an SS′NS′S. When the bias 4 Nb TI Nb Substrate Nb TI a b 200 nm 5 nm 50 nm с d f e 5 nm Deformed Crystal 20 nm 2 nm Region 1 (TI) Region 2 (S`) Region 3 Region 4 (S) g Nb TEM image of the cross section, pictured in the (a) by red dashed line. (c) and (d) show the high resolution HAADF-STEM image of the regions, pictured in (b) by red dashed rectangle and small red rectangle, respectively. (e) FFT of two regions, corresponding to TI (orange) and S′ (yellow). (f) EDX map of the area shown in (d). (g) Profile of the elements distribution, subtracted from line, shown in the (f) by the arrow. 5 current satisfies the condition |Ib|/2+|Icirc| > I′ c (see Section 5 of the Supplemental Materials for more details), the JJ acts as an SN ′NN ′S. Here I′ c, Ib, Icirc are the S′-layer critical cur- rent, bias current, and the current circulating in the loop, respectively. The switching from SS′NS′S to SN ′NN ′S leads to the second volt- age step, which can be described as an appear- ance of N ′-layer resistance R′ in the shunt. Numerical simulations predict that Ic2 de- pends on magnetic field as A + B| cos(πΦ/Φ0)|, which nicely fits the experimental data (Figure 2f). Here, A and B are the fit parameters. The Ic1 behaviour is fitted as an asymmetric SQUID with asymmetry coefficient α = IL c −IR c IL c +IR c = 0.1, where IL c and IR c are the critical currents of the left and the right Josephson contacts in the SQUID. Typically, the retrapping current is different from the critical current in SNS junctions be- cause of the overheating of the N region.27 To describe the fact that Ic1 is non-hysteretic but Ic2 is (see Figures 2a,f and Section 2 of the Sup- plemental Materials), we added Joule heating in the model by thermally coupling S′ inter- faces, N region, S electrode, and the TI flake.28 Details of this model could be found in Sec- tion 5 of the Supplemental Materials. When the bias current reaches the retrapping current, the N ′-layer switches to an S′ and R′ drops to 0. The model suggests that R′ ∼ RN, there- fore, the produced heat significantly decreases. The excess heat is being transferred to the flake through metallic surface states, thus the Josephson junction region quickly cools down to the bath temperature. As a result, the SQUID does not exhibit the switching, corresponding to Ic1, because Ir2 < Ic1. That is why we ob- serve that Ir2 limits Ic1 near the integer flux quantum values (bottom curves in the Figure 2f). In order to describe the blurriness of the sec- ond critical current around Φ = Φ0/2 (see Fig- ure 1d), we take into account the inhomogeneity of the S′ layer and treat the S′ as a combina- tion of layers with slightly different I′ c. Indeed, this approach provides a nonzero width of Ic2, if RL′ N > RN > RR′ N inequality holds (see Sec- tion 5 of the Supplemental Materials). How- ever, it does not lead to the full evanescence of Ic2 at half flux quantum. Another possible ex- planation of the blurriness effect is the interplay between the SQUID loop and a superconduct- ing loop formed by S′ region. The difference in London penetration depths and geometric inductance of the loops may result in a pecu- liar behaviour of screening currents that pass through the weak link region and are not con- sidered by the RSJ model. To validate the presence of the S′ region and to study the SS′ and S′N interfaces, we per- formed TEM study of the interface between Nb and Fe-BSTS. We cut one of the Josephson junctions, as shown in Figure 3a along the red line. The corresponding cross section is shown in Figure 3b. Since we have conducted the TEM study after the transport measurements (and, therefore, thermal cycling) we have observed the same strain-induced buckling feature, as in Ref.,29 which is indicated in Figure 3b by a large rectangle. Interestingly, the interface be- tween strained and unstrained regions is very sharp, as shown in Figure 3c. Unstrained region demonstrates well-ordered structure, while the strained region is so deformed that there is no order seen. Nevertheless, as in Ref.,29 this fea- ture was formed after the worm-up and there- fore did not affect our results. There are regions of specific contrast between the TI layers (region 1) and Nb contacts (region 4) (see Figure 3d). One of it looks darker (re- gion 3) and does not have a periodic structure, while the other (region 2), on the contrary, has a brighter contrast and demonstrates local or- dering. A redistribution of the intensity in the region 2 can be noticed. In the ordered struc- ture of BiSbTe2Se, within one quintuple layer, two bright (Bi/Sb) and three less bright (Se/Te) points are observed (see Figure 3e and Figure 1a), while in region 2 the intensity of all atomic columns is more or less the same, which should indicate the averaging of the atomic mass of all atomic columns, that is, mixing of atoms in all or almost all crystallographic positions and a change in the symmetry of the structure. In- deed, the Fourier transform (FFT) taken from the ordered TI layers (see Figure 3e, orange in- 6 set) and from the region 2 (see Figure 3e, yel- low inset) are different. The FFT of the disor- dered region lacks reflections corresponding to long distances of 29.7 Å, and the observed image can be interpreted as the zone of an I-centered tetragonal cell with parameters a=4.9 Å and c=6.2 Å. The mixed EDX maps (see Figure 3f) show that region 2 is enriched in Bi and Sb, al- though antimony is not shown on the mixed EDX map for ease of interpretation. The same trend is clearly visible on the linear profile of the EDX signal in Figure 3g. Indeed, the atomic ratio Bi:Sb:Te:Se in the region 2 corre- sponds to the composition Bi2.3Sb1.2Te0.9Se0.6, significantly differs from the composition Bi1.06Sb0.99Te1.73Se1.22 obtained for ordered TI layers. At the same time, the composition of the amorphous diffuse layer (region 3) is equal to Bi1.1Sb1.1Te1.6Se1.2 and is very close to the nominal composition observed in the TI. Thus, the bright contrast in region 2 is primarily associated with the enrichment of this region with the heaviest bismuth compared to other elements. We associate region 2 with S′. This region can be either proximitized by S, or it can has intrin- sic superconductivity. Usually, superconduct- ing states just below SC electrodes stem from the superconducting proximity effect. How- ever, TEM results suggest other origins, such as intermixing of the elements,30,31 strain,32,33 and other composition issues. For example, Bi1−xSbx alloys are known to be superconduct- ing34,35 and the region 2 is enriched in Bi and Sb. In addition, it is known that tetradymite topological insulators becomes superconducting under pressure. The superconducting phase transition is accompanied with two structural phase transitions, according to.36 In our case we also observed the tetragonal phase, which is in qualitative agreement with structure, found in Therefore, we suggest that S′ has intrin- sic (not proximitized by Nb) superconductivity. Another argument for the intrinsic supercon- ductivity of S′ comes from the fact that Ic2 has a linear dependence on external magnetic field (see Figure 2b and Section 2 of the Supplemen- tal Materials), which is typical for thin films of superconductors.37 Ic2(T) also support this hy- pothesis. It was shown that if ∆Nb >> ∆S′ (i.e. T Nb c >> T S′ c ), the temperature dependence of the critical current of the SS′ interface in the KO-1 model is determined by the temperature dependence of ∆S′, which can be approximated by the square root.18,38 In our case, Ic2(T) is well fitted by the square root dependence (see Material), which is another argument for intrin- sic superconductivity of S′. Therefore, in our case, the second step in the I(V ) curve is asso- ciated with breaking of the superconductivity in the S′ region. We believe that the S′ region is formed dur- ing the Ar-plasma etching, performed before the Nb deposition. It explains why the Region 2 is enriched in Bi and Sb, since it is known that Se and Te are more prone for sublimation, comparing with Bi and Sb. In addition, plasma treatment can change the crystal structure of the material, as shown, for example, in In contrast, the direct deposition technique just after cleaving crystals allows to obtain a clean interface without an additional phase, akin to Nevertheless, an additional study is re- quired to understand the exact impact of the Ar-plasma to surface of topological insulator. Conclusion Thus, we have demonstrated the existence of two critical currents in SQUID based on Fe- doped TI BiSbTe2Se. We analyzed the depen- dencies of these critical currents on tempera- ture and magnetic field and carried out struc- tural and elemental analyses of the Nb inter- face with Fe-doped TI BiSbTe2Se. The con- ducted study shows that the detected effect can be explained by the presence of intrinsic su- perconductivity in the transition layer between Nb and the Fe-doped TI BiSbTe2Se. Appar- ently, this layer is formed during etching of the TI surface and subsequent deposition of Nb. If so, we are raising a serious concern of this common approach for device fabrica- tion. We claim, that even in the case of the high S/TI interface transparency, determined 7 from the Ic(T) dependence, the interface may have complex structure, which can adversely af- fects the physics of artificially designed topo- logical superconductors, including Majorana- related effects. This complex structure of the interface should be taken into account when technological process involves Ar-plasma clean- ing. If atomically flat and clean interface is needed, we suggest to use determenistic transfer inside the glove box,41–45 in situ methods,40,46 or other technological processes. Acknowledgement It is a pleasure to thank A. Abramov for the help with the device fabrication; Rikizo Yano, Hishiro T. Hirose, Tsuyoshi Tanda, Takao Sasagawa and Satoshi Kashiwaya for useful discussions. This work was supported by the RSF 21-72-00140. This work was performed using e-beam lithography of MIPT Shared Facilities Center. ARPES studies supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federa- tion (No. FSMG-2021-0005). TEM study was conducted at Advanced Imaging Core Facility of Skoltech. Crystal growth was supported by CRP in MSL-Tokyo Tech, Japan. Author contribution V.S.S. conceived the project and supervised the experiments, A.F. and D.V.V. performed the ARPES mea- surements, E.K. did mechanical exfoliation, A.G.S. and A.K. realized e-beam lithography, V.S.S performed the deposition of the Nb film, A.K. conducted the transport measurements, M.Y.K., V.S.S. and R.A.H. provided the expla- nation of the observed effects, I.B. and R.A.H. constructed the RSJ-model, I.B. did numerical modeling, S.N.K did the fitting by the KO-2 model, A.K. wrote the manuscript with the contributions from other authors. Competing Interests The Authors declare no Competing Financial or Non-Financial In- terests. Data Availability The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.