Bead-Droplet Reactor for High-Fidelity Solid-Phase Enzymatic DNA Synthesis Punnag Padhy1*, Mohammad Asif Zaman1, Michael Anthony Jensen2,3*, Yao-Te Cheng1, Yogi Huang4, Ludwig Galambos1, Ronald Wayne Davis2,3,5, Lambertus Hesselink1* 1Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A 2Stanford Genome Technology Center, Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, 94304, U.S.A 3Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A 4Department of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A 5Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 94305, U.S.A *Corresponding author. Email: punnag@stanford.edu, m.a.jensen@stanford.edu, hesselink@ee.stanford.edu Solid-phase synthesis techniques underpin the synthesis of DNA, oligopeptides, oligosaccharides, and combinatorial libraries for drug discovery. State-of-the-art solid-phase synthesizers can produce oligonucleotides up to 200-300 nucleotides while using excess reagents. Accumulated errors over multiple reaction cycles prevent the synthesis of longer oligonucleotides for the genome scale engineering of synthetic biological systems. The sources of these errors in synthesis columns are poorly understood. Here we show that bead-bead stacking significantly contributes to reaction errors in columns by analyzing enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides onto the initiated beads along with porosity, particle tracking and diffusion calculations. To circumvent stacking, we introduce dielectrophoretic bead-droplet reactor (DBDR); a novel approach to synthesize on individual microbeads within microdroplets. Dielectrophoretic force overcomes the droplet-medium interfacial tension to encapsulate and eject individual beads from microdroplets in a droplet microfluidic device. Faster reagent diffusion in droplets, and non-uniform electric field induced enhancement in reagent concentration at its surface can improve reaction fidelities in DBDR. Fluorescence comparisons suggest around 3-fold enhancement of reaction fidelity compared to columns. DBDR can potentially enable the high-purity synthesis of arbitrarily long strands of DNA to meet the emerging demands in healthcare, environment, agriculture, materials, and computing. 1. Introduction Solid-phase synthesis techniques revolutionized de novo synthesis of DNA , oligopeptides , oligosaccharides , and combinatorial libraries for drug discovery . Insoluble solid support bound molecules can be sequentially exposed to a large excess of reagents to synthesize the desired long-chain molecule step-by-step . Current state-of-the-art platforms can synthesize oligonucleotides (single-stranded DNA) that are 200-300 nucleotides long in practice , irrespective of the synthesis chemistry. Accumulated errors over multiple reaction cycles limit the synthesis of longer oligonucleotide strands in the existing solid-phase synthesis platforms . For example, in enzymatic synthesis , these errors lead to a large polydispersity in the synthesized oligonucleotides and reduce the yield of the desired product with increase in intended strand length . However, as synthetic biology seeks to engineer increasingly complex biological systems, there is a surge in demand for the synthesis of arbitrarily long strands of oligonucleotides . This requires the minimization of errors over individual synthesis reaction steps. Therefore, development of fundamentally novel physical sample handling techniques for solid-phase synthesis that can facilitate more efficient interfacing of solid supports and reagents to enable high-purity synthesis reactions is essential. Faster reaction rates, reduced reagent consumption and wastage as well as a cleaner synthesis process are additionally desirable . Development of high-purity synthesis techniques necessitates an understanding of the physical basis of inadequate reagent exposure in existing platforms. In microarrays, misalignment of optical beams and inkjet print heads leads to substitution and deletion errors . In columns, which tend to be more efficient and amenable for subsequent gene assembly , deletion strands are the major byproduct. However, the actual reason for the errors is poorly understood and generally attributed to the reaction chemistries that are less than 100% efficient . As a result, significant research is directed towards optimization and improvement of the chemistries . Research on physical sample handling is primarily geared towards enhancing parallelization, throughput, and miniaturization . We establish that the stacking of beads in synthesis columns (Figure 1a) curtails adequate exposure of the growing oligonucleotide strands on the bead surfaces to the reagents and limits the reaction fidelity. To address this problem, we postulate that synthesis on individual beads can maximize reagent access to the bead surfaces. To ensure adequate reagent usage and minimum wastage per bead we choose to synthesize within microdroplets. Furthermore, as an added benefit, the small size of the microdroplet can facilitate faster reagent diffusion to the reaction site to drive faster reactions. The above objectives can be achieved by encapsulating and ejecting individual beads (of radius Rb) from microdroplets (of radius Rd). However, capillary forces due to interfacial tension (γow) are significant at this length scale and must be overcome to manipulate the bead across the droplet-medium interface. In state-of-the-art bead encapsulation techniques, beads pre-suspended in the dispersed (droplet forming) phase are flowed towards the droplet generator site . After the droplet breakup, the bead is held inside it by the droplet- medium interfacial tension. It is not amenable to implement multistep solid-phase synthesis reactions on individual beads using separate reagent microdroplets for each step. Hence, there is a need for new approaches to encapsulate the bead from the surrounding immiscible medium into the droplet and eject it back out into the medium. Herein, we introduce DBDR (Dielectrophoretic Bead-Droplet Reactor), a technique to implement solid-phase oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by using dielectrophoretic force to encapsulate and eject them from picoliter scale reagent microdroplets (Figure 1b). When sufficiently large voltage (Vs) is applied across the electrodes, the dielectrophoretic force (∝ Rd 3|Vs|2) overcomes the capillary forces (∝ Rbγow) to move the hydrophobic bead, across the aqueous reagent-oil medium interface, into the droplet. At low voltages (Vs), the dominant capillary force ejects the hydrophobic bead out of the droplet. As a proof-of-concept, we demonstrated the enzymatic coupling of fluorescently labelled nucleotides to the 3’ end of the initiator strands on the bead using DBDR (Figure 1b). Furthermore, fluorescence measurements show that DBDR achieves higher fidelity of reactions than columns with stacked beads. 2. Device And Reaction Design The silicon-on-glass microfluidic device developed for demonstration of DBDR consists of Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) electrodes (≈ 15 μm wide, Figure 1c and d) in the reaction chamber that are suitably aligned with the on-demand droplet generator microchannel (≈ 25 μm wide, Figure 1c and d) to ensure that the dispensed droplet (Rd ≈ 25 μm) lies within its trapping range. The electrodes are made smaller than the channel (Figure 1d) to ensure that the trapped droplet encapsulates the trapped bead as it covers the electrode (Figure 1b). ITO and glass ensure optical transparency for imaging the trapping and manipulation process as well as fluorescence detection of the coupling reaction. (Supplementary Material and Supplementary Figure 1). Streptavidin-coated fluorescent green polystyrene beads (Rb = 3 μm, Figure 1e) are used as solid supports. 5’ biotinylated oligonucleotide with 25 nucleotides bound to the microbead using streptavidin-biotin linkages (Figure 1e(i)) are used as initiators. The enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT) couples the fluorescently labelled nucleotides (dCTP-AF647) to the 3’ end of the initiators (Figure 1e(ii)) when the bead is encapsulated within the reagent droplet (Figure 1b). A red LED excites AF647 to detect the coupling of dCTP-AF647 to the initiated bead (Figure 1b and 1e(ii), Supplementary Material and Supplementary Figure 2-4). 3. Bead-Droplet Encapsulation and Ejection The device, filled with ≈ 2.5% w/w solution of Span 80 in silicone oil (kinematic viscosity= 1 cSt), is mounted on the sample holder with relevant electrical and fluidic connections (Supplementary Figure 3a & b). Initiated beads suspended in the oil solution are introduced into the device through the bottom fluidic port (Figure 1d). When a single bead enters the vicinity of the electrodes it is dielectrophoretically trapped (Supplementary Figure 3c) by applying a voltage (Vs) across the electrodes (E1 and GND in Figure 1d). Subsequently, a reagent droplet is dispensed into the reaction chamber (Supplementary Figure 3d) and trapped adjacent to the bead (Supplementary Figure 3e). When Vs is increased to ≈ 120 V (amplitude), the bead is fully encapsulated by the reagent droplet (Figure 2a, Movie 1). Reducing Vs to ≈ 0.1 V ejects the bead from the droplet (Figure 2a, Movie S1). Electrohydrodynamic simulations (Figure 2b, Supplementary Material) support these observations. It can be understood in terms of the change in the system’s electrocapillary potential energy (∆U) due to a change in the Gibbs free energy (ΔUIT ≈ −γowcos(θ)∆Aws) of the interfaces between the bead, droplet and the medium as well as the change in the electrical energy of the bead covered by the reagent droplet, θ = 145∘ is the contact angle that the reagent droplet forms on the surface of the bead (Figure 3) and Q is the charge stored on the electrode E1 (Supplementary Material). The large θ means the bead has a propensity towards the oil (hydrophobic). When Vs is high, |ΔUE| ≫ |ΔUIT|. To attain the minimum energy configuration, the droplet moves towards the electrode (ΔU ≈ ΔUE < 0) and engulfs the bead in the process (Figure 2c). When Vs is low, |ΔUE| ≪ |ΔUIT|. To attain the minimum energy configuration, the droplet ejects the hydrophobic bead, which is touching the droplet-medium interface from the inside, as it moves away from the electrode (ΔU ≈ ΔUIT < 0, Figure 2d). Once the bead completely separates from the droplet, ΔUIT is negligible (Figure 2d). Design tradeoffs indicate that while a larger droplet would mean more reagent usage per reaction, a smaller droplet would require a larger voltage to exert significant dielectrophoretic force (∝ Rd 3|Vs|2) to move the bead across the interface (Figure 3a). Our choice of droplet size (Rd = 25μm) is a good compromise. Silicone oil 1cSt acts as a chemically inert suspension medium with low viscosity (Figure 3b) and high dielectric breakdown strength that prevents the rapid evaporation of the tiny reagent microdroplets due to their high surface-to-volume ratio . Addition of the surfactant (Span80) to silicone oil 1cSt further reduces γow to 5.5 mN/m and increases θ to 145°. This makes the otherwise hydrophilic streptavidin surface of the bead (water droplet forms a contact angle of 50° on a streptavidin surface in air) hydrophobic (Figure 3c). Therefore, the choice of silicone oil and surfactant is critical for the spontaneous ejection of the bead from the droplet on touching its interior surface in the absence of an applied voltage. Hence, we establish a robust approach to encapsulate and eject individual beads from droplets (detailed experimental process in Supplementary Material). 4. Enzymatic Coupling of Nucleotide In DBDR After establishing the physical working principle of DBDR, it was used for a proof-of- concept demonstration of enzymatic coupling of single nucleotides onto the initiator strands bound to a microbead. The above process was duplicated along with fluorescent imaging of the bead with a red LED before encapsulating after ejecting it (Figure 4a, Supplementary Material and Supplementary Figure 4a-f). The clear red emission at the position of the bead after ejection confirmed the binding of the fluorescently tagged bases (dCTP-AF647) to the bead. Three repeats of this experiment (Supplementary Figure 4g) were performed with encapsulation time of 300s to ensure reproducibility. To eliminate any false positives due to unincorporated bases non- specifically bound to the surface of the bead, we reiterated the above process using beads devoid of initiator strands and reagent solution without TdT (control experiment in Figure 4b). Lack of red fluorescence at the site of the bead after ejection confirmed the absence of non-specific binding (Figure 4b, Supplementary Materials and Supplementary Figure 4h-m). This establishes DBDR as a robust approach for enzymatic DNA synthesis on individual beads in droplet reactors. While prior reports of chemical synthesis in microdroplets involved all the reagents in fluidic form , there was no droplet microfluidic analogue to solid-phase synthesis . DBDR brings together the disparate fields of droplet microfluidics and solid-phase synthesis. While droplet microfluidic implementation of gene assembly, gene expression and other steps of the design- build-test cycle of synthetic biology exist, a droplet microfluidic implementation of solid-phase synthesis remained elusive due to the inability to handle solid supports in such systems . By addressing this problem, DBDR opens a route for a completely droplet microfluidic process pipeline for synthetic biology that could minimize reagent consumption during testing and verification. 5. Coupling Fidelity Enhancement in DBDR After having demonstrated enzymatic coupling of nucleotides to initiated beads using DBDR, we compared its coupling fidelity with reactions implemented in synthesis columns. Large variations in fluorescence intensity across beads in the column (Figure 5) indicate nonuniform reagent environment in the vicinity of each bead which results in corresponding variations in the reaction fidelities. Only a small fraction of the beads has extremely bright fluorescence which closely represent the maximum attainable enzymatic coupling fidelities. The reduced fidelity on an overwhelming majority of the beads leads to an overall decrease in the average coupling efficiency (average of the histogram in Figure 5) and suggest significant missed couplings. Beads reacted using DBDR consistently exhibit higher fluorescence intensities which is quantified using the average fluorescence intensity ratio (FIRavg = 3.2, Figure 5). This indicates enhanced access of individual bead surfaces to reagents within the microdroplets which then translates to improved reaction fidelities. A 3.2 times higher reaction fidelity implies that reactions implemented using DBDR can achieve near-perfect fidelity even when the same reactions implemented in synthesis column attain a fidelity of mere 32%. While excess concentration of reagents is generally used to drive up reaction fidelities in synthesis columns , it is accompanied by excess reagent wastage as well. If the synthesis processes are repeated to generate N nucleotides long oligomer the ratio of error free products (EFPR) synthesized using DBDR and synthesis columns will be given by EFPR = 1 106 × 3.2N(around a million beads are used in the synthesis column). Therefore, for merely N = 12 > 6 log10 3.2, EFPR > 1 can be achieved. So, higher quantity of error free synthesis product can be achieved on 1 bead using DBDR than on a million beads using synthesis columns for oligomers that are longer than merely 12 nucleotides (N = 12). Furthermore, the ratio of reagents usage (RUR) between DBDR and synthesis columns would be RUR = 60pl 50μl ≈ 10−6. Hence, DBDR has the potential to synthesize significantly higher quantity of error free strands while consuming much less reagents. The performance improvements would be more pronounced with increase in N. This observed superior performance of DBDR compared to synthesis columns (statistical significance established using Welch’s t test, Supplementary Material) can be attributed to 1) bead-bead stacking, 2) faster reagent diffusion time in droplets compared to columns and 3) non-uniform electric field acting on droplet reactor. Firstly, the stacking of beads in synthesis columns restricts reagent access to the bead surfaces. Ideally, beads can be stacked in a definite number of regularly packed lattice arrangements . The rhombohedral is one of the most tightly packed arrangements with a packing fraction of 0.74. It has a fluid filled inter-particle void volume of 4 (√2 − π 3) Rb 3 ≈ 40fl in a single unit cell encompassing a bead (of radius Rb) with ≈ 140 attomoles of initiators on the surface. On the other extreme, the simple cubic (SC) arrangement has a packing fraction of 0.52 and a void volume of 4 (2 − π 3) Rb 3 ≈ 103fl in a single unit cell. The 5μM concentration of fluorescently labelled nucleotides implies ≈ 0.2 attomoles (≈ 140 attomoles/700) and ≈ 0.52attomoles (≈ 140 attomoles/280) of nucleotides per void in a unit cell in rhombohedral and SC stacking respectively. On the other hand, in DBDR, the bead has access to the entire reagent volume within the droplet (forms a contact angle φ = 140° with the device surface, Supplementary Figure 7) which is (2−3cos φ+cos3 φ) 3 πRd 3 = 65pl and ≈ 325 attomoles (≈ 140 attomoles/0.43) of nucleotides. As we can see, while the droplet has ample nucleotides to completely couple with the initiators on the bead surface, the voids in the stack don’t. Therefore, ideally the fluorescence intensity ratio (FIRavg) between beads reacted using DBDR and in perfectly stacked synthesis column is expected to be between 280-700. However, in practice perfect stacking is a rarity. On introduction of reagents into the synthesis column (say at t = 0, Figure 6a), the particles are displaced from the perfect stack due to the drag force exerted by the turbulent flow (t = 0.05, Figure 6a). The increased interparticle spacing facilitates better reagent access to the bead surfaces. This explains the much lower FIRavg. Once the reagent influx stops, the particles settle down under gravity into imperfect stacks (t = 70s and t = 300s, Figure 6a). Different particles have different settling times. This explains the varying exposure (spread of the grey band and histogram in Figure 5) to reagents during the experimental time (300s). Even when the beads are floating up, there are many beads in proximity (≈ 10 beads in a region of size equivalent to a droplet in frame t = 0.05 in Figure 6a) competing for the reagent molecules. Therefore, we see that the tight stacking of beads in synthesis columns which is known to provide the large surface area of solid support for the synthesis of large quantity of oligonucleotides also contributes significantly to reaction errors (reduced reaction fidelity). These errors accumulate over multiple synthesis cycles to ultimately negate the advantage of large synthesis quantity achieved in the columns. On the other hand, by ensuring one bead per droplet, DBDR is uniquely placed to ensure maximum attainable reagent access (resulting in higher observed fluorescence) to the bead surface during the experimental duration. As a result, beads reacted using DBDR exhibit higher than maximum attainable fluorescence in synthesis columns. As stated earlier, to compensate for this reduced reagent access in synthesis columns, higher reagent concentrations are used . However, this increases reagent wastage per reaction which can accumulate over multiple synthesis cycles to make the synthesis of longer strands inviable. Secondly, in synthesis columns beads not only access reagents from the voids in their immediate vicinity but also molecules that diffuse to the stack from further reaches of the column to replenish the reacted molecules. The shorter dimensions of the droplet facilitate much faster diffusion (Tdiff ∝ l2) of reagent species than columns . For example, it would take a single nucleotides (with diffusion coefficient D ≈ 10−6 − 10−5cm2/s ) approximately Tdiff,col = h2 2D ≈ 25000s (h = 2.28mm) to diffuse from the top of the column to the stack of beads at the bottom (Figure 6b) which is much longer than the experimentally employed reaction times (≈ 300s). On the other hand, diffusion time across the droplet (RD = 25μm) is a mere Tdiff,DBDR = 2RD 2 D ≈ 12.5s. Therefore, within an experimental time of 300s the coupling reaction in DBDR is less likely to have unreacted strands than in synthesis columns. This can enable the faster synthesis of longer strands. Hence, by using parallel manipulation techniques DBDR synthesis can be extended to multiple beads undergoing reactions in separate droplets to achieve desired synthesis throughput along with high-fidelity and faster reactions. Again, although excess reagent concentration can compensate for the longer diffusion times in synthesis columns, it will also increase the reagent wastage. It is worth mentioning that in an ideal synthesis column scenario, beads would be tightly packed between the filters. In such a case, only the reagents within the voids will be accessible for coupling. This would further reduce reaction fidelity and the average fluorescence intensities of the beads reacted in columns (FIRavg will increase). Thirdly, the applied electric field can affect rates of catalysis by lowering the activation energy required to perform a chemical reaction . Furthermore, the confinement provided by the droplet surface along with the non-uniform AC electric field driven drift of the charged species such as e.g. Na+, Co2+, Mn2+, Zn2+, and Mg2+ (represented generally as Me+) and the negatively charged dCTP-AF647 in the reagent can lead to their significantly enhanced concentrations at the droplet-medium interfaces at opposite ends of the droplet (Figure 6c). With electric drift coefficients (μdrift) ≈ 3 × 10−4cm2/V. s − 6 × 10−4cm2/V. s , these charged reacting species can migrate a distance of 75μm (> 2Rd) under the influence of an average electric field of 10kV/cm withing a half period (2.5ms) of a 200 Hz AC supply. The increased concentration of Me+over the negative half cycle will enhance their acceptance into terminal transferase (TdT). Its rate of polymerization is dependent on which ion is bound to the active site (Mg2+ incorporates dGTP and dATP; Co2+ incorporates dCTP and dTTP) . Furthermore, the electric field may also help stabilize the metal ion-triphosphate interaction, thus enabling a more efficient nucleophilic attack by the 3’-OH group of the primer on the α-phosphate of the dCTP-AF647 . Their improved incorporation into the enzyme and the enhanced concentration of dCTP-AF647 in the positive half of the AC cycle can lead to improved coupling fidelities. It is noteworthy that additional reagents need not be introduced into the droplet to achieve these concentration enhancements. Therefore, this does not entail any additional reagent consumption or wastage. Our predictions are in line with observations of reaction rate accelerations in microdroplet reactors . 6. Conclusion In summary, we introduce a novel technique (DBDR) to implement enzymatic oligonucleotide synthesis on individual beads by combining dielectrophoresis and droplet microfluidics. Fluorescence measurements and modelling suggest that by avoiding bead-bead stacking reaction fidelities using DBDR can exceed synthesis columns. The stacking of beads in synthesis columns provides a large surface area for the synthesis of large quantities of oligonucleotides . However, it also enhances the accumulation of reaction errors which ultimately negates the product quantity advantage over multiple reaction cycles to limit the synthesized strand length. On the other hand, the superior reaction fidelity of DBDR, achieved due to improved interfacing of solid supports with reagents, when replicated over multiple reaction cycles using scalable device architectures can potentially enable the synthesis of ultra-long strands of oligonucleotides (≫ 300 bases) with unprecedent yields of the intended FLP while minimizing reagent consumption and wastage. It will mitigate the need for subsequent purification and error correction and reduce the cost of synthesis per base . The lower reagent diffusion times across the droplet may lead to faster reactions which can be advantageous in the synthesis of long strands. The electrodes exerting the non-uniform electric field can be seen as on-site alignment features integrated onto the synthesis platform that maximize interaction between individual beads (solid supports) and reagent droplets. The electrode identifies the difference in the electrical properties of the droplet, bead, and the suspension to exert a dielectrophoretic force to enforce their alignment. This is in sharp contrast to microarrays where the reagent alignment apparatus is external to the synthesis surface (mechanical alignment of micromirrors in DMDs and nozzles in inkjet printheads). Reagents are dispensed or synthesis spots are activated based on preprogramed sequence of coordinates. No feedback from the synthesis surface is followed to ensure alignment accuracy. Furthermore, our research expanded the functionality of droplet microfluidics based chemical synthesis systems by incorporating solid-phase synthesis. 7. Outlook and Scope for Future Work In addition to being a potential platform for high-fidelity solid-phase enzymatic DNA synthesis, DBDR can have many other applications. Water-in-oil droplets are excellent model systems to study enzymatic reactions within volume-confined environments . Typically, droplets are merged to deliver the reaction substrate to the enzyme. However, this process is accompanied by an increase in the overall volume. Instead, if the substrate is bound to a solid support, as in DBDR, the volume of the aqueous compartment and the reagent concentrations remains the same. Droplet microfluidics has enabled the processing of chemical information using Boolean logic, paving the way for chemical computation as well as logic-driven manipulation of chemical payloads for combinatorial screening applications . DBDR can extend this concept a step further by writing chemical information onto solid supports; thus, creating solid-state drives for chemical information, which can facilitate one-bead-one-compound combinatorial synthesis using Boolean logic as well as DNA data storage on a droplet microfluidic processor. DBDR can be extended to implement other forms of solid-phase synthetic chemistries such as oligopeptide, and oligosaccharide. Finally, the diminishing costs of performing solid-phase combinatorial chemistry using the one-bead-one-compound approach on DBDR may make it economically feasible for a larger body of scientists to pursue research into traditionally expensive areas of chemistry such as drug discovery and vaccine development; this may expedite scientific discoveries to cure potentially life-threatening diseases and ailments.