arXiv:2211.08152v1 [cs.ET] 15 Nov 2022 Evidence of In-Memory Computing in a Ferrofluid Marco Crepaldi1, Charanraj Mohan1, Erik Garofalo2, Andrew Adamatzky3, Konrad Szaciłowski4, Alessandro Chiolerio2∗ 1Electronic Design Laboratory, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,16163, Genova, Italy 2Bioinspired Soft Robotics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia,16163, Genova, Italy 3Unconventional Computing Laboratory, University of West England, BS16 1QY, Bristol, United Kingdom 4Academic Centre for Materials and Nanotechnology, AGH University of Science and Technology, 30-059, Krak ́ow, Poland ∗To whom correspondence should be addressed; E-mail: alessandro.chiolerio@iit.it Magnetic fluids are excellent candidates for important research fields includ- ing energy harvesting, biomedical applications, soft robotics and exploration. However, notwithstanding relevant advancements such as shape reconfigura- bility, that have been demonstrated, there is no evidence for their computation capability, including the emulation of synaptic functions. Here, we experi- mentally demonstrate that a Fe3O4 water-based Ferrofluid (FF) can perform electrical analog computing and be programmed using quasi DC signals and read at Radio Frequency (RF) mode. We have observed features in all respects attributable to a memristive behavior, featuring both short and long-term in- formation storage capacity and plasticity. The colloid was capable of classify- ing digits of a 8 × 8 pixel dataset using a custom in-memory signal processing 1 scheme, and through Physical Reservoir Computing (PRC) by training a read- out layer. One-Sentence Summary A Ferrofluid can store analog information and run electrical in- memory computing using quasi-DC write and RF read modes. Main Text As a part of the largest international effort underway to explore alternative computing meth- ods called unconventional computing (1, 2), there is a consolidated trend in the research on devices, materials and in natural processes, to find an implicit exhibition of computing features, even beyond solid aggregation state. The idea of computing with liquids attracted engineers and mathematicians since the early 1900s (3), but later prototypes of liquid computers were mostly based on hydraulic, reaction-diffusion, and fluidic principles (4). Only recently, liq- uid and colloidal systems have been subject to attention for mimicking the ions moving in the human brain through embedding aqueous solutions in gel or solid-state scaffolds (5). Being applicable to soft robotics (6), energy harvesting (7), and computation in general (8), magnetic fluids are always of great research interest (Sec. S1). Particularly, ferrofluids (FFs) are mixtures in which nanometric-size dispersed insoluble particles are suspended throughout a solvent, the particles being typically superparamagnetic, giving rise to interesting collective behaviour. A potential of FF in computing, massive-parallel information processing, sensing, and energy har- vesting regardless of their shape has not been addressed before, notwithstanding first reports on their shape reconfiguration are already available (9). Here, we demonstrate that a volume of a superparamagnetic FF can be interchangeably assigned to memory and computing roles. This property is consistent with the rising paradigm of in-memory computing, which aims at mitigat- ing processor-memory data transfer bottleneck by embedding computation in memory (10–13). 2 Furthermore, we demonstrate FF computation using the concept of Reservoir Computing (RC), a paradigm that takes advantage from system dynamics (spontaneous or excited from external sources) for advanced information processing. Reversibility, fading memory, nonlinearity of electrical response and structural stochasticity are usually considered as prerequisites for any physical implementation of RC concepts (14), and most solid-state memristors fulfil these re- quirements (15). Our experimental setup shown in Fig. 1A comprises a FF sample (the reservoir) connected to a two-port Vector Network Analyzer (VNA), a DC bias generator (where the negative terminal is internally connected to ground) and two bias tee circuits to decouple RF and DC signals (details in Materials and Methods). Both the DC bias generator and the VNA are connected to a Personal Computer to implement measurement scripts (Sec. S2), that is, applying a DC voltage across the reservoir and reading the impedance through its S-parameters, that can be always converted to impedances as a function of frequency. As shown in Fig. 1B, the FF is stimulated as follows: a quasi-DC voltage VP (both positive and negative) is applied to the system to program/write it, and its internal status (read) is acquired in RF mode using the magnitude impedance parameters. Since the observed S-parameters and consequently impedance magnitude variations are small (Sec. S3), the sum of the numerical impedance values over all scanned frequencies ZC xy can be used profitably as an indicator (see the formulas in the figure). This way the S-parameters are collapsed to a single number for each measurement point, reducing data volume. Consequently, each reading measurement is an ensemble of four real numbers ZC 11, ZC 12, ZC 21 and ZC 22, all a function of time t, e.g., for port one, ZC 11 ≡ ZC 11(t). Hysteresis, a fingerprint of memristance (16), is a necessary condition for neuromorphic computation (17). Fig. 1C shows hysteresis loops obtained with a voltage sweep from -3.8 V to 3.8 V with steps of 0.1 V each lasting 1 s, repeated for 50 times. At the beginning of the test (t = 0 s) we started with VP = -0.85 V and impedance values were ZC 11(0) = 14312 Ω, 3 ZC 12(0) = 2320 Ω, ZC 21(0) = 2060 Ω and ZC 22(0) = 11795 Ω. The pinched hysteresis of ZC 11 shrinks for positive VP as the number of iterations increases, even with such zero average excitation. The hysteresis of ZC 22 shrinks throughout the whole VP range while for ZC 12 and ZC 21 we ob- serve the opposite phenomenon. On the one hand, the results indicate that assuming a given DC stimulus, its effect on the impedance variation is not constant and varies over time. On the other hand, this feature indicates a long-term adjustment of the material towards an equilibrium condition, that can be interpreted as the feature of memorizing the previous DC bias history. Furthermore, due to fluidity of the material, this memory will be naturally fading, which is another important prerequisite for an efficient and universal RC system (18). The liquid can be used to store information in the form of a particular impedance evolution at a given port. To pose a parallelism with biological neurons we can refer to a long-term plasticity feature. Fig. 2A shows the stimulus scheme used to demonstrate storage capacity for N information values – in this specific test N = 16. The test comprises repeated Reset, Write and Hold phases, where Reset implements a control loop on ZC 11 to reset its value to ZC∗ 11 . The results in Fig. 2B show that ZC∗ 11 is correctly reached for each iteration, and notwithstanding impedance control is implemented at port one, ZC 22 evolves towards well defined impedance values, that are a function of the applied pulse duration TP(i). Interestingly, the ZC 22 values do not reset at the beginning of each Write phase. The small variation of the ∆ZC 22 values and the associated uniform distribution parameters during Hold of Fig. 2C, suggests that the colloid can be used as a high resolution short-term memory. In general, as TP(i) can be controlled with the power of continuum, analog information storage can be implemented and information can be stored even for a longer duration (Sec. S4). By extending the memory stimulus scheme of Fig. 2A, we could demonstrate in-memory digit classification. To this end, we prepared a dataset consisting of the ten digits 0–9, in 8 × 8 matrices of pixels (Sec. S5) that we have serialized as shown in the scheme of Fig. 3A. 4 Data serialization has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach towards neuromorphic data processing with very minimal computational resources [e.g. single artificial neurons (19, 20)]. Each pixel, besides its value 0–1 that can be mapped to a voltage level VP, can be attributed a weight in terms of pulse duration wi and, in general, an offset (in terms of additive voltage). It is therefore possible to build up sequences with higher or lower sensitivity to a particular digit or selectively filter particular pixel values. Here, we do not bias the colloid in the condition of having a pinched hysteresis, so to obtain a monotonic decrease of impedance during the tests, and therefore enable a direct comparison of the final value for all digits after the application of the sequences. By assuming instead that the system is in the conditions of a pinched hysteresis, the FF can progressively adapt to implement a learning mechanism by providing a particular non-zero offset weighting (Sec. S6). Fig. 3B shows the stimulus scheme of the pattern classification test, which exploits in- memory computing features. Similarly to the memorization experiments here we apply a reset control on ZC 22, towards the impedance set-point ZC 22 = 14338 Ω, using an initial Charge phase at 10 V. Each pixel is associated to a -3.3 V or 0 V voltage (black or white) for a given weight duration, with zero offset. After verifying differentiation (Sec. S5), we provide the weighted sequences so that the pulse durations of the expected black pixels are longer compared to the others. We apply sequentially all serialized pixel matrices from 0 to 9, using all the weighted sequences for each digit. Fig. 3C–E show the measurement results assuming 4.5 and 0.25 s weights (black and white, respectively), for three sample digits, 1, 4 and 7. Results show that with this in-memory computing scheme ZC 22 decreases more considerably in case the weighted sequence matches the digit. The final decision can then be achieved by using a simple threshold on the ZC 22 value, which depends on the digit to be detected, or alternatively, by indexing the digit that leads to the lowest impedance after all of them are serialized. This particular scheme works except for 3 which is a subset of 8 (Fig. 3F), thus leading to 90% accuracy. As an 5 effect of long-term plasticity, we have observed also that if the above test is repeated for days without interruption, the impedance dynamics shrinks, irrespective of the digit (see Sec. S7). The behaviour of the liquid, however, is reversible and impedance dynamics can be restored. Similarly to memristors (differences outlined in Sec. S8), to further demonstrate the com- putation capability of the FF we have implemented PRC using an ad-hoc readout layer. The FF exhibits chaotic nature (resulting, inter alia from Brownian motions as well as from the surfactant molecules featuring electrical polarizability), and within its deterministic features, it presents a strong sensitivity to initial electrical conditions (Sec. S9), while it can provide both fading memory and long-term plasticity (for instance see the plots in Fig. S3). RC is typically implemented taking advantage of a physical reservoir short-term memory (21). However, within the time frame of a digit classification, our findings show that the dynamics of the FF tend in the long-term to reduce if a trivial reset condition is used (Sec. S7). Moreover, besides sensi- tivity to initial conditions, the FF exhibits chaotic non-equilibrium at repeated impedance sets (Sec. S10). Such features can make PRC unfeasible and it is thus necessary to avoid changes in dynamical regime during both training and inference. To mitigate these variations, we have designed a particular ’reset’ sequence that maintains the dynamical features of the material consistent. It consists of the application of a high voltage towards two impedance points, that are higher and lower compared to the initial impedance ZC∗ 22 used to run active computation, respectively. Fig. 4A shows the measurement scheme and the reset sequence. In our tests ZC 22|LOW = 16350 Ω, ZC 22|HIGH = 16450 Ω and ZC∗ We used constant weighting to serialize the 64 pixels of the digit matrices (each pixel lasts 2 s, with -3.3 V for 1 and 0 V for 0) and we have trained a Neural Network (NN) layer to classify four digits 0–3 (rationale and dataset in Sec. S11). The NN comprises a first block which normalizes in parallel the 64 impedance values in the range 0–1 to get rid of residual dynamical variations due to the FF chaotic nature. The input layer is made of a 64 Dense model, followed 6 by a Batch Normalization block (that helps back-propagation convergence), another 14 elements Dense model, and finally a single Dense neuron. Inference is achieved in real-time using the trained NN on new measurement data from the FF consisting on 64 impedance values ZC 22. Fig. 4B shows the confusion map, after detecting the four digits with the pre-trained NN, achieving an accuracy of 90.6%. In conclusion, we have demonstrated the first ever evidence of a FF in-memory computing device. A FF can implement complex calculations both with custom in-memory computing schemes, and PRC, thus widening its spectrum of features. Besides extending the possibilities of already existing applications, these findings make solutions featuring unprecedented plasticity, fault-tolerance and resilience towards extreme environments a plausible reality, thanks to FFs amorphous nature.