Properties of condensed matter from fundamental physical constants K. Trachenko1 1 School of Physical and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS, UK Fundamental physical constants play a profound role in physics. For example, they govern nuclear reactions, formation of stars, nuclear synthesis and stability of biologically vital elements. These are high-energy processes discussed in particle physics, astronomy and cosmology. More recently, it was realised that fundamental physical constants extend their governing reach to low-energy processes and properties operating in condensed matter systems, often in an unexpected way. These properties are those we experience daily and can routinely measure, including viscosity, thermal conductivity, elasticity and sound. Here, we review this work. We start with the lower bound on liquid viscosity, its origin and show how to relate the bound to fundamental physical constants. The lower bound of kinematic viscosity represents the global minimum on the phase diagram. We show how this result answers the long-standing question considered by Purcell and Weisskopf, namely why viscosity never falls below a certain value. An accompanying insight is that water viscosity and water-based life are well attuned to fundamental constants, adding another higher-level layer to the anthropic principle. We then discuss viscosity minima in liquid He above and below the λ-point. We subsequently consider a very different property, thermal diffusivity, and show that it has the same minimum fixed by fundamental physical constants as viscosity. We also discuss bounds related to elastic properties, elastic moduli and their analogues in low-dimensional systems, and show how these bounds are related to the upper bound for the speed of sound. We conclude with listing ways in which the discussion of fundamental constants and bounds advance physical theories. Contents 1. Introduction 1 2. Minimal viscosity 3 A. The liquid problem 3 B. Viscosity and dynamical crossover 4 C. Viscosity minima 6 D. Elementary viscosity, diffusion constant and uncertainty principle 9 E. The Purcell question: why do all viscosities stop at the same place? 10 F. Fundamental constants, quantumness and life 11 G. Quantum liquids 12 H. Quark-gluon plasma 14 I. What is “fundamental”? 15 3. Thermal conductivity 15 A. Thermal conductivity of insulators and dynamical crossover 15 B. Lower bound on thermal diffusivity 17 C. Thermal diffusivity of electrons in metals 18 4. Minima on the phase diagram: theory and applications 18 5. Elastic properties 19 A. Elastic moduli 19 B. Low-dimensional systems: surface tension and atomic force 20 6. Speed of sound 20 A. The upper bound 20 B. Comparing to experiments 22 7. Summary: fundamental constants and physical theories 24 8. Acknowledgements 25