Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material A. Sola,1 E. Olivetti,1 L. Martino,1 and V. Basso1 Istituto Nazionale di Ricerca Metrologica, Strada delle Cacce 91, 10135, Turin, Italy. (*Electronic mail: a.sola@inrim.it) (Dated: 18 November 2022) To assess the potential of polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material, we have experimentally inves- tigated its anomalous Nernst effect (ANE) by means of the heat flux method. We prepared MnBi samples by powder metallurgy; this technique allows the preparation of samples in arbitrary shapes with the possibility to tailor their magnetic properties. In the material exhibiting the highest remanent magnetization, we found a value of the ANE ther- mopower of -1.1 μV/K at 1 T, after the compensation of the ordinary Nernst effect from pure bismuth present inside the polycrystalline sample. This value is comparable with those reported in the literature for single crystals. The performance of a thermoelectric device working with the Seebeck/Peltier effects is ruled by both its architecture and the characteristics of the materials. The latter are rep- resented by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = ε2σT/k where ε is the Seebeck termopower, σ is the electrical con- ductivity, T is the temperature and k is the thermal conduc- tivity. The typical device architecture consists in pillars of p-type and n-type semiconductors that are thermally in par- allel and electrically in series1. This configuration allows the maximization of the efficiency, but limits the possibili- ties of arbitrary shaping. Structures such as thermal-sensing coatings2 or flexible devices3 can however be devised by ex- ploiting transverse thermoelectric effects4, also called ther- momagnetic effects5. The Nernst effect refers to the trans- verse thermopower N = −∇yV/∇xT that rises in a material in which the temperature gradient ∇xT is applied in presence of a magnetic field Bz. In ferromagnetic materials, with a sponta- neous magnetization, the thermopower is called spontaneous or anomalous Nernst effect (ANE). The performance of a ther- momagnetic device depends on the ratio between two lengths: one along the electric potential and the other along the ther- mal gradient. These are oriented along perpendicular direc- tions, while in a Seebeck/Peltier device the two lengths are parallel and coincide. This fact opens new possibilities for the improvement of the performance, along with more free- dom in the geometries, by tuning dimensions and shapes of the devices. The optimum shape, for an architecture based on multistage cascading, was derived by Harman6 and subse- quently developed7–9. The opportunity to adapt the shape of thermoelectric devices to the geometries of existing systems is of paramount importance and sometimes it is the only option, as for example for the proposal of self-cooling cables10. In this framework, the study of thermomagnetic effects in fer- romagnets that could be easily produced in different sizes and shapes, like polycrystalline materials, becomes crucial. A material worth of investigation is MnBi, which allows the preparation of magnetic samples by powder metallurgy pro- cesses. The thermomagnetic properties of MnBi single crys- tals have been recently investigated11, with some interesting findings in terms of an extra contribution to the transverse thermopower. This originates from magnon-electron interac- tion due to the large spin-orbit coupling of the MnBi itself and it was also observed in heterogeneous systems such as multi- layers12,13 and composites of bulk materials with heavy metal nanoparticles14. Nevertheless the possibility of exploiting this favorable condition in a single material makes the MnBi ap- pealing in the framework of the thermomagnetic applications. Previous studies on MnBi single-crystals report a transverse thermopower at saturating field of 2 μV/K at room temper- ature and 10 μV/K at 80 K11. These values are comparable with the maximum ANE thermopowers reported in a recent perspective paper by Uchida and coworkers15, where the high- est ANE coefficients are reported for the Heusler ferromagnet Co2MnGa. Some experimental results of ANE in polycrys- talline samples are already present in the literature, with large values at 2T recently reported for polycrystalline FexGa4−x (2.96 < x < 3.15)16. The aim of the present study is the investigation of the ANE thermopower in polycrystalline MnBi samples prepared by powder metallurgy processes. Our study has the scope to un- veil the gap in performance between ideal materials used for the study of fundamental phenomena and less ordered sys- tems, with the advantage, in this second category, to exploit the hard magnetic properties of MnBi and have a device work- ing without an external applied magnetic field. Samples were prepared through a powder metallurgy route that consists in the annealing of manganese and bismuth powders, previously mixed and pressed to form a pellet. All the powders were handled in a nitrogen-filled glove box to avoid oxidation. The α-MnBi phase is obtained by heating at 320 ◦C for 1 hour in vacuum or inert atmosphere. We prepared three types of samples, exploiting magnetic field annealing and the induc- tion of defects by means of high-energy ball milling to tailor the microstructure and hence the magnetic properties of the samples17. The hysteresis loops of the samples prepared ac- cording to these three procedures, measured by means of vi- brating sample magnetometry (VSM), are shown in Fig. 1. Sample A, that can be considered as a reference, has been an- nealed in vacuum without applied magnetic field; this prepa- ration favored the formation of randomly oriented and well developed MnBi grains. Sample B was annealed in nitrogen atmosphere under a static magnetic field of 1 T produced by a Halbach cylinder. This procedure allows the development of a preferred orientation of the MnBi grains with their c- axis along the applied field direction. The resulting hysteresis cycle shows larger saturation and higher remanent magneti- zation compared to the reference sample. For sample C, we focused on the development of coercivity. In order to obtain arXiv:2211.09553v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 17 Nov 2022 Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material 2 Magnetization as a function of the applied magnetic field measured by vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) for each type of polycrystalline MnBi sample. A: isotropic reference sample obtained by annealing without applied magnetic field. B: sample annealed under a static 1 T magnetic field. C: sample obtained by milling of the reference sample. a high value, we milled the material that was annealed in the same way as the sample A in a planetary ball mill. The milling process was for 1 h at 450 rpm in zirconia jar (ball-to-powder ratio ∼14) and afterwards we pressed the resulting powder in a new pellet. A smaller grain size and the presence of defects, representing pinning centres for domain wall motion, allowed to increase significantly the value of the coercive field17, as shown in Fig. 1. The transverse thermopower of the afore- mentioned samples was investigated by an experimental setup based on the heat flux method whose technical details and the calibration procedure are reported in previous works18,19. The experiment consists in the measurement of the transverse volt- age response as a function of the heat flux traversing the sam- ple. The latter quantity is monitored by means of calibrated Peltier cells while the whole system is kept under vacuum in order to avoid uncontrolled heat leakages. This procedure al- lows to disregard the role of the thermal resistances between the sample and the thermal sensor, that usually affects the di- rect measurement of the temperature difference. The value of the ANE thermopower N has been experimentally derived as: N = VANE/Ly −jq/k (1) where VANE is the measured voltage drop, Ly is the distance between the electrodes, jq is the heat current density measured by the calibrated Peltier cells sensors and k is the thermal con- ductivity of the material under investigation whose value, for our study, has been approximated to the one of pure bismuth that is 7.9 WK−1m−1. A scheme of the measurement configu- ration is shown is Fig. 2 a. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the directions of the voltage drop VANE and the one of the heat current density jq. An electromagnet was used to apply the magnetic field alternating between ±1 T and measured by a calibrated Hall probe. We compensated the induced volt- age which constitutes a spurious component of the measured voltage drop VANE; this component arose from the variation of the magnetic flux density across the electric wiring of the experiment. For each sample mounting inside the measure- ment system, the determination of these induced voltages was performed by applying the same varying magnetic field in ab- sence of heat fluxes. The results for the three types of MnBi samples are shown in Fig. 2 b. The ANE voltages VANE as a function of the applied magnetic field are shown in the top row of Fig. 2 b. Here we represented only the values of VANE obtained with positive temperature differences, as an example of the measurement. The corresponding values of temperature difference are reported in the labels and have been derived as ∆T = −jqLx/k. The measured voltage VANE follows an hys- teresis loop whose magnitude increases along the vertical axis for higher temperature differences. The values of VANE at zero applied field, highlighted by black dots on the hysteresis loops in the top row of Fig. 2 b, correspond to a Nernst effect driven by the remanent magnetization of the sample. These values, normalized by the geometrical factors of the samples, are used to represent VANE/Ly at remanence as a function of the ther- mal gradients, shown in the bottom row of Fig. 2 b. Our system is able to produce heat currents jq in both positive and negative directions along x; this allows to test the signs of the ANE voltages according to the signs of jq. The slopes in Fig. 2 b are the values of ANE thermopower at remanence. Sample B, prepared under magnetic field annealing (blue set) exhibits the largest value, N = −5.8·10−7 V/K. The curves shown in the top row of Fig. 2 b resemble the VSM measurements in Fig. 1: particularly, sample B and C exhibit high remanent magnetization and high coercivity, respectively, also in their ANE characteristics. A decrease of the VANE for increasing applied magnetic fields is found in all samples; the interpreta- tion of this phenomenon is the presence of unreacted bismuth, a source of transverse thermopower whose sign is opposite to the one of the MnBi ANE, as shown in Fig. 3. Data in Fig. 3 are the measured Nernst thermopower of pure bismuth pellet obtained with the same experimental setup and in the same ge- ometrical configuration used for the MnBi samples. The value of the Nernst coefficient of bismuth, 32·10−6 VK−1T−1, has been derived by the plateau of the the derivative of the curve of Fig. 3. The red line is a guide for the eye whose slope is equal to the Nernst coefficient of bismuth and therefore paral- lel to the thermopower vs. field curve in the range above 1 T. The three main features of the measured Nernst effect of bis- muth are the high magnitude, the sign, opposite to the one of the MnBi ANE thermopower, and the behaviour as function of the applied magnetic field, that is non-linear but exhibits no hysteresis. With this information it is possible to analyze the MnBi ANE measured thermopower by taking into account the presence of the bismuth Nernst voltage and considering the to- tal measured voltage as: Vtot = (1−xBi)VMnBi +xBiVBi (2) where xBi is the unreacted bismuth linear phase fraction in- side the sample, VBi is the Nernst voltage contribution from bismuth and VMnBi is the sought ANE voltage from MnBi. The criterion used to choose a value of xBi is to make the ANE loop follow the VSM loop for each type of material, by using the data reported in Fig. 3 for the VBi. Accord- Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material 3 detected along the y-axis. The distance between electrodes is Ly. b) Top: ANE voltages as a function of the applied magnetic field for three positive values of temperature difference. Bottom: gradients of ANE voltage as a function of the applied thermal gradient measured at zero magnetic field (corresponding to the values highlighted by the black dots on the top graphs). In the labels the values for the ANE thermopower are reported. Each column corresponds to the type of material: orange data-set for the zero-field annealed sample (A), blue data-set for the field annealed sample (B) and green data-set for the milled sample (C). magnetic field, normalized by the geometrical factors of the sample and by the thermal gradient. Experimental data are represented by the black line, while the red line is the reference slope for a Nernst coefficient of 32·10−6 VK−1T−1. ing to this calculation, it is possible to obtain the MnBi ANE voltage VMnBi extrapolated to the absence of bismuth. The bottom row of Fig. 4 shows the same VSM data of Fig. 1 (orange lines) superimposed to the MnBi thermopowers (pur- ple points) after the compensation of the Nernst contribution from bismuth, for the three types of materials. On the top row Fig. 4 are reported also the measured thermopowers from the samples, before the bismuth compensation. The results of the MnBi ANE thermopowers at remanence together with the MnBi ANE thermopowers at saturating field after the bismuth compensation are summarized in Table I, for the three types of materials. In the case of the field-annealed material (sam- ple B), the value of ANE thermopower at 1 T reaches -1.1 μV/K, that is half of the value reported at room temperature for single crystal11. For the other types of materials (sample A and C) we observed lower ANE thermopowers. This is com- MnBi Sample ANE at 0 T ANE at 1 T μVK−1 μVK−1 Zero-field annealed -0.63a Field annealed -1.1a Milled -0.45a a ANE thermopower for the MnBi after the bismuth compensation, obtained from the data reported on the bottom row of Fig. 4 patible with the anisotropic nature of the ANE, whose mag- nitude depends on the direction of the magnetization and of the c axis of the MnBi crystals. We have further checked the value of the unreacted volume bismuth fraction by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements. The volume per- centages of bismuth that we obtained were three to ten times bigger than the percentages needed to achieve the superimpo- sition between the ANE thermopower curves and the magneti- zation curves of Fig. 4, bottom. However, it is reasonable that the MnBi and the bismuth phases do not grow with the same shapes since the residual bismuth is presumably an intergran- ular phase that surrounds the MnBi crystals. With this model of the microstructure it is possible to evaluate the linear phase fraction xBi as the amount of phase crossed by a line oriented along an arbitrary direction inside the MnBi sample. The re- sult is compatible to the ones used to meet the condition of the superimposition between magnetization curves and ANE thermopower curves. In conclusion, we demonstrated the thermomagnetic char- acteristics of polycrystalline MnBi samples prepared by means of powder metallurgy followed by field annealing. This method permits an easy manipulation of the magnetic proper- Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material 4 comparison between VSM magnetization curves (orange line) and ANE thermopowers of MnBi (purple diamonds) after the compensation of the Nernst effect of bismuth, originating from the unreacted phase inside the samples. The bismuth fractions needed to achieve the superimpo- sition between the ANE and the VSM curves according to Eq. 2 is 2 % for the zero-field annealed sample, 1.6 % for the field annealed sample and 1.6 % for the milled sample. ties at the preparation stage and its direct effect on the ANE thermopower. This work paves the way towards the optimiza- tion of the properties of a transverse thermoelectric material such as MnBi: among the requirements, one of the most important is the high value of the remanent magnetization. Moreover, it is important to take into account the different contributions to the thermopower from materials whose ther- momagnetic characteristics are different, like in the case of bismuth inside the MnBi samples. The optimization of these parameters allows the characteristics of polycrystalline sam- ples to be comparable to the ones obtained from ideal and more difficult-to-produce materials, such as single crystals. This represents a step forward in the applicability of thermo- magnetic effects in the field of thermoelectric coolers and en- ergy harvesting devices. 1F. J. DiSalvo, “Thermoelectric cooling and power generation,” Science 285, 2A. Kirihara, K.-i. Uchida, Y. Kajiwara, M. Ishida, Y. Nakamura, T. Manako, E. Saitoh, and S. Yorozu, “Spin-current-driven thermoelectric coating,” Na- ture materials 11, 686–689 (2012). 3A. Kirihara, K. Kondo, M. Ishida, K. Ihara, Y. Iwasaki, H. Someya, A. Matsuba, K.-i. Uchida, E. Saitoh, N. Yamamoto, et al., “Flexible heat- flow sensing sheets based on the longitudinal spin seebeck effect using one-dimensional spin-current conducting films,” Scientific reports 6, 1–7 4S. R. Boona, H. Jin, and S. Watzman, “Transverse thermal energy conver- sion using spin and topological structures,” Journal of Applied Physics 130, 5G. S. Nolas, J. Sharp, and J. Goldsmid, Thermoelectrics: basic principles and new materials developments, Vol. 45 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2001). 6T. Harman, “Theory of the infinite stage nernst-ettingshausen refrigerator,” Advanced energy conversion 3, 667–676 (1963). 7C. Kooi, R. Horst, and K. Cuff, “Thermoelectric-thermomagnetic energy converter staging,” Journal of Applied Physics 39, 4257–4263 (1968). 8K. Scholz, P. Jandl, U. Birkholz, and Z. Dashevskii, “Infinite stage etting- shausen cooling in bi-sb alloys,” Journal of applied physics 75, 5406–5408 9M. M. H. Polash and D. Vashaee, “Infinite-stage nernst-ettingshausen cry- ocooler for practical applications,” Physical Review Applied 15, 014011 10L. de’Medici, “Thermomagnetic mechanism for self-cooling cables,” Phys- ical Review Applied 5, 024001 (2016). 11B. He, C. ̧Sahin, S. R. Boona, B. C. Sales, Y. Pan, C. Felser, M. E. Flatté, and J. P. Heremans, “Large magnon-induced anomalous nernst conductivity in single-crystal mnbi,” Joule 5, 3057–3067 (2021). 12K.-D. Lee, D.-J. Kim, H. Yeon Lee, S.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee, K.-M. Lee, J.- R. Jeong, K.-S. Lee, H.-S. Song, J.-W. Sohn, et al., “Thermoelectric signal enhancement by reconciling the spin seebeck and anomalous nernst effects in ferromagnet/non-magnet multilayers,” Scientific reports 5, 1–10 (2015). 13R. Ramos, T. Kikkawa, A. Anadón, I. Lucas, T. Niizeki, K. Uchida, P. A. Algarabel, L. Morellón, M. H. Aguirre, M. R. Ibarra, et al., “Interface- induced anomalous nernst effect in fe3o4/pt-based heterostructures,” Ap- plied Physics Letters 114, 113902 (2019). 14S. R. Boona, K. Vandaele, I. N. Boona, D. W. McComb, and J. P. Here- mans, “Observation of spin seebeck contribution to the transverse ther- mopower in ni-pt and mnbi-au bulk nanocomposites,” Nature communi- cations 7, 1–7 (2016). 15K. Uchida, W. Zhou, and Y. Sakuraba, “Transverse thermoelectric gen- eration using magnetic materials,” Applied Physics Letters 118, 140504 16Z. Feng, S. Minami, S. Akamatsu, A. Sakai, T. Chen, D. Nishio-Hamane, and S. Nakatsuji, “Giant and robust anomalous nernst effect in a polycrys- talline topological ferromagnet at room temperature,” Advanced Functional Materials , 2206519 (2022). 17C. Curcio, E. S. Olivetti, L. Martino, M. Küpferling, and V. Basso, “Study of the temperature dependence of coercivity in mnbi,” Physics Procedia 75, Polycrystalline MnBi as a transverse thermoelectric material 5 18A. Sola, P. Bougiatioti, M. Kuepferling, D. Meier, G. Reiss, M. Pasquale, T. Kuschel, and V. Basso, “Longitudinal spin seebeck coefficient: heat flux vs. temperature difference method,” Scientific reports 7, 1–9 (2017). 19G. Venkat, C. Cox, A. Sola, V. Basso, and K. Morrison, “Measurement of the heat flux normalized spin seebeck coefficient of thin films as a function of temperature,” Review of Scientific Instruments 91, 073910 (2020).