1 Evolution of Resistive Switching Characteristics in WO3-x-based MIM Devices by Tailoring Oxygen Deficiency Krishna Rudrapala, Biswajit Janab, Venimadhav Adyamc and Ayan Roy Chaudhuria,b* aAdvanced Technology Development Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 721302, West Bengal, India bMaterials Science Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 721302, West Bengal, India cCryogenic Engineering Centre, Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, 721302, West Bengal, India KEYWORDS memristor, tungsten oxide, oxygen vacancy modulation, filamentary switching, forming-free switching 2 ABSTRACT We report on resistive switching (RS) characteristics of W/WO3-x/Pt-based thin film memristors modulated by precisely controlled oxygen non-stoichiometry. RS properties of the devices with varied oxygen vacancy (VO) concentration have been studied by measuring their DC current voltage properties. Switchability of the resistance states in the memristors have been found to depend strongly on the VOs concentration in the WO3-x layer. Depending on x, the memristors exhibited forming-free bipolar, forming-required bipolar and non-formable characteristics. Devices with high VOs concentration (~1×1021 cm-3) exhibited lower initial resistance and memory window of only 15, which has been increased to ~6500 with reducing VOs concentration to ~5.8×1020 cm-3. Forming-free, stable RS with memory window of ~2000 have been realized for a memristor possessing VOs concentration of ~6.2×1020 cm-3. Investigation of the conduction mechanism suggests that tailoring VOs concentration modifies the formation and dimension of the conducting filaments as well as the Schottky barrier height at WO3-x/Pt interface which deterministically modulates RS characteristics of the WO3-x based memristors. INTRODUCTION Resistive random access memory (RRAM), that stores data in the form of its resistance states defined by the history of applied voltage, has drawn significant research attention for next generation high dense non-volatile memory applications. RRAMs which consist of simple metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures offer various advantages, such as low power consumption, multiscale switching, scalability, fast operation speed and superior cycling endurance in comparison to the present day charge-based memory technologies. While resistive switching (RS) phenomenon has been reported in diverse class of materials, metal 3 oxide-based RRAMs that involve modulation of resistance states due to change in the metal valence state (VCM) has drawn significant attention., Various metal-oxides encompassing binary transition metal oxides (TMOs) such as Ta2O5, TiO2, WO3-x, ZrO2, NiO, etc., and perovskites e.g. Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3, SrTiO3, SrZrO3, BiFeO3 etc. have been investigated for their promising VCM type RS.– VCM type RS in metal- oxides often involves formation and rupture of conducting filaments (CFs) due to migration of oxygen vacancies (VOs) under an applied electric field, their generation and annihilation at an active metal-oxide/electrode interface. From the materials point of view, binary TMOs have been widely studied, which are attractive due to their simple structure, low cost, ease of processing, complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) technology compatibility, and promising performance. Controlling the oxygen non-stoichiometry in binary TMOs through various approaches, such as formation of bilayer structures, utilization of different thin film growth techniques, modification of thin film growth conditions, incorporation of dopants, etc. have been found to play crucial roles in governing their RS properties. Sharath et al. demonstrated strong reduction of forming voltage in sub-stoichiometric Ta2O5-x/TaOx bilayer thin films with increasing VOs concentration in the TaOx layer grown under controlled oxygen atmosphere. While bipolar RS had been observed for samples with higher VOs content, the switching transformed to threshold type for samples fabricated at the highest oxidation condition. Yong et al. compared the impact of different thin film growth techniques on VOs concentration in HfOx layers, which influences their forming voltage, memory window (Roff/Ron) and the Schottky barrier height (SBH) at HfOx/TiN interface. Skaja et al. reported manifestation of reduced forming voltage and high Roff/Ron upon increasing VOs content in sputter deposited Ta2O5-x thin films in which VOs concentration had been controlled by sputter power and O2/Ar ratio. Palhares et al. reported on Zr doping in TaOx thin films as an efficient method of reducing VOs formation 4 energy, increasing confinement of the CFs which led to reduced device to device variability. Ghenzi et al. demonstrated that small variation of O2/Ar ratio during reactive sputter growth of TiO2-x-based devices led to different RS characteristics, e.g. standard bipolar, electroforming free bipolar and non-switchable device within the same materials system owing to significant variation of VOs concentration. Rehman et al. reported tuning of RS characteristics in Zn-doped CeO2, where concentration and mobility of VOs in CeO2 has been tuned by Zn dopant concentration. Tunable digital to analogue RS in Nb2O5 thin films by VO engineering has been demonstrated by Xu et al. Bousoulas et al. discussed that concentration and distribution of VOs in TiO2-x directly influence diameter of the CFs that impacts sensitivity of the conducting paths. Out of various binary TMOs which exhibit stable RS, WO3, which is a n-type wide band gap TMO, has been a convenient choice for RS based device applications due to its compatibility with back-end-of-line processing in CMOS integrated circuits. RS properties of WO3 has been reported to be susceptible to oxygen non-stoichiometry in the oxide layer. Won et al. and Rudrapal et al. discussed the impact of VOs accumulation on the WO3-x/electrode interface on determining its RS properties., Kim et al. reported the role of electrodes with different electronegativities in tuning RS characteristics of WO3 layers by means of an interfacial suboxide layer formation. Biju et al. discussed inhomogeneous distribution of VOs driven changeover of RS mechanism with changing thickness in thermally grown WO3-x films. Yang et al. demonstrated on-demand realization of electrical and neuromorphic multifunction in WO3–x-based nanoionic device through externally induced local migration of oxygen ions. Rudrapal et al. demonstrated manifestation of forming-free (FF), self-compliant, multi-level RS in WO3-x layers, which has been attributed to reversible oxygen migration at WO3-x/Pt interface., The existing literature reports suggest that, defect engineering based on tuning VOs concentration and assembly in WO3-x thin films holds the potential of 5 deterministically control their RS properties. However, to the best of our knowledge report on the evolution of RS properties in WO3-x thin films with precise variation of VOs concentration is not present in the literature. Here, we investigated precisely oxygen tailored WO3-x thin films and correlated variation of their RS characteristics with oxygen content in the layers. On the basis of VOs concentration modulation in WO3-x, we highlighted an effective way to control operating parameters such as forming requirement, set voltage (Vset), and Roff/Ron in W/WO3-x/Pt asymmetric MIM devices and discussed the corresponding switching mechanism. This study enables development of fabrication strategies based on VOs tailoring for realizing CMOS compatible WO3-x based forming free bipolar RS memory devices with a high Roff/Ron ratio. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION All the WO3-x films deposited at room temperature are amorphous in nature which has been confirmed from grazing incidence X-ray difraction (GIXRD) measurements (Figure S1). The samples under investigation possess similar thickness (~42-47 nm), low roughness (<1 nm) and sharp interfaces with the electrodes without the formation of any interfacial layers (Figures S2 and S3). W 4f and O 1s region for S75, S80, and S85. The binding energies of 35.3 eV and 37.5 eV corresponding to W6+ 4f7/2 and W6+ 4f5/2 respectively. Additionally, two minor peaks appeared at 34.3 eV and 36.5 eV corresponding to the W5+ 4f7/2 and W5+ 4f5/2 respectively. The 4f5/2 and 4f7/2 peaks are separated by an expected spin-orbit splitting of 2.2 eV and an area ratio 6 of 4:3 for both the oxidation states of W. Manifestation of W5+ states in the spectra indicates the formation of non-stoichiometric oxide layers. In case of WO3, the presence of W5+ species is commonly associated with the formation of VOs to maintain charge neutrality., Oxygen non-stoichiometry in the WO3-x layers has also been confirmed from the O 1s peak analysis. The O 1s peak (Figure 1b) could be deconvoluted into two sub- peaks at 530.2 eV and 531.5 eV respectively. While the peak at 530.2 eV represents the oxygen at lattice positions of the stoichiometric oxide layer, the higher energy peak at 531.5 eV represents O atoms in the oxygen-deficient regions of the WO3-x matrix. The degree of S80, and S85 with its deconvoluted peak and corresponding area ratio representing variation of stoichiometry with O2 partial pressure during the growth. (a) W 4f spectra and its corresponding area ratio of W5+ to W6+ peaks, (b) O 1s and its corresponding area ratio of its non-stoichiometric to lattice oxygen peaks. 7 oxygen non-stoichiometry in the WO3-x layers can be correlated to the area ratio of the O 1s peaks corresponding to the oxygen deficiency and stoichiometric oxygen (AVo/AO). The AVo/AO ratio has been found to reduce monotonically from 34.9% for S75 to 29.8% for S85. This indicates improvement of oxygen stoichiometry in the sputter-grown WO3-x layers with increasing O2 partial pressure during deposition. The amount of VOs in the WO3-x layer has to reduce from 9.1% for S75 to 3.8% for S85. This corresponds to a monotonous reduction of VOs concentration in the WO3−x layers from 1×1021 cm-3 (S75) to 4.5 ×1020 cm-3 (S85) (Figure 2), representing a change of O/W ratio from ~2.95-2.98. A similar trend of oxygen partial pressure-dependent evolution of VOs content in DC reactive sputter growth metal oxide thin films has been discussed by Skaja et al. for Ta2O5-x and Ghenzi et al. for TiO2-x., RS characteristics of the non-stoichiometric WO3-x layer have been investigated using W/WO3-x/Pt asymmetric MIM structure. The WO3-x layer possesses sharp interfaces with both top and bottom electrodes as evidenced from cross sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a representative sample presented in Figure S3. The inset of Figure 3a represents a schematic of the device structure where DC bias has been applied to the top W electrode and the bottom Pt electrode has been kept grounded. Prior to the RS measurements, S75, S80, and S85. Lines are to guide the eyes. Decrease of VO and increase of O/W ratio from S75 to S85 is clearly evident. 8 initial resistance (Ri) of the as-fabricated devices has been measured at 0.1 V. Figure 3a represents Ri of all the samples including the device-to-device variability measured over 15 devices from each of the samples. The median value of Ri has been found to monotonically increase from 13 MΩ for S75 to 32 GΩ for S85. Such large variation of intrinsic resistance level by more than three orders of magnitude has been ascribed to difference in concentration of VOs in the WO3-x layers. Lowering of their resistance with increasing VOs is related to the increase in free electron concentration, as VOs act as donors in WO3. Considering that VOs in WO3-x predominantly manifest as VO 2+, excess electron concentration in the layers due to VO formation varies between ~2×1021 cm-3 (S75) to ~9×1020 cm-3 (S85). The increase in n- type characteristics of the WO3-x layers with increasing VOs concentration has also been confirmed from the reduced separation of Fermi level from the conduction band edge (~1.3 eV for S85 to ~0.7 eV for S75) estimated from investigation of XPS valence band spectra and absorbance spectra from UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) measurements (Figures S4 and S5). sweeps of more than 100 cycles measured in the sequence of 0.0 V→-3.0 V→0.0 V→+3.0 V→0.0 V with a step of 0.05 V and a compliance current set at 1 mA. The compliance current and voltage range used during DC sweep measurements are known to influence on the RS characteristics of the MIM devices significantly. Therefore, the RS characteristics of the samples S75-S83 under investigation have been compared using a constant compliance current (1 mA) and DC bias range (± 3V). Initially, all the as prepared devices have been at high resistance state (HRS) and all, but S85 turned into low resistance state (LRS) when a suitable voltage with negative polarity (Vset) has been applied on the top W electrodes initiating the set process. The samples have been reset back to HRS on application of a positive DC bias, representing a bipolar clockwise switching (CWS). Interestingly, the samples S75-S80 having 9 VOs concentration in the range of ~1 ×1021 cm-3 - 6.2 ×1020 cm-3 exhibited stable bipolar switching without the requirement of any additional electroforming step. This FF nature could be attributed to the large VOs concentration in the WO3-x layers. FF bipolar RS in non- stoichiometric WO3-x having similar VOs density has been reported earlier. However, the sample S83 required an additional forming step that involves application of a larger negative DC bias (~-4.15 V) prior to exhibiting RS (Figure 3e). Thus, S83 which possesses a lower concentration of VOs (~5.8 ×1020 cm-3) has been termed as a forming-required (FR) device. Further reduction of VOs concentration to ~4.5 ×1020 cm-3 (S85) rendered the layer to be highly insulating, which could not be switched to LRS even after applying a DC voltage as high as - 10 V (inset of Figure 3f), indicating a non-formable (NF) device. This has been attributed to insufficient VOs density in the WO3-x layer which hinders the formation of CFs in the oxide layer. Variation of the I-V characteristics in the WO3-x samples with controlled non- stoichiometry clearly exhibits the deterministic role of VOs on their bipolar RS properties, which change from FF to FR to finally NF device depending on the VOs concentration. VOs concentration-dependent modulation of RS characteristics has been reported earlier in literature for various metal oxides. Sharath et al. reported VOs concentration-dependent modulation from FR to FF RS characteristics in HfO2-x thin films. Skaja et al. reported a reduction of forming voltage in the case of Ta2O5-x with the increase of VOs concentration. Ghenzi et al. observed NF device when the oxygen partial pressure during the TiO2-x layer growth has been increased beyond a certain limit. 10 In the present study, the nature of RS in all the WO3-x samples under investigation has been associated with gradual change in current with DC voltage sweep. In this case, the Vset has been defi ned to be the applied voltage at which current reaches the compliance value, or the maximum applied voltage (-3V) in case current remains below the compliance limit. Vset determined for the samples S75-S83 based on this convention has been plotted in Figure 4a. The median value of Vset has been found to increase from -1.9 V to -3 V for samples S75 to S83 respectively. Monotonic increase of Vset from S75 to S83 is related to the reduced concentration of VOs in the WO3-x layer. Park et al. reported an increased Vset when the VOs concentration has been reduced by increasing the O2 flow during the growth of TiOx layer. It is to be noted that for all the samples the reset voltage (Vreset) has been fixed at 3 V. case, inset shows the schematic of the W/WO3-x/Pt device structure with its electrical connections. DC sweep characteristics of the samples with more than 100 sweep application of HV step shows the S85 is a non-switchable device, inset shows the applied HV step. The figure represents evolution of RS with varying VO-concentrated sample. 11 cycles at a read voltage (Vread) of +0.5 V. Roff/Ron increased significantly from ~15 for S75 to ~6500 for S83 indicating an inverse relation with the VOs concertation in the switching layer. In order to elucidate the observed trend of Roff/Ron further, LRS and HRS resistance values (at +0.5 V) of the end members (S75 and S83) of the set of samples considered in this study, has been plotted for 100 cycles and 5 devices (inset of Figure 4b). While the LRS varied marginally around 1 MΩ, the HRS increased significantly (more than three orders of magnitude) from S75 to S83. Clearly, higher HRS resistance in samples with lower VOs concentration leads to the enhanced Roff/Ron. This has been be attributed to the inferior insulating characteristic of the VO rich samples and reduced oxygen available to rupture the filament., SWITCHING MECHANISM The switching mechanism has been elucidated by investigating the conduction mechanism before and after the switching event. For that, the temperature-dependent DC sweeps were taken for samples from S75 to S83 and the corresponding LRS and HRS data have been plotted each switched sample, it increased from S75 to S83. (b) Extracted Roff/Ron ratio, it increased almost exponentially from S75 to S83, lines are to guide the eyes, the inset shows the variation of HRS and LRS of S75 and S83. 12 against temperature as shown in Figure 5a and b respectively. For all the WO3-x samples under investigation exhibiting RS, resistance at LRS has been found to increase with increasing temperature, whereas in HRS an opposite trend has been observed. This indicates formation of metallic filaments during the set operation which predominantly control the LRS current, whereas rapture of filaments during the reset step forms the HRS in which the current is controlled by the WO3-x/Pt Schottky junction. Change of resistances with temperature for all the switchable samples at (a) LRS, indicating metallic-like behavior. (b) HRS, indicating Schottky-like behavior. (c) Fitting of the HRS data for the Schottky emission. (d) Extracted φB from each of the sample which shows a monotonic increment from S75 to S85, lines are to aid the eyes. 13 In order to investigate possible dependence of the Schottky barrier at WO3-x/Pt junction on VOs concentration in the oxide layer, current conduction in the HRS has been analyzed under the framework Schottky emission theory: J = A ∗ T2e − q(φB−√ qV 4πεrε0d) kBT (1) Where J is current density, A is the effective Richardson constant, T is absolute temperature, q is the electronic charge, φB is SBH, V is voltage, εr,ε0 are the relative and absolute permittivity respectively, d is the space charge width, kB is the Boltzmann constant. HRS. The linear relationship of ln(J/T2) vs V0.5 is consistent with the Schottky conduction mechanism. Figure 5d demonstrates evolution of SBH (φB) at the WO3- x/Pt interface with changing VOs concentration in the sub-stoichiometric WO3-x layers. φB has been found to decrease from 1 eV for S85 to 0.71 for S75, which is consistent with the reduction of SBH with increasing VOs in metal oxide thin films.– Next, microscopic mechanism of RS phenomenon in the asymmetric devices with WO3-x layers of varying stoichiometry has been elucidated considering metallic filament-driven LRS and Schottky barrier-driven HRS current. Figure 6 presents a schematic of the proposed RS mechanism in the WO3-x layers considering the S75 and S83 as representative VOs rich and VO poor samples respectively. It has been postulated that the VO concentration is higher at the WO3–x/Pt interface compared to the other parts of the layer. Such a postulation is valid considering that Pt is permeable to oxygen which allows reversible migration and storage of oxygen species in the grain boundaries of Pt in contact with metal oxides.– RS in the present samples involves VO diffusion due to the concentration gradient, their drift in response to the applied potential and oxygen transfer reaction at the interface with the inert Pt electrode. When a negative bias is applied on the top W electrode, conductive filament 14 consisting of relatively large density of VOs starts to grow from the cathode toward the anode due to the drift and diffusion flux of VOs. Additionally, VOs gets generated by anodic oxidation at the WO3-x/Pt interface: VO ••(Pt) + OO ×(WO3−x) → OO ×(Pt) + VO ••(WO3−x) (2) A gradual increase of current with applied bias in all the W/WO3-x/Pt devices under investigation (Figure 3) suggests a competition between VO drift and diffusion migration towards W cathode, and oxygen exchange reaction at the high-work function Pt electrode. Considering a much lower diffusion coefficient of oxygen in Pt compared to WO3, certain depletion of VOs in WO3–x near its interface with Pt can take place., In such case, VOs migration towards cathode shall dominate over the oxygen extraction at anode, giving rise to a high insulating region near the WO3–x/Pt interface. Formation of a VO depleted region near the anode induces a reverse concentration gradient (from cathode to anode) which eventually drives VOs diffusion towards the anode and reduces the depletion gap. At an adequately large applied voltage, the VOs generation flux at the anode also increases which aids to the filament formation. Finally at the Vset, the formation of the conductive filament gets completed when LRS sets in. The observed difference in Vset for all the samples under consideration has been the initial, set, and reset process along with the evolution of filament and depletion gap depending on the VOs concentration for (a) S75, (b) S83. 15 attributed to their initial VOs concentration and VOs generation at the WO3-x/Pt interface. As evident from Figure 3a, electrical conductivity (σ) of the WO3-x layers increases with increase in VOs concentration in the layer. Considering VOs formation barrier at a metal-oxide/anode interface to be a constant, the VOs depletion gap varies inversely with σ of the oxide layer. Therefore, it is postulated that VOs depletion gap at the WO3-x/Pt interface increases from S75 to S85 in accordance to their increasing electrical resistances. Since VOs generation rate at the oxide/anode interface gets prompted by the heat generation due to Joule heating effect, Vset reduces from S83 (having lower σ) to S75 (having higher σ). This is further established by the RS, a forming step is required for the sample S83 ([VO]~ 5.8×1020 cm-3) and S85 ([VO] ~4.5×1020 cm-3) did not exhibit any RS at all even after applying a voltage as high as -10 V. In order to further elucidate the influence of CFs on the conduction behaviour of WO3-x layers, resistance states of S75 and S83 have been compared at -0.5V (Figure S6). While resistance of the LRS increased by 10 times from S75 to S83, the HRS increased by 1000 times. Under the framework of filamentary conduction model, increase LRS resistance with decreasing VOs suggests a higher filament resistance. This is attributed to the reduction of filament diameter with reducing VOs concentration from S75 to S83. Reduction of CFs’ diameter with reducing VOs concentration in metal-oxide layers has been reported for TiO2-x and NbOx based RS devices., , Such difference in the LRS resistance has not been observed when measured at +0.5V during reset cycles (Figure 4b). During the reset operation for bipolar RS observed in the present study, when a positive bias is applied on the W top electrode, VOs annihilation at the WO3-x/Pt takes place: OO ×(Pt) + VO ••(WO3−x) → VO ••(Pt) + OO ×(WO3−x) (3) As a result, partial dissolution of filament starts to re-establish the Schottky junction, and current conduction during the reset cycle begins to get controlled also by the Schottky barrier 16 at the WO3-x/Pt interface even before complete reset. The nature of the VOs depleted region and the CF determines the LRS resistance during reset operation. Similarly, large difference of the HRS resistance between S75 and S83 at a read voltage of -0.5V is attributed to the better oxidation of the samples which present a higher barrier to the conduction of electrons prior to the set process. CONCLUSIONS In summary, fabrication of amorphous WO3-x thin films by DC reactive sputtering under varying the O2/Ar ratio provides an effective method of inducing precisely controlled oxygen non-stoichiometry in the oxide layers. XPS investigation confirmed stoichiometry variation which corresponds to VOs concentration ranging between ~4.5 ×1020 cm-3 to ~1 ×1021 cm-3 in the WO3-x layers grown under different O2/Ar ratio. Increase in VOs with reduced O2/Ar ratio has been found to increase conductivity of the oxide layers which is attributed to the enhanced free electron concentration in the n-type WO3-x. DC I-V measurements on the W/WO3-x/Pt devices provided the evidence that VOs concentration plays a significant role in their RS characteristics. Low concentration of VOs (≤4.5×1020 cm-3) suppresses the formation of CFs thus rendering the devices non-switchable. Increase in VOs concentration to ~ 5.8×1020 cm-3 leads to a switchable device after inducing an electroforming step, while the devices with higher VOs concentration (VO = 6.2 ×1020 cm-3 to 1 ×1021 cm-3) exhibit forming free bipolar RS. Further, the set voltage and memory window of the devices have been found to reduce with increasing VOs concentration. Analysis of the DC I-V characteristics establishes that modulation of RS characteristics in the WO3-x layers relates to the CF diameter, their formation and dissolution due to VOs diffusion under concentration gradient, their drift in response to the applied potential and oxygen transfer reaction at the WO3-x /Pt interface. Our work has provided 17 strong proof that RS characteristics of CMOS compatible are deterministically tunable by VOs engineering. EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS substrate. Before any deposition, the substrates have been cleaned by dipping sequentially in Trichloroethylene, Acetone, and Methanol for 5 min for each case in an ultrasonic bath. After that, it has been rinsed with de-ionized (DI) water and dried with a nitrogen blower. The chamber had been evacuated to a base pressure of 7.5×10-4 mTorr prior to the oxide layer deposition. The depositions were carried out at room temperature by DC reactive sputtering using a commercial tungsten target (advanced engineering materials, purity >99.99%) with a chamber pressure of 5 mTorr. In order to achieve varied oxygen non-stoichiometry in the WO3- x layers, five samples (Table 1) have been grown with oxygen partial pressure during the growth varying from 75% to 85% in a mixture of oxygen and argon gas (O2/Ar) keeping all the other parameters unchanged. The samples have been prepared by maintaining a target-to-substrate distance of 10 cm and DC power density of 1.23 Watt/cm2. MIM structures for investigating RS properties have been prepared by depositing W dots with a diameter of 100 μm on the WO3- x thin films by DC sputtering through a shadow mask. The structural property has been investigated by GIXRD using X-ray source of CuKα1 having a wavelength of 1.5406 Å (PANalytical, Empyrean). The diffraction patterns were collected with a step size of 0.06° in the 2θ range of 20–60°. The incidence angle of CuKα radiation was kept at 0.4° relative to the sample surface. The X-ray reflectivity (XRR) measurements were done in the same instrument and the fittings were done using the AMaaS software. The device structure was confirmed by a cross-section transmission electron microscope (TEM) (FEI TECNAI G2 F20 X-TWIN) image. Bandgap was measured through 18 UV-Vis DRS. Chemical analysis and valence band spectra of the oxide layers have been done using XPS (PHI 5000 VersaProbe III, USA) measurements with monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (spot diameter 100 μm). Deconvolution of the XPS spectra includes Shirley-type baseline subtraction and profile fitting through the Lorentzian-Gaussian function. The C1s peak at 284.5 eV has been taken as a reference point for all the binding energy calculations. DC current- voltage (I-V) measurements were carried out by Keithley 4200-SCS keeping a step size of 0.05 V. A JANIS probe station (model no: ST500-UHT-1-(4CX)) has been used to probe the samples. Sample O2 partial pressure S75 75% S77 77% S80 80% S83 83% S85 85% AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author *A. Roy Chaudhuri Email: ayan@matsc.iitkgp.ac.in Author Contributions A.R.C conceived the idea. A.R.C and K.R designed the experiments, executed the measurements and analyzed the data. B.J contributed in the experiments. A.R.C and V.A 19 supervised the work. All the authors discussed the results and have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. Funding Sources Authors acknowledge partial funding from SERB, SPARC scheme, The Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. Notes Authors declare no competing financial interest. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT Authors acknowledge SERB (Letter No CRG/2021/000811) and the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India (SPARC, vide letter No. SPARC/2018-2019/P252/SL); for partial financial support of the work, the Central Research Facility (CRF) of Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur for various characterization facilities. Authors acknowledge Mr. Subhajit Dutta and Dr. BN Shivakiran Bhaktha, Department of Physics, IIT Kharagpur for UV-Vis DRS measurements.