1 / 12 Electronic Origin of Half-metal to Semiconductor Transition and Colossal Magnetoresistance in Spinel HgCr2Se4 A. J. Liang1,2,3*, Z. L. Li4*, S. H. Zhang1,2*, S. C. Sun5, S. Liu1, C. Chen1,2,3,6, H. F. Yang1, S. T. Cui1, S.-K. Mo3, S. Yang4, Y. Q. Li4, M. X. Wang1,2, L. X. Yang5, J. P. Liu1,2†, Z. K. Liu1,2†, Y. L. Chen1,2,5,6† 1School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, P. R. China 2ShanghaiTech Laboratory for Topological Physics, Shanghai 200031, P. R. China 3Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA 4Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 5State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics and Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P. R. China 6Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK *These authors contributed equally to this work. †Corresponding authors: liujp@shanghaitech.edu.cn,liuzhk@shanghaitech.edu.cn, yulin.chen@physics.ox.ac.uk Half-metals are ferromagnets hosting spin-polarized conducting carriers and crucial for spintronics applications. The chromium spinel HgCr2Se4 represents a unique type of half-metal, which features a half-metal to semiconductor transition (HMST) and exhibits colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) across the ferromagnetic- paramagnetic (FM-PM) transition. Using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we find that the Fermi surface of n-type HgCr2Se4 (n- 2 / 12 HgCr2Se4) consists of a single electron pocket which moves above the Fermi level (EF) upon the FM-PM transition, leading to the HMST. Such a Lifshitz transition manifests a giant band splitting which originates from the exchange interaction unveiled with a specific chemical nonstoichiometry. The exchange band splitting and the chemical nonstoichiometry are two key ingredients to the HMST and CMR, consistent with our ab-initio calculation. Our findings provide spectroscopic evidences of the electronic origin of the anomalous properties of HgCr2Se4, which address the unique phase transition in half-metals. The interplay of the spin, charge, orbital and lattice degrees of freedom in condensed matters provides important physical properties such as unconventional superconductivity , metal insulator transition , colossal magnetoresistance (CMR) and anomalous Hall effect . First proposed in the 1980’s, half-metal is considered one such intriguing system . A perfect half-metal hosts fully spin polarized conducting charge carriers that are ideal for spintronics applications. In the past decades, a handful of half-metals have been proposed, such as oxides (e.g. CrO2 ), spinels (e.g. Fe3O4 ), perovskites (e.g. (La,Sr)MnO3 ), Heuslers (e.g. NiMnSb ) and zinc blendes (e.g. CrAs ). Among them only few are experimentally verified to be half-metal with nearly 100% spin polarization . Recently, the Cr-based chalcogenide spinel HgCr2Se4 have been theoretically proposed and experimentally verified as a half-metal . It possesses magnetic moments of 3μB/Cr3+ with a spin polarization of the conducting carriers up to 97% . Similar to mixed-valence manganites and Eu-based chalcogenides , HgCr2Se4shows an intriguing resistivity anomaly across the ferromagnetic-paramagnetic (FM-PM) transition, where the resistivity changes by several orders in magnitude, featuring a half-metal to semiconductor transition (HMST) . The CMR is observed in the same temperature regime as HMST (~20K above and below TC ). Moreover, HgCr2Se4 also hosts spiral like antiferromagnetic insulating state under high pressure , √T-type dependence of versatile transport coefficients at low 3 / 12 temperature , and may realize a Chern semimetal state and other topological nontrivial states . These unique properties make HgCr2Se4 an important platform to investigate the interplay between the half-metallicity, magnetism and topology. Despite the strong motivations, the electronic origin of the HMST, CMR and other intriguing properties in HgCr2Se4 remain elusive. Further, the proposed topologically nontrivial band structure requires experimental verification. Nonetheless, the photoemission spectroscopy investigation on the electronic structure of HgCr2Se4 has not been achieved. Hence, a direct measurement of the electronic band structure would offer crucial evidences in answering these questions. In this work, using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES), we report a comprehensive electronic structure study on n-HgCr2Se4. Far below Tc, we observed a Fermi surface produced by a single conduction band (CB) and a characteristic ~0.3 eV direct band gap. Upon increasing temperature, the CB moves towards Fermi level (EF) and eventually above it above TC, showing a Lifshitz transition. Meanwhile the valence band (VB) remains almost unshifted, resulting in an increase of the band gap. Such an electronic evolution could be well reproduced by our ab-initio calculations, which suggests the shift of CB is driven by the exchange interaction that splits bands. The resulted CB is thus fully spin polarized below TC. Our findings reveal that the Lifshitz transition which can be tuned by both the chemical nonstoichiometry (EF position) and the magnetic-field-mediated exchange band splitting are responsible for the ideal HMST (Fig. 1a) and CMR near TC. These findings reveal the electronic origin of the most unusual properties in HgCr2Se4 and can be applied to related half-metals. Methods ARPES measurements were performed at BL 10.0.1, BL 7.0.2, BL 4.0.3 of the Advanced Light Source, BL 5-2 of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Light Source. BL 10.0.1 and BL 4.0.3 are equipped with R4000 analyzers. BL 7.0.2 and BL 5-2 are 4 / 12 equipped with DA30 analyzers. The measured sample temperature and vacuum level were 20K~250 K and lower than 5.0×10-11 Torr. The angle resolution was 0.2° and the overall energy resolution was better than 20 meV. Single crystals of n-HgCr2Se4 were grown by vapor transport method . The Curie temperature TC is ~ 105 K with the electron density in a range of 1016–1018 cm−3 . All the calculations are generated by PBE+U method, with a coulomb energy U on the Cr element of 5.5 eV. Results HgCr2Se4 crystallizes in the space group Fd3m with Cr atoms forming tetrahedrons (Fig. 1b). The increase of the lattice by Se makes the FM Cr-Se-Cr interaction prevail the Cr-Cr antiferromagnetic interaction , resulting in a FM transition at ~105K . High quality samples (Fig. 1c(i)) have octahedral shape, flat shining surfaces and sharp edges with sharp Bragg peaks (Fig. 1c(ii)) and core levels (Fig. 1g). Fig. 1d shows the bulk and projected (111) surface Brillouin zones (BZs). The n-type nature (the as-grown sample is moderately n-doped ) is confirmed by Hall resistivity measurements . The temperature dependent resistivity indicates a FM-PM transition at ~105 K with a resistivity variation by several orders in magnitude (Fig. 1e). Below Tc, the magnetic susceptibility shows clear soft ferromagnetism (Fig. 1f). Above Tc, the magnetic susceptibility curves gradually approach the linear shape, suggesting strong FM fluctuations above Tc. The band structure of n-HgCr2Se4 in the FM state on (111) surface is illustrated in surface because of the rich interior Hg vacancies (SI1). Therefore, the photoemission spectrum observed on the as-cleaved samples only contain hole-like bands (Figs. 2a-c). The constant energy contour (CEC) near the VB maximum shows a clear six-fold symmetry, consistent with the (111) surface cleavage (Fig. 2a). By using both the linear horizontal (LH) and vertical (LV) polarized photons, four sets of hole- like bands (α, β, γ, δ) along Γ̅-M̅ (Figs. 2b-c) are identified, agreeing well with the calculation (Fig. 2d). 5 / 12 To measure the bandstructure of the CB, we raise the EF by using in situ surface alkaline metal (K) deposition (SI2). Upon K dosing, the CB (ε band, a small electron pocket at Γ̅ as labelled in Figs. 2d) appears below EF (Figs. 2e-h). Along the Γ̅-M̅ direction, the CB and VB (uppermost α band) have effective masses of 0.15 me and 2.88 me, and a ~0.3eV direct band gap at 20K (Fig. 2g). The CB and VB around Γ̅ can also be observed by spectrum on the (001) cleaved surface (SI3). By extracting the band dispersion along Γ − L (Fig. 2h), we further confirm there is no in-gap state. All the observed bands (α, β, γ, δ, ε) and the gap size are captured by our first-principle calculation (Fig. 2d). From the calculations we conclude that the α,γ and β, δ bands are spin-split pairs in the FM state. Since the calculated spin splitting of the CB is ~1 eV , the observed ε band is thus fully spin polarized (its spin split counterpart lies way above EF), consistent with the half-metal nature in n-HgCr2Se4 . We estimate the evolution of the CB, VB and the band gap across Tc by temperature dependent measurement (Figure 3 and SI4). The CB spectrum, energy distribution curves (EDCs) at Γ̅ and the normalized EDCs (with respect to the EDC at 105K) are plotted in Figs. 3a, b and c, respectively. The CB moves continuously towards EF and disappears upon increasing temperature, suggesting a Lifshitz transition in the bandstructure. The abrupt change appears at 100K-105K (Figs. 3a9-10) near TC, where the CB disappears. Such an evolution is an intrinsic property of n-HgCr2Se4 since the CB would reappear below EF after cycling the temperature back to 20K (Fig. 3a12). Contrarily, negligible changes are found in the VB (SI4) upon temperature variation. Above Tc, there seems to be no density of states near EF (Figs. 3a10-11) in contrast to the observed electron pocket near EF below TC (Figs. 3a1-8). Such an evolution of the Fermi surface could be explained by considering the impurity bands from Hg and Se vacancies. Our ab-initio calculations demonstrate that the impurity bands from the Se vacancies lie across the CB bottom in the FM state (Fig. 3d). When the CB moves upward in the PM state, the impurity bands lie within the band gap and accommodates the electrons from the CB. In return the impurity bands pin the EF, leading to the observed 6 / 12 bandstructure above TC (see SI4). The electrons are transferred back to the CB from the impurity bands when the CB moves downwards to cross the impurities bands in the FM state. Discussion and conclusion We summarize our temperature dependent results in Fig. 4a. The disappearance of the CB across Tc in n-HgCr2Se4 suggests the band shift is associated with the ferromagnetism, which splits the CB via exchange interaction. On the other hand, the VB is not significantly affected by the ferromagnetism, most likely due to its orbital characters. The VB contains mostly Se p orbitals, which has small coulomb energy U and thus much smaller band splitting than the CB with more Cr d orbitals (See SI5 for a comparison of calculated bandstructure below and above TC). The observed Lifshitz transition across the FM-PM transition provides the electronic origin of the HMST as well as the CMR, as summarized in Fig. 4b. The transfer of electrons between localized impurities bands and the itinerant CB well accounts for the large variation in the resistivity in the HMST across Tc. Meanwhile, the external magnetic field aligns fluctuated spin moments near TC (inset in Fig. 4b) . The exchange splitting strength is thus tuned, leading to a magnetic field driven Lifshitz transition (Fig. 4b(ii)) and the HMST (Fig. 4c), thereby achieving the CMR (Fig. 4d). Such a mechanism from the electronic structure point of view may be much simplified (e.g., neglecting the defects scattering and the magnetic polarons ), however it captures the essential physics. With different EF positions due to different impurity levels, the HMST and CMR would change accordingly, also showing nice agreement with our interpretations (see discussions in SI6). The mechanism can also nicely explain the giant red shift of the optical absorption edge . The absence of other complex correlated phenomena (e.g. phase separation , Jahn-Teller distortion and charged ordered state in manganites ; the extra incoherent band showing pseudogap in manganites and Eu-chalcogenides , and 7 / 12 the electron polaron coupled replica bands in Eu-chalcogenides) in HgCr2Se4 offers us the excellent opportunity to identify the key ingredients for the HSMT and CMR in half-metals. Our findings could be further applied to other half-metal systems such as manganites and Eu-chalcogenides. Because the HSMT and CMR in these systems always appear in the same temperature regime near TC , requiring additional turning knobs (e.g., doping , strain , et al.) to achieve both ferromagnetism and ideal EF position. Finally, we note that the observed band gap in FM state from ARPES and optical experiment contradicts with the predicted Chern semimetal state in HgCr2Se4. This is probably because of the relative overestimate of the spin-orbital coupling strength and the amplitude of band inversion. In summary, we reveal a Lifshitz transition in n-HgCr2Se4 that results from exchange band splitting at a proper EF. The observed electronic transition plays the dominant role of the HMST and CMR in n-HgCr2Se4. Our findings highlight that achieving both strong ferromagnetism and ideal EF positions to fine-tune the electronic bandstructure are critical to the realization and application of the HMST and CMR among the spinel and other half-metal systems.