Anderson transition of in-gap quasiparticles in a quasi-two-dimensional disordered superconductor Hae-Ryong Park1,2*, Kyung-Yong Park1*, Kyoung-Min Kim3*, Kyung-Hwan Jin, Jun-Sung Kim1,2, Han-Woong Yeom1,2, Ki-Seok Kim1,4†, Jhinhwan Lee2† 1Department of Physics, POSTECH, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37673, Republic of Korea 2Center for Artificial Low Dimensional Electronic Systems, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Pohang 37673, Republic of Korea 3Center of Theoretical Physics of Complex Systems, Institute for Basic Science (IBS) Daejeon 34126, Republic of Korea 4Asia Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics (APCTP), Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37673, Republic of Korea The Anderson transition of Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticles in superconducting state has been studied theoretically for last three decades. However, its experimental proof is lacking. In particular, the relationship of the superconducting order-parameter fluctuations and the Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles have not been well understood. Our study, based on scanning tunneling microscopy measurements, investigates how BdG quasiparticles become Anderson-localized and delocalized as a function of energy and applied magnetic field in a quasi-two-dimensional Fe-based superconductor with sufficient zero-bias BdG quasiparticles. The anomalous multifractal spectra based on the spatial distributions of the pairing gaps and the coherent peak heights suggest that superconducting fluctuations play a key role in the delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticles. Our real-space Hartree-Fock-BCS- Anderson simulations and renormalization group analysis with pairing fluctuations support quasiparticle localization and suggest that enhanced pairing fluctuations lead to delocalization of BdG quasiparticles and ‘weak localization’ of phase-fluctuating Cooper pairs in quasi-two-dimensional disordered superconductors. The present study proposes that the 10-fold way classification scheme has to be generalized to take order-parameter fluctuations in actual quantum matter. Also, it shed light on how ac energy loss due to quasiparticles at Fermi level can be controlled in a quasi-2d superconductor with sufficient pairing fluctuation. Researches on the superconductor-to-insulator transitions driven by disorders have advanced our understanding of superconductivity in terms of the quantum coherence in Cooper pair and Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) quasiparticle dynamics1-11. Two pathways have been proposed for these quantum phase transitions: phase- disorder-driven12-22 and amplitude-fluctuation-governed23,24. The phase-disorder mechanism suggests Anderson localization of preformed Cooper pairs, leading to a pseudogap and lack of coherent peaks in the quasiparticle spectrum of the insulating state. On the other hand, the amplitude fluctuation case predicts Anderson localization of BdG quasiparticles, leading to the renormalization of Coulomb interaction to break Cooper pairs and the gap closure. However, strong inhomogeneity can mix these two pathways. While the former has been extensively investigated both theoretically and experimentally, the Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles inside the superconducting phase has been studied only theoretically25-27. As far as we know, the experimental proof of Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles inside the superconducting phase has never been reported. In terms of experiments, the low-energy BdG quasiparticle states typically are not sufficiently generated with disorder to access the signature of localization clearly. Theoretically speaking, while its microscopic mechanism is elusive, Anderson transitions of BdG quasiparticles serve as a central building block in the ten-fold way classification scheme of topological matter28,29, referred to as the Altland-Zirnbauer symmetry class30. Essential simplification in the ten-fold way classification scheme is that the superconducting order parameter remains to be fixed in the Anderson transition, where the dynamics of BdG quasiparticles is described by a non-interacting tight-binding lattice model. In this case the delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticles is allowed only at the zero energy, where other in-gap quasiparticle states are all localized, in two dimensions. The validity of this simplified model has not been tested yet. The primary objective of this study is to investigate the Anderson transition of low-energy BdG quasiparticles in a disordered quasi-2d superconductor and its interplay with the superconducting pairing fluctuations. The experimental limitations in observing the localization of BdG quasiparticles is overcome by quasi-2d Fe-based superconductor with large spacings between adjacent superconducting monolayers and, above all, with significant pair breaking perturbations by the neighboring layers of magnetic V atoms leading to large zero-bias BdG quasiparticle density of states2,31-33. This system serves as a platform to directly observe the Anderson transition of BdG quasiparticles by spectroscopic imaging with scanning tunneling microscopy. In this study, we propose the delocalization phenomenon starting from the energy close to the superconducting gap and approaching the Fermi level at stronger pairing fluctuations, which highlights the role of Cooper-pair fluctuations in the Anderson transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles. Resorting to scanning tunneling microscopic (STM) measurements, we first confirm the abundance of zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS and the existence of static fluctuations of near-zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS with self-similarity up to a length scale sufficiently larger than the superconducting coherence length. We also obtain various statistical information from the distributions of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS (ρ), the local pairing gap (Δ) and the coherent-peak height (ZΔ), and show how they change with applied magnetic field and investigate the localization properties of the quasiparticles and Cooper pairs. We also introduce novel multifractal spectra of fΔ(α; H) and fZΔ(α; H) given by multiple moments of the local pairing gaps and the coherence peak heights in addition to the conventional multifractal spectrum fρ(α; H) of the quasiparticle LDOS34-36. These two ‘anomalous’ multifractal spectra fΔ(α; H) and fZΔ(α; H) together with the conventional multifractal spectrum fρ(α; H) suggest how the in-gap BdG quasiparticles become delocalized with applied magnetic field, shown in the schematic phase diagram Fig. 1a and the renormalization group (RG) based phase diagram Fig. 1b, which will be discussed below in detail. We claim that this study proposes a novel mechanism for delocalization of quasiparticle excitations in quasi-two dimensions beyond the two well-known mechanisms of the ten-fold way classification without electron correlations28,29,37 or the appearance of strong ferromagnetic fluctuations38,39. To verify the magnetic-field driven delocalization of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles, we have taken local spectroscopic maps of the disordered quasi-2D Fe-based superconductor Sr2VO3FeAs at 0 T and 7 T. See the STM measurement in Fig. 1c. These maps are taken at 4.8 K well below the superconducting Tc of ~ 30 K, and the maximum magnetic field 7 T is well below Hc2 (>> 10 T) at 4.8 K33,40,41. Due to the significant separation of the adjacent FeAs layers by insulating Sr2VO3 bi-layers (Fig. 1c), as evidenced by the conductance in c direction 1/100 times smaller than those in the ab plane33,41, the system could be a model quasi-2D FeAs superconductor to investigate the energy dependent localization of BdG quasiparticles, with the O vacancy defects in the VO2 layers playing the role of potential and magnetic scattering centers for both the quasiparticle interference and the Anderson localization of quasiparticles. The Fermi-level proximity of the α band minimum and the tunneling matrix effect of the capping Sr2VO3 layer contribute to the overall asymmetry of the tunneling spectra (Fig. 1d). It is known that the bands of the capping Sr2VO3 layers are gapped and separated from the Fermi level at least by 200 meV and hence do not contribute to the zero-energy LDOS41. However, the magnetic VO2 layer with Neel order near the FeAs layers may contribute to the zero-bias quasiparticles by time-reversal symmetry breaking33,42. The topograph simultaneously taken with the zero-field LDOS map is shown in Ext. Data Fig. 2a and the strongest quasiparticle scattering centers extracted from the -20 meV LDOS map of Ext. Data Fig. 2g are identified as O vacancies in neighboring VO2 layers43 and are overlaid as red dots in all real-space maps throughout this Report. The zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS map at 0 T (Fig. 1e) shows strong long-range static fluctuations in the vicinity of the defects (Ext. Data Fig. 2h) which disappears in the LDOS map taken at 7 T (Fig. 1f). The energy-resolved autocorrelation plots of the quasiparticle LDOS (Fig. 1g-h) shows that they are restricted to a narrow energy range |E| < 3 meV symmetrically centered at the Fermi level. The QPI modulations due to the intra- band scattering of electrons in Γ-centered electron pocket41,43 are symmetrically formed around each defect (Ext. Data Fig. 2) with a strong energy-dependence of the wavelength and a much weaker magnetic-field-dependence. Fitting the zero-bias autocorrelations of the quasiparticle LDOS to Ae−r/ξ + Be−κr cos(2kFr − φ), which is a combination of the exponential decay (∝ A:Anderson localization-dependent long-range correlation and localization-independent short-range residual electronic correlation) and the sinusoidal exponential decay (∝ B:quasiparticle scattering interference), shows strong field-dependence of the fitted values of ξ (6.67 nm at 0 T vs. 1.99 nm at 7 T) and we identify the Anderson localization length scale as ξAL ≃ ξ0T ≃ 6.67 nm and localization-independent short-range residual electronic correlation as ξ7T ≃ 1.99 nm. Striking evidence for the existence of quasi-localized or critical quasiparticles at zero magnetic field can be given by the scale-dependent multifractal spectrum analysis of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS (Figs. 1j and 1k). Varying the box size for the multifractal spectrum whose formulation is described in SI section 1.3, the multifractal spectrum of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS remains to be self-similar (critical) within the Anderson localization length scale ξAL at 0 T as shown in Fig. 1j and Fig. 2t. The significantly large autocorrelation length scale ξAL of the zero-bias LDOS at zero field compared with the 7 T case, its confinement within a narrow energy range centered at the Fermi level, and its disappearance by application of the magnetic field (Fig. 1h) indicate that quasi-localized or critical in-gap BdG quasiparticles at zero magnetic field become delocalized by applied magnetic field. Below, we discuss how this delocalization phenomenon is correlated with strong fluctuations of local pairing gaps. First of all, it is useful to compare the quasiparticle localization length ξAL with the Cooper-pair coherence length ξΔ, given by the autocorrelation analysis of the zero-bias LDOS (ρ) and that of the pairing amplitude (Δ), respectively. (See SI section 1.1 and Ext. Data Fig. 1b for the fitting procedure.) It turns out that ξAL ≈ 6.67 nm is longer than ξΔ ≈ 1.39 nm at zero magnetic field. Although both length scales are reduced at 7 T, the inequality ξρ > ξΔ still holds. We suspect that the inequality of ξAL > ξΔ may serve as a condition for the superconducting state to coexist with Anderson localization of BdG quasiparticles. The underlying physical picture is that the BdG quasiparticles remain coherent within the Cooper-pair coherence length scale, and such ‘coherent’ quasiparticle excitations allow global coherence of Cooper pairs, regarded to be ‘BCS superconductivity’. This scenario can be verified by confirming ξAL ≈ ξΔ in the vicinity of the superconductor- insulator transition. To reveal the mutual correlation between the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS and the local pairing gap, we extract out the local pairing-gap map and the coherence peak-height map as shown in Figs. 2a-f and calculate the cross-correlation of every map with respect to the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS map (Fig. 2a) as shown in the insets of Figs. 2a-f. The coherence peak-height map has been discussed to play the role of the local Cooper-pair density map11,22,44. Excluding the QPI modulation length scale visible in Figs. 2a-f as concentric rings, there seems to be two other length scales in the cross-correlation of the zero-bias quasiparticle LDOS map and the local pairing-gap map (inset of Fig. 2b), where they are negatively correlated in short range (< 2 nm) due to the local anticorrelation of the zero-bias LDOS and the superconducting gap as predicted by the Dynes formula indicating local pair breaking effects, and positively correlated in long range (>2 nm) which will be discussed in detail below. On the other hand, the coherence peak-height map shows negative correlation with the zero-bias LDOS map in all length scales (inset of Fig. 2c) due to the much stronger spectral weight conservation shared between the zero- bias LDOS and the gap-energy LDOS. To understand the positive long-range correlation between the zero-bias LDOS map and the local pairing-gap map, we recall the self-consistent gap equation in strongly disordered superconductors18,21, given by Δ(r⃗) = geff 2 ∫ dε Δ(ε) √Δ2(ε)+ε2 |ψ(ε, r⃗)|2 tanh √Δ2(ε)+ε2 2T , where the energy-dependent gap function is Δ(ε) = with the LDOS measured in the superconducting phase. These two equations result in Δ(ε) = geff 2 ∫ dε′ I(ε, ε′) Δ(ε′) √Δ2(ε′)+ε′2 tanh √Δ2(ε′)+ε′2 2T , where is the autocorrelation function. Using the LDOS in the superconducting state at 0 T, we obtain I(ε, ε′) in Fig. 2m, where the bright spot at (ε, ε′) = (0,0) indicates Anderson localization at zero magnetic field. As a result, we find the in Fig. 2o). Comparing Fig. 2o with Figs. 2b, we observe clear signature of the positive long-range correlation between the zero-bias LDOS and the pairing gap reproduced, which confirms that increased zero-bias LDOS due to Anderson localization is responsible for the increased pairing gap on the large scale of ξAL. Repeating this analysis at finite ranges of temperature T and the BCS coupling constant geff (Fig. 2p), we obtain critical temperatures as a function of the BCS coupling constant, which gives reasonable values ~ 30K at geff~0.6. In a typical quasi-2d superconductor with negligible zero-bias LDOS, the applied magnetic field will reveal magnetic vortices as locally finite zero-bias LDOS. However, in the case of quasi-2d superconductor with strong pairing fluctuations and finite zero-field zero-bias LDOS, the major effect of magnetic field will be to delocalize the Anderson-localized quasiparticles and make the LDOS distribution more uniform. Also, the LDOS distribution will be generally upshifted due to partial closure of the pairing gap (Figs. 2g and 2j). The delocalization of the quasiparticles at 7 T is manifested by the narrowing of the multifractal spectrum at L =1 (Fig. 2j) and the significant narrowing by half at L ≥ 16 (9.376 nm) (Fig. 1k). The latter is free from the residual QPI- induced LDOS variance since the averaging box size L is larger than the QPI modulation length scale π kF ≃ 6.7 nm and therefore closer to the multifractal spectrum for the ideal delocalization. With the LDOS distribution being more uniform and pair breaking starting to take place in applied magnetic field, the superconducting gap distribution will be partially closed starting from the band with smallest pairing gap which may occur quasi-randomly at a length scale much shorter than the zero-field Anderson localization length scale. This will cause splitting of the pairing gap distribution into two parts, one peaked at finite values with similar distribution width compared with the zero-field case and another part newly peaked at zero-bias (Fig. 2h). This pair breaking scenario will lead to increased short-range fluctuations of measured pairing gap at high applied magnetic field manifested as widening of the multifractal spectrum of the pairing gap (Fig. 2k). On the other hand, at a length scale larger than ξAL, the positive long-range correlation of the pairing gap with the zero-bias LDOS discussed above (inset of Fig. 2b) will lead to decreased long-range fluctuations of the pairing gap at high applied magnetic field, following the behavior of the zero-bias LDOS. This will lead to the cross-over of the magnetic-field-dependence of the multifractal spectrum width at a length scale near ξAL (Figs. 2q-2s). The pair breaking by applied magnetic field will also strongly down-shift the distribution of the coherence peak height (Fig. 2i). It is interesting to see that the coherence peak height whose direct distribution width decreases with applied field (Fig. 2i) will have increased normalized distribution width leading to increased width of their multifractal spectra in applied magnetic field (Fig. 2l). To understand the opposite multifractal behaviors (Figs. 2j and 2k) of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles and the local superconducting order parameter with minimal set of assumptions, we turn to the real-space Hartree- Fock-BCS-Anderson simulation45,46 for two-dimensional disordered superconductors with s-wave pairing symmetry. We introduce the following BCS Hamiltonian defined on a two-dimensional square lattice, H = − ∑ [tij + (εi − μ)δij]ciσ † cjσ ⟨i,j⟩σ + ∑ (Δici↑ † ci↓ † + H. c. ) i , (1) where Δi = U⟨ci↓ci↑⟩ is the superconducting order parameter and εi is an on-site random potential uniformly given in (−V, V). Here, we consider the strong disorder regime of V = 4, where all single-particle states are localized in the normal state. We also introduce an effective repulsive interaction Ur, which reduces the effective random potential as εi → εi + Ur 2 ⟨ni⟩0 and enhances the density of electrons around the zero energy. See the SI section 2 for more details. μ is the chemical potential to adjust the occupation number. tij is an effective hopping parameter between nearest neighbor sites. Considering an external uniform magnetic field applied in z-axis, this hopping parameter is modified as tijciσ † cjσ + h. c. = −t[ci+1,j † ci,jeiΦx + h. c. +ci,j+1 † ci,jeiΦy + h. c. ]. (2) The phase factors are given by Φx = ( e ħ) ∫ Ax(y)dx xj xi and Φy = ( e ħ) ∫ Ay(x)dy yj yi . Here, we consider the symmetric gauge A = (−yφ0p/q, xφ0p/q, 0) and the magnetic flux per unit cell is ∮ A ⋅ ds = Ba2 = 2φ0p/q with the flux quantum φ0 = h/e and coprime integers p and q (See the SI section 2.3 and Ext. Data Fig. 7). We find that the distribution of the local paring amplitude is Gaussian-like (Fig. 3h) without external magnetic field, where the mean value of 〈Δ〉 is smaller than that of the clean superconducting system. Applying external magnetic field, the Gaussian distribution of Cooper pairs becomes broader and distorted. In particular, there appears finite population of the zero local pairing amplitude. Furthermore, the sign change of the local pairing amplitude, i.e., the π phase shift of the Cooper pair is observed in the Cooper-pair distribution function. See Fig. 3h. The local-pairing multifractal spectrum becomes broader (Fig. 3k), which indicates existence of their strong fluctuations driven by external magnetic field. On the other hand, the LDOS of the in-gap quasiparticles are enhanced and become more homogeneous (Fig. 3g). The density distribution function is narrower and shifted to larger mean values of the LDOS. The multifractal spectrum shows weaker multifractality by the magnetic field (Fig. 3j). The probability density function of a low-energy eigenfunction (Fig. 3i) and the corresponding multifractal spectrum (Fig. 3l) show qualitatively similar features with those of the LDOS. All these behaviors in the simulation with minimal assumptions are consistent with our STM measurements, which indicates that magnetic-field driven ‘localization’ of Cooper pairs occurs at the same time with delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticles. The magnetic-field driven delocalization of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles is verified by the scaling behavior of the critical exponent α2 of the inverse participation ratio (IPR)37,47. The scaling behavior negatively correlated with enhancement of the system size indicates that the in-gap BdG quasiparticles are Anderson- localized without external magnetic field (Fig. 3m). On the other hand, we find that the IPR critical exponent increases as enlarging the system size, driven by external magnetic field, which confirms metallicity of the in-gap BdG quasiparticles (Fig. 3n). In Fig. 3m, we identify the zero-field mobility edge of the in-gap BdG quasiparticle state inside the superconducting gap based on the scale invariance of the IPR exponent. We point out that the mobility edge of the in-gap BdG quasiparticle state is quite close to the coherent peak position. We suspect that the superconductor-insulator transition would occur when the mobility edge crosses the coherent peak position. It is not clear how ξΔ ≈ ξAL discussed before can be consistent with this condition. We further justify our real-space Hartree-Fock-BCS-Anderson simulation, investigating the energy dependence of the multifractal scaling exponent α0 (Figs. 3o-p) which quantifies the uniformity of measures and the strength of multifractality1,2. Both simulation and experimental results explain that the closer to the zero energy, the weaker the uniformity and the stronger the multifractality get. To reveal the role of spatial fluctuations of pairing fields in delocalization of in-gap BdG quasiparticle states, we perform a renormalization group (RG) analysis48. Considering the fact that the superconductor belongs to the class C in the tenfold way topological classification28,29, we write down a Lagrangian density of our minimal model as VaΨ†σaΨ 3 a=1 , (3) where Ψ = (ψ↑, ψ↓ †) is a Nambu spinor field that describes BdG quasiparticle states. Here, ω is an energy variable, k is a radial momentum expanded about the Fermi momentum, v is the Fermi velocity, Δ0 is a constant pairing field, and σa are the Pauli matrices. Δ1|k|α is a non-uniform pairing field introduced phenomenologically to describe disorder-induced in-gap states (α = 0.5 is taken without loss of generality; See Fig. 4a). V1, V2 and V3 stand for three disorder scattering terms, which originate from random pairing fluctuations in amplitude and phase, and a random potential, respectively. We assume a Gaussian white-noise distribution for each Va , i.e, ⟨Va(r)Va(r′)⟩ = δ(r − r′)Γa, where the disorder parameter Γa characterizes the variance of such a distribution. Therefore Γ1 and Γ2 are the measures of the pairing fluctuations increasing with the applied magnetic field and Γ3 is a measure of the disorder strength. (See SI section 3 for more details about the construction of this model.) Taking into account quantum corrections in the one-loop order, we obtain RG flow equations, which are given in an approximate form as (See SI section 3 for the full equations and computation details), dΔ0 dl = Δ0[1 + A(−Γ1 + Γ2)], (4) dΔ1 dl = (1 − α)Δ1, (5) dΓ1 dl = Γ1 + B(Γ1 2 + Γ2 2), (6) dΓ2 dl = Γ2 + 2BΓ1Γ2, (7) dΓ3 dl = Γ3 − 2CΓ1Γ2, (8) where l → ∞ in the zero-temperature limit and the coefficients A, B, C are given by A = 1 ω2+(Δ0+Δ1)2, (9) B = (Δ0+Δ1)2 [ω2+(Δ0+Δ1)2]2, (10) C = ω2 [ω2+(Δ0+Δ1)2]2. (11) There exist two stable fixed-point (FP) solutions for these equations (See Fig. 4b): FP1: ( Γ1 ω , Γ2 ω , Γ3 ω) → (∞, ∞, ∞), (12) FP2: ( Γ1 ω , Γ2 ω , Γ3 ω) → (∞, ∞, 0), (13) where FP1 (FP2) indicates that an in-gap BdG quasiparticle state for given ω is localized (delocalized). If Γ1 and Γ2 are so weak that FP1 is stabilized for all ω, the system belongs to the conventional disordered superconducting phase1-11,31,32 where all in-gap states are localized. On the other hand, if Γ1 and Γ2 are strong enough that FP2 is stabilized for certain ω, the system belongs to a novel anomalous metallic phase with superconductivity where delocalized in-gap states are developed. In the latter case, the delocalized in-gap BdG quasiparticles may constitute metallic charge carriers in the superconducting gap, which could be reminiscent of the failed superconductor15. A quantum phase transition between two phases occurs when the disorder parameters are controlled (Fig. 4c). Our detailed RG analysis taking the energy dependence demonstrates the delocalization nature of the quantum phase transition (See SI section 3 for the computation details). The energy dependent phase diagram in Fig. 4c explicitly shows the emergence of delocalized in-gap states as Γ1 (the strength of superconducting fluctuations) increases. When Γ1 is small, only localized in-gap states exist in an energy window (green region). When Γ1 becomes larger, however, delocalized in-gap states also appear in a higher energy range (red region). A mobility edge (dashed line) appears in the latter case, which is comparable to that found in the numerical simulation (See Fig. 4). The phase diagram in Fig. 4e also exhibits the sharp transition of the energy range for delocalized in-gap states across the phase boundary in the disorder parameter space. The RG analysis suggests that our samples may undergo this delocalization transition, which is unveiled by the multifractality spectrum analysis in Fig. 2 (Exps.) and Fig. 3 (Sims.). When the magnetic field is absent, the pairing fluctuations are weak (small Γ1 and Γ2 in the effective field theory) and in the presence of magnetic field, the pairing fluctuations become strong (large Γ1 and Γ2). The RG analysis suggests that the former and latter belong to the conventional disordered superconducting phase and the anomalous metallic phase with superconductivity, respectively. In summary, our STM measurements and real-space mean-field simulations confirmed that the quasiparticles are localized with self-similar fractal LDOS structure and are delocalized with applied magnetic field which enhances the Cooper-pair fluctuations rather strongly, evidenced by the Cooper-pair multifractal spectrum and the coherent-peak height-distribution function. Our disorder RG analysis suggests the existence of a fixed point characterized by relatively large variance of Cooper pairs, not controllable by the perturbative RG method. These results suggest an anomalous insulator-metal transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles in a quasi- two-dimensional Fe-based superconductor, offering a novel mechanism for Anderson transitions in quasi-two dimensions beyond the ten-fold way classification. We believe that the metal-insulator transition of in-gap BdG quasiparticles is not limited to the superconducting state only, but a ubiquitous phenomenon wherever the corresponding order-parameter field for spontaneous symmetry breaking is strongly fluctuating near the metal-insulator transition, and is expected to show the multifractal spectrum of the collective mode. Although we showed that the quasiparticle states can be delocalized by the fluctuations of order parameter fields, the fundamental mechanism is not fully clarified yet. It is natural to expect a two-parameter scaling theory for the Anderson transition based on the quasiparticle localization length and the order-parameter correlation length. STM measurements could reveal the interplay between the symmetry-breaking field and the corresponding quasiparticle state by the multifractal analysis of the collective spectrum.