1 Atomic motifs govern the decoration of grain boundaries by interstitial solutes Xuyang Zhou1,2,*, Ali Ahmadian2, Baptiste Gault1,3, Colin Ophus4, Christian H. Liebscher2, Gerhard Dehm2, Dierk Raabe1,* Department of Microstructure Physics & Alloy Design, Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany. Department of Structure & Nano- / Micromechanics of Materials Max-Planck-Institut für Eisenforschung GmbH, 40237 Düsseldorf, Germany. Department of Materials, Royal School of Mines, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, UK. National Center for Electron Microscopy, Molecular Foundry, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA *Corresponding to: x.zhou@mpie.de; d.raabe@mpie.de; Abstract Grain boundaries, the two-dimensional (2D) defects between differently oriented crystals, control mechanical and transport properties of materials 1-3. Our fundamental understanding of grain boundaries is still incomplete even after nearly a century and a half of research since Sorby first imaged grains 4. Here, we present a systematic study, over 9 orders of magnitude of size scales, in which we analyze 2D defects between two neighboring crystals across five hierarchy levels and investigate their crystallographic, compositional, and electronic features. The levels are (a) the macroscale interface alignment and grain misorientation (held constant here); (b) the systematic mesoscopic change in the inclination of the grain boundary plane for the same orientation difference; (c) the facets, atomic motifs (structural units 5), and internal nanoscopic defects within the boundary plane; (d) the grain boundary chemistry; and (e) the electronic structure of the atomic motifs. As a model material, we use Fe alloyed with B and C 6, exploiting the strong interdependence of interface structure and chemistry in this system. This model system is the basis of the 1.9 billion tons of steel produced annually 7, and has an eminent role as a catalyst 8. Surprisingly, we find that even a change in the inclination of the GB plane with identical misorientation impacts GB composition and atomic arrangement. Thus, it is the smallest structural hierarchical level, the atomic motifs, which control the most important chemical properties of the grain boundaries. This finding not only closes 2 a missing link between the structure and chemical composition of such defects but also enables the targeted design and passivation of the chemical state of grain boundaries to free them from their role as entry gates for corrosion 9, hydrogen embrittlement 3, or mechanical failure 10. Grain boundaries (GBs) are among the most important features of the microstructure, occupying an area of 500-1,000 football fields per cubic meter material with 1 m grain size. On the one hand, they render positive effects such as the simultaneous increase in strength and ductility 11,12, but on the other hand they make materials vulnerable, for crack initiation 10, onset of corrosion 9, pinning of magnetic domain walls 13, diffusional intrusion14 or reduction in electrical conductivity 15. These features qualify GBs as the most important microstructural defects for many high-performance materials. Two key factors are missing in our knowledge about GBs. The first one is the systematic and meaningful representation of GBs with pertinent and property-oriented parameters: their characterization requires five geometric degrees of freedom 16 and further parameters to describe them down to their atomistic-scale facets 17-21 and motifs 22-26, yet, it is still elusive which of these really matter for structure-property relations. By motifs we mean here certain geometric polyhedra built by atoms that form repeating units to constitute the GBs 5,23-27, e.g., the kite 24,28, domino, and pearl 22,29 structures that were described before to decipher the GB’s elementary ‘genetic’ structure. This concept of the GB motif was inspired by the early works of Gaskell 30,31 and Bernal 32: they described liquids and amorphous materials as an arrangement of polyhedral structural atomic units and found that only a surprisingly small number of them is needed to construct such complex materials. Identifying key properties of GBs across all these scales at systematic variation of these parameters has not yet been realized. The second one is the difficulty of characterizing both, the GB structure (in all these aspects) and their chemical decoration state down to the atomic scale. The hierarchy of the GB structure across these different features is complex: an adequate representation of a GB at least requires to define the misorientation between adjacent grains and the inclination of the GB plane. At a mesoscopic view energy-favored GB planes are normally the most densely packed ones which comprise a high density of atomic coincidence sites, derived from a virtual lattice that extends over both adjacent crystals (CSL) 33. At a refined scale it is found that the GB planes do not generally follow this geometrical criterion alone but that they can further decompose into a sequence of piecewise planar facets, which are sets of reconstruction motifs of lower total energy 18,28. At the atomic level, local GB structures, including the faceting 18,19,28, as well as many other features such as secondary defects34, ordering 2,35-38 and phase transformation 22,39,40, can play crucial roles in the spatial distribution of solute atoms within GB planes. This complex interplay between GB structure and chemistry leads to a deviation from the Langmuir- 3 McLean type of (sub-)monolayer adsorption behavior 16, which takes a thermodynamic view at chemical decoration, yet, is structurally agnostic to these fine atomic details. This complexity shows that – in order to gain a fundamental understanding of the coupling behavior between structure and chemical composition – direct experimental observation of all these structure features and across all these scales, together with a mapping of the GBs chemical composition is required. This must be done under conditions, where each of these parameters is varied systematically, step-by-step, while the other parameters are kept constant. For this study, we have developed a custom-designed workflow along an instrument ensemble which allows to map the structure, chemistry and electronic state of GBs at length scales ranging from macroscopic to atomic. The macro- and mesoscale study of GB structure was carried out by optical, scanning electron microcopy (SEM), and diffraction imaging. We observed atomic GB structures using probe-corrected high angle annular dark field - scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) 6,22. We used atom probe tomography (APT) 41 to quantify the distribution of solutes along the GB plane at the nanoscale 42-45. APT has the sensitivity to detect all elements in the periodic table, and provides 3D chemical composition using machine-learning enhanced mapping 46 of the chemical decoration inside the GB planes, routinely for areas as large as 10,000 nm2. Direct imaging of the atomic structure at GBs is currently not possible for APT due to the limited spatial resolution of approximately 0.1-0.3 nm in depth and 0.3-0.5 nm in width 47,48, and the local magnification effect 49-51. We used differential phase contrast – four dimensional STEM (DPC- 4DSTEM) to map low atomic number objects and the local charge-density of crystalline materials with sub-Ångström resolution 52-58. We reconstructed the charge-density maps from the DPC-4DSTEM data to spatially resolve B and C atoms decorating the Fe GBs. With this multi-scale and multi-physics GB analysis approach we make the surprising observation that it is actually not the macroscopic or mesoscopic geometrical aspects that explain the specific chemical decoration state of an interface as is usually claimed. Instead, features at the smallest length scales, i.e. the atomistic motifs, determine the chemistry of a GB. As a model material we have chosen a Bridgeman- produced body-centered cubic (bcc) – Fe Σ5 (where Σ5 is the density of coincident sites 33) bicrystal, stabilized by approximately 4 at.% Al and alloyed with C and B atoms 6. We have selected this material as Fe-C alloys, also referred to as steels, represent about 1.9 billion tons of material produced each year 7, by far the most common metal class, with an uncounted number of safety critical and functional applications, ranging from huge infrastructure to tiny magnets. B has been selected as a second alloy element owing to its peculiar, and often highly beneficial effect on GB cohesion and the resulting material properties 11. 4 Hierarchical characterization of grain boundaries We grew bcc - Fe Σ5 bicrystals 6. During the growth process, the GB plane changed its orientation with respect to the neighboring grains, see the orange dashed line superimposed on the optical image in Fig. 1a. We cut a disk (5 mm thick and 2 cm in diameter, marked as a blue rectangle in Fig. 1a) from the bicrystals to investigate the hierarchical structure and composition of the GB over 9 orders of magnitude in size scale using a variety of characterization methods (see Fig. 1). Macroscopically, this particular region exhibits a significant change in the GB plane inclination perpendicular to the growth direction, but remains relatively straight along the growth direction, see the optical image in Fig. 1a. Fig. 1b shows the mesoscale GB character measured by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). The GB has a total length of approximately 1 cm. We divided the GB into regions of interest (ROIs) from #1 to #91 with 10 m horizontal distance between each number. The orientation of the adjacent grains remained constant, while the GB plane systematically changed its angle, see the inset blue cubes and yellow lines. We quantified the rotation of the GB planes by the inclination, which is the angle between the GB plane and the inner bisector between the directions in the grains. The inclination changed from 0° to 60° with a monotonic variation (see Fig. 1b, more measurements are referred to Extended Data Fig. 1). At the nano- and atomic scales, we found that GBs are not flat. Faceting, discontinuities, and steps occur at a high number density along the GB plane. For example, the 4DSTEM orientation map and the HAADF- STEM image in Fig. 1c show facet structures along the Σ5 // GB. Such abrupt local structural variation leads to a dramatic change in the spatial distribution of solute atoms within the GB planes, showing that it is not the mesoscopic alignment but the atomic-scale motif- and facet-structure which determines its chemical decoration. Fig. 1d shows a representative APT measurement of the same Σ5 // GB, where the local content of C and B varies significantly along the curved GB plane. We present more 4DSTEM orientation maps in Extended Data Fig. 2 and APT reconstructions in Extended Data Fig. 3. We observed the light B and C atomic columns at the local GB motifs using the recently developed DPC- 4DSTEM imaging technique 53,54,58. As shown in Fig. 1e, the atomic columns containing the B or C atoms at Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB were revealed and validated by a combination of experimental and simulated charge-density maps reconstructed from the DPC-4DSTEM data sets. The contrast for the light atoms, here B or C, is weak in the dark-field image due to their much lower atomic weight compared to Fe. Using the charge-density maps, we were able to detect a clear signal in the center of the GB atomic motif structure (referred to as ‘kite’ 24,28), representing the B or C-containing atomic columns. The charge density map can also provide an opportunity to study the electronic structure of the GB 54. Here light atoms in the Fe GB have been directly imaged in the electron microscope at sub-Ångström- resolution. 5 6 Fig. 1 Hierarchy study of Σ5 Fe grain boundaries (GBs) over 9 orders of magnitude. a Macroscale information of the Σ5 bicrystals. b Structural characterization of Σ5 GBs at mesoscale level by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). A continuous change in the inclination of the GB was recorded while the misorientation between the adjacent grains remained constant. The number indicates the position at which the EBSD scan was acquired, ranging from #1 - # 91, at 10 μm spacing, see the illustration in a. The blue squares represent the body-centered cubic (bcc) unit cells imaged at direction. c shows in-plane defects in the representative Σ5 (430) // (010) GB. The two left hand side images show the reconstruction of the orientation from the four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4DSTEM) data set. The black squares represent the body-centered cubic (bcc) unit cells imaged at direction. The right image is the high angle annular dark field (HAADF) – scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image. d The local composition of B and C along the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB plane. e Imaging light B and C atoms in the center of the kite structure for a Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB using differential phase contrast (DPC)-4DSTEM imaging. The left image shows the atomic model structure of the Σ5 Fe (colored in red) GB with B (blue) decoration. The right image includes the reconstructed dark-field and charge-density map for both simulated and experimental data sets. The last column of each row shows the schematic illustration of the main structural features of a given hierarchy. Grain boundary chemistry We have systematically quantified the GB chemistry for a series of Σ5-GBs with different inclinations using the influence of the GB inclination on their chemical properties, we selected ROIs in which the GBs appeared to be flat in the reconstructed APT volume. For example, Fig. 2a shows the atom maps of Fe, B, and C, extracted from a region with a Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB. We found a clear tendency for B and C to segregate at the GB, which is consistent with previous theoretical and experimental studies 6,59-65. It is worth noting that the detailed study of Al depletion caused by the co-segregation of B and C was reported in our previous publication 6. In the current work, we focus on the segregation behavior of the light elements B and C. We quantified the in-plane solute compositions of B and C throughout the GB. The composition ranges for B and C are 0.2-1.3 atomic (at.) % and 0.2-1.7 at. %, respectively, corresponding to interfacial excesses of 0.7-4.5 atoms (at.)/nm2 and 0-5.7 atom(at.)/nm2, respectively. In a GB composed of kite structures, the center of a single kite structure includes several sites in the direction perpendicular to the projection 7 direction of the kite structure; these sites may be fully or partially occupied by interstitial atoms, resulting in different solute content, i.e., different values of interfacial excess. When the center of the kite structure consisting of a Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB is fully occupied by interstitial atoms, the interfacial excess is 7.7 at./nm2. According to our APT results, there is less than a monolayer adsorption of B or C atoms at this Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB, since the interfacial excesses for both B and C are less than 7.7 at./nm2. The mean occupancies for B and C are approximately 31% and 38%, respectively. We also noticed an inhomogeneous segregation pattern of both B and C in the contour maps of their compositions in the GB planes 46 (see Fig. 2b). First, it must be clarified that due to the limited detection rate and trajectory aberration 41,66, APT cannot provide a reconstruction in which every atom in the bulk material is accurately reconstructed. Here for the spatially resolved solute content along the GB plane, the quantification results represent the statistics over several, approximately 10-20, kite structures. The solute content values in Fig. 2b do not show the composition of each individual kite structure, but the average value for several kite structures. Although the composition of each kite provides more information about the physical interrelationships from the energy point of view. It is not possible to directly learn the atomic level information from the APT measurements. However, the statistics of an average value can readily provide a general understanding of the behavior of solute-solute interaction at GBs 42,67. Interestingly, the decoration with B and C are not strongly correlated but some regions appears to be mutually repulsive, i.e., regions enriched in B can have a low content of C (see Fig. 2b) and vice versa. We quantified the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient between the local GB compositions of B and C as 0.02, which is midway between the lower (-1, anti-correlated) and upper (1, perfect correlation) bounds, indicating a very weak correlation. There are two main reasons for the inhomogeneous segregation. The first reason is composition-dependent segregation behavior 6,68. In our previous work, we used density functional theory (DFT) to study this phenomenon and we found that increased coverage of interstitial or substitutional sites, e.g. by B and C, decreases the segregation tendency, suggesting that co-segregation effects limit the enrichment of B and C 6. More specifically, the segregation energy for B at the interstitial sites is -2.6 eV - -2.8 eV, indicating a strong segregation tendency. However, when additional B or C is present at the second nearest (to GB) interstitial sites, the segregation energy for interstitial sites approaches zero or even reaches positive values. In these cases, further segregation is energetically unfavorable 6. The second reason is site- and motif-specific segregation, which is determined by the local GB motifs in the GB plane 19,62. Wang et al. 62 found that more open GB structures, e.g., with local motifs such as Σ5 compact structure units, such as e.g. the local motif 3 (21̅1̅) // (12̅1). For a GB with the same CSL value, e.g., a Σ5 GB, the segregation energies for C at the interstitial site reduced from -1.13 eV/atom to -1.40 8 finding shows that the local Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) motif is energetically more favorable for C segregation than the Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) motif. The GB motif-dependent segregation tendency has also been reported for the system Cu-Ag by Peter et al. 19, where nanometer-sized facets were observed to be composed of asymmetric segments. In our study, the inhomogeneous B and C segregation is therefore attributed to the changes in these local motifs. In the following sections, we will address the atomic structure of the different local motifs in more detail. Fig. 2 Local chemical composition analysis for Σ5 GBs. a. Fe (only show 3 at. % of total Fe atoms), B, and C atom maps from the atom probe tomography (APT) reconstruction of the Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) GB. b Contour maps of the solute B and C compositions along the GB planes shown in a. c The distribution of B 9 and #91 Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) GBs, represented by the area fraction of a given B or C content as a function of B or C composition. Additional in-plane quantitative GB chemistry results are summarized in Fig. 2c (see each of the APT reconstruction in the Extended Data in Fig. 3). The average B content increased from 0.37±0.19 at. % to more than three times that at the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB. For the average in-plane composition of C, a relatively constant composition of 0.8 at. % was observed for GBs with different inclinations, except for the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB, which is about 25% higher than for the other GBs. Summarizing the segregation GB and Σ5 (430) // (010) GB have a relatively low solute content of approximately 1.4 at%, see Extended Data Fig. 4. Our APT observation is consistent with the theoretical prediction of Wang et al. 62. Facet structures Fig. 3 shows selected HAADF-STEM images for the four representative GBs we studied for the in-plane GB chemistry. More images of these GBs can be found in the Extended Data Fig. 5. We have drawn yellow lines to highlight the projection of GB planes where atomically sharp GBs were detected. This indicates that the lamellae samples are so thin that the inclination of the GBs in the projection direction is not pronounced, i.e., the structures are essentially constant along the projection direction. Fig. 3a shows the Σ5 (430) // (010) GB in which in-plane defects occur continuously to compensate for the appears relatively straight, with the local GB motifs showing the typical kite structure, Fig. 3b. In this GB, a step connecting two regions with kite structure was observed. For the Σ5 (11 1 0) // (98̅0) GB in Fig. 3c, we found a nanofacet morphology with different combinations between local motifs, such as Σ5 (310) // We tabulated all observed local GB motifs in Fig. 3e, where three local GB motifs dominate: Σ5 {110} // 10 the kite-shaped structural units are commonly identified and also predicted from DFT and Mendelev calculations 28,59,68,69. However, there are less reports on the asymmetric Σ5 {110} // {010} GB motifs. Fig. 3 HAADF-STEM images of the local GB structures. a-d are Σ5 GBs with the local plane pairs (430) positions of the GBs. The red squares and blue lines assist in identifying the local GB planes. e Summary table showing the local GB planes for Σ5 GBs with different macroscopic GB inclinations. Imaging light B and C atoms at grain boundaries We have next studied the above mentioned three types of prevalent atomic GB motifs with regards to the occurrence of the light elements B and C, using the DPC-4DSTEM method. B and C atomic columns are identified by locating peaks with weak or no contrast in the dark-field images, but strong contrast in the charge density maps. The full reconstruction, including the electric field, the (projected) electrostatic potential, and the charge-density maps, can be found in the Extended Data Fig. 6. Fig. 4 shows only the reconstructed dark-field image (top row) and the charge-density map (bottom row) for each GB motif. More ROIs of the local GB motifs can be found in the Extended Data Fig. 7. In Fig. 4a, we highlighted the Σ5 (110) // (010) motif with a yellow triangle. The B and C atomic columns are marked with black arrows in the charge-density map, which appear far apart, indicating a potentially low solute content in this GB type. Fig. 4b shows the typical kite structure of the Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) motif, 11 highlighted by yellow quads. In the charge-density map, we found that the center of the kite structure is occupied by light atoms. It is worth noting that this DPC-4DSTEM method can only detect whether there is an atomic column consisting of light elements but it cannot distinguish what type of solute it is, i.e. whether it is a predominantly B or C-occupied atomic column or a mixed state (see Extended Data Fig. 8). Based on our preliminary DFT study, all of these occupation states have been shown to be energetically favorable 6. The last Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) motif is more complicated, as we identified two different variants of this type. Fig. 4c shows one variant of the motif, which appears to be a separated kite structure, as highlighted with yellow quads and a line. Similar to the Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) motif, the B or C atomic columns can also occupy the center of the kite structure. Another variant of this motif for the Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) type structure is the extended kite structure, see Extended Data Fig. 7c iii-vi. We found that this type of motif variant is commonly more distorted 6,62,63,68, which might be a reason that it can accommodate higher fractions of interstitial or substitutional sites that are suited for hosting B or C. This result is consistent with the quantifications from our APT results, see Fig. 2c, where the composition of solutes for the Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) GB shows a wide range and its mean composition is the highest of all GBs studied, up to 1.95 at% for total B and C content. The theoretical prediction of Wang et al. 62 also suggests that the Σ5 (21̅0) // (12̅0) type structure is energetically more favorable for the interstitial segregation of C than the Σ5 (310) // (31̅0) type structure. This direct atomic-scale observation of the motif structures underneath the mesoscale plane inclination features provides an explanation for the profound differences among GBs with different inclinations for their chemical decoration states observed by APT. 12 from the atomic DPC-4DSTEM data sets are shown in the top and bottom panels, respectively. The repeated structures are highlighted in yellow lines in the dark-field map. The B or C atomic columns are indicated by black arrows in the charge-density maps. In summary, we performed a holistic, multiscale analysis of the hierarchical, structural, and chemical features of GBs using high-resolution imaging techniques including HAADF-STEM, APT, and atomic DPC-4DSTEM, which extends over 9 orders of magnitude in spatial resolution. We find that the chemical properties of GBs cannot be simply determined by their CSL value or mesoscopic angular features alone, but instead strongly depend on their GB inclination, the resulting faceting, and particularly on the local atomic motifs. Using charge-density maps, we were able to directly map the atomic columns of light elements B and C in the GBs of an Fe bicrystal. These results not only yield direct experimental evidence for understanding the chemical nature of GBs on the basis of their atomic-scale structural properties, but also provide the scientific basis for developing advanced materials with controllable interfaces.