Microstructure reconstruction using diffusion-based generative models Kang-Hyun. Lee1, and Gun Jin Yun1,2 1Department of Mechanical & Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Gwanak- gu Gwanak-ro 1 Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea 2Institute of Advanced Aerospace Technology, Seoul National University, Gwanak-gu Gwanak-ro 1, Seoul 08826, South Korea Abstract Microstructure reconstruction has been an essential part of computational material engineering to reveal the relationship between microstructures and material properties. However, finding a general solution for microstructure characterization and reconstruction (MCR) tasks is still challenging, although there have been many attempts such as the descriptor-based MCR methods. To address this generality problem, the denoising diffusion models are first employed for the microstructure reconstruction task in this study. The applicability of the diffusion-based models is validated with several types of microstructures (e.g., polycrystalline alloy, carbonate, ceramics, copolymer, fiber composite, etc.) that have different morphological characteristics. The quality of the generated images is assessed with the quantitative evaluation metrics (Fréchet inception distance (FID) score, precision, and recall) and the conventional statistical microstructure descriptors. Furthermore, the formulation of implicit probabilistic models (which yields non-Markovian diffusion processes) is adopted to accelerate the sampling process, thereby controlling the computational cost considering the practicability and reliability. The results show that the denoising diffusion models are well applicable to the reconstruction of various types of microstructures with different spatial distributions and morphological features. The diffusion-based approach provides a stable training process with simple implementation for generating visually similar and statistically equivalent microstructures. In these regards, the diffusion model has great potential to be used as a universal microstructure reconstruction method for handling complex microstructures for materials science. Keywords: microstructure reconstruction, diffusion model, denoising diffusion probabilistic model, microstructure reconstruction, neural network 1. Introduction One of the major goals in material science is to build process-microstructure-property linkages of the target material to optimize its property for the given application. Owing to the development of computational materials science with integrated computational materials engineering (ICME), inverse materials design has been aided by numerical simulations and data-driven techniques in the last decades . A vital issue in the computational material design framework is building a reliable large-scale microstructure database. To deal with this issue, microstructure characterization and reconstruction (MCR) have been utilized to facilitate the materials design by using microstructural descriptors which encapsulate the essential morphological information. For instance, if one can find a reasonable descriptor for a given microstructure image, it is able to reconstruct equivalent microstructure images (or even three- dimensional microstructure) as many as desired. To date, a considerable amount of studies have been conducted to propose some reasonable and universal descriptors for microstructure reconstruction such as physical descriptors , correlation functions , random fields , and spectral density functions . Based on the pre-characterized microstructure with certain descriptors, most of the MCR methods involve an iterative optimization process for minimizing the difference between the target descriptors and the current descriptors . After a sufficient number of iterations, it is able to generate statistically and morphologically equivalent microstructure samples. In addition, the differentiable descriptors have been also used to characterize and reconstruct microstructure samples with gradient-based optimization . However, it is still challenging to find a universal descriptor that works for various types of microstructures. The conventional MCR methods based on statistics of morphological features (e.g., two-point correlation and lineal path functions) often do not work well as the shape of the target microstructure gets complicated. For instance, the typical microstructures of alloy, ceramics, and carbonate are well reconstructed from n-point correlation whereas only some artificial neural network (ANN)-based models have shown noteworthy performance on the reconstruction of copolymer microstructure. In other words, the conventional MCR methodologies require insights into the spatial distribution of the morphological features in the material of interest. Meanwhile, various types of data-based synthesis frameworks have been proposed in recent days with the rapid evolution of generative neural network models including variational autoencoders (VAEs) , flow-based models , and generative adversarial networks (GANs) . These generative models learn a latent representation of the sample data, which can also be thought of as a compressed form of original data. After training the generative models, the models can generate a new sample by simply sampling the latent variables. In particular, GAN-based models have shown noteworthy performance on microstructure reconstruction tasks . In addition, the StyleGAN also has the lowest Fréchet inception distance (FID) scores with ImageNet 64 × 64 dataset as shown in Table 1. Using GAN, it is able to generate high-resolution image samples with high precision and recall (i.e., low FID). Furthermore, not only do GANs generate high-quality samples, GANs can generate samples very fast since it requires only a single pass through the trained network. However, GAN models suffer from critical problems such as mode collapse and non-convergence issues . Due to the adversarial formulation of the loss function to train the discriminator and the generator, training GANs is highly unstable . For instance, GAN models often produce samples from a limited set of modes (i.e., degraded diversity of the model outputs). To secure the diversity of samples as well as the precision, the hyperparameters and the complex features in GAN models should be carefully addressed. The difficulties of training and scaling models are the major drawback of GANs, which hinder their wide application in different domains. To overcome these problems with GANs, diffusion-based generative models have been drawing significant attention for data synthesis in recent days. Recent works on diffusion models have demonstrated their noteworthy generative performance with high-quality samples comparable to those from GANs . In 2021, Dhariwal and Nichol also showed that their tailored denoising diffusion models outperform GANs on image synthesis tasks in sample quality (i.e., FID score). In addition, the performance of the diffusion-based model (i.e., cascaded diffusion model (CDM)) presented by Ho et al. is also ranked first with the benchmark result using ImageNet 64 × 64 (Table 1). The diffusion models are likelihood- based models which generate samples by gradually denoising the noised samples . According to Yang et al. , there are three popular formulations of diffusion models which are the denoising diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) , the score-based generative models (SGM), and the stochastic differential equations (SDE). Although the detailed formulation process is different for each case, DDPM and SGM can be generalized with the solutions of SDE for noise perturbation and sample generation (i.e., denoising). In particular, the open-source code for the generative model formulated with the DDPM approach is also released by OpenAI . After the original denoising diffusion model was proposed by Sohl-Dickstein , the diffusion models have been shown to provide a generative performance with a comprehensive distribution coverage in various domains such as computer vision, natural language processing, and multimodal modeling . Furthermore, the stationary objective of these models without adversarial formulation and relatively simple architecture compared to GANs also facilitate their application. The advances in the probabilistic parameterization of the diffusion models also provide stable training procedures for forward (diffusion) and backward (denoising) transformation of the prior data distribution . This study proposes a diffusion model-based microstructure reconstruction approach using the DDPM formulation . Compared to the conventional MCR methods, the model does not require any physical or spatial approximation. Instead, the model directly learns the sample data distribution, enabling the generation of multiple synthetic images of microstructures. To the authors’ best knowledge, this is the first study conducted for implementing denoising diffusion-based microstructure reconstruction. Furthermore, the implicit formulation of probabilistic diffusion models, which is called denoising diffusion implicit models (DDIM) , is adopted to accelerate the sampling process (which is a solution for the slow computational speed of the original DDPM). To validate the model’s performance, various microstructure images with different morphological characteristics are considered to be reconstructed. Then, the performance of the model is evaluated using the evaluation metrics (FID scores , precision, and recall ) for assessing the quality of samples in terms of data synthesis, as well as the conventional spatial statistics for analyzing the morphological similarities between the original and generated samples. Model FID Type Year