1 Ultrafast synthesis of SiC nanowire webs by floating catalysts rationalised through in-situ measurements and thermodynamic calculations Isabel Gómez-Palos,†a,b Miguel Vazquez-Pufleau,†,a Jorge Valilla,a,c Álvaro Ridruejo,b Damien Tourret,a,*and Juan J. Vilatelaa,* a IMDEA Materials, Madrid, 28906, Spain. b Department of Materials Science, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, E.T.S. de Ingenieros de Caminos, 28040 Madrid, Spain. c Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, 28911 Leganes, Spain. *damien.tourret@imdea.org, juanjose.vilatela@imdea.org. This work presents the synthesis of SiC nanowires floating in a gas stream through the vapour-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism using an aerosol of catalyst nanoparticles. These conditions lead to ultrafast growth at 8.5 μm/s (maximum of 50 μm/s), which is up to 3 orders of magnitude above conventional substrate-based chemical vapour deposition. The high aspect ratio of the nanowires (up to 2200) favours their entanglement and the formation of freestanding network materials consisting entirely of SiCNWs. The floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition growth process is rationalised through in-situ sampling of reaction products and catalyst aerosol from the gas phase, and thermodynamic calculations of the bulk ternary Si-C-Fe phase diagram. The phase diagram suggests a description of the mechanistic path for the selective growth of SiCNWs, consistent with the observation that no other types of nanowires (Si or C) are grown by the catalyst. SiCNW growth occurs at 1130 °C, close to the calculated eutectic. According to the calculated phase diagram, upon addition of Si and C, the Fe-rich liquid segregates a carbon shell, and later enrichment of the liquid in Si leads to the formation of SiC. The exceptionally fast growth rate relative to substrate-based processes is attributed to the increased availability of precursors for incorporation into the catalyst due to the high collision rate inherent to this new synthesis mode. Introduction There is a strong interest in methods that enable large-scale assembly of high-aspect ratio nanomaterials as macroscopic structures. Macroscopic networks of nanowires, nanotubes and 2D nanomaterials show promise in a myriad of applications, ranging from purification1 to energy storage2,3 and conversion4, from thermal management5,6 to electronics7. There are various routes to synthesise inorganic nanowires in powder form8,9. But, to produce macroscopic structures, the prevalent method has been so far through their growth as vertically aligned arrays on a substrate of interest by chemical vapour deposition (CVD)10,11. In the process, nanowires grow through the so-called vapour- liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism, whereby gas precursors decompose and get incorporated into a metal catalyst nanoparticle on a substrate forming an alloy, which then, upon supersaturation, segregates a solid nanowire. Nanowire diameter, position and number density are controlled and fixed through pre-deposition of the catalyst nanoparticles12,13. Recently, we proposed an alternative route to produce macroscopic structures of nanowires through the synthesis of silicon nanowires floating in a gas stream from an aerosol of gold catalyst nanoparticles in a flow-through reaction. The floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition (FCCVD) method enabled continuous assembly of macroscopic sheets of Si nanowires14. A similar method is well known for spinning of continuous fibres of carbon nanotubes15,16. Nanowires of III-V semiconductors are also known to grow through this method17,18,19. The fascinating prospect is that FCCVD is a new general route for assembly of inorganic nanowires as macroscopic structures that eliminates all processing solvents and substrates, and which leads to a new class of textile-like 2 network materials. This paper sets out to support this hypothesis by demonstrating that silicon carbide nanowires (SiCNW) also can be synthesised by FCCVD and directly form macroscopic freestanding solids. Silicon carbide nanowires combine the properties of a refractory ceramic with a wide band gap (2.3 eV), high field strength, and high charge mobility. They are thus particularly attractive for high frequency20, high power21 and high temperature electronic devices22, but have also been used for photocatalysis23, field emission24, electromagnetic radiation absorption25, and energy storage26. Numerous methods for SiCNW synthesis exist, including template assisted growth27, laser ablation28 and carbothermal reduction,29 but chemical vapour deposition (CVD) is preferred because of its superior yield, selectivity and ease of implementation.30,31,32 SiCNW synthesis by CVD is generally carried out using transition metal nanoparticles pre-deposited on a silicon wafer as a catalyst. Variations include the use of other metals33, generation of Fe catalyst in the gas phase34 and growth on different substrates (e.g. carbon fibre24). There are also several forms of introducing precursors of CVD, either as separate C and Si compounds35 or as molecules containing both elements, such as polysilacarbosilane36 and hexametyldisilane37,38. Despite this wide range of synthesis conditions, reported SiCNW growth rates by CVD are narrow, and slow. Average growth rate for conventional substrate processes is ≈5 nm/s. Moreover, the presence of a substrate restricts sample format, thus limiting the application of SiCNWs. This work demonstrates that eliminating the substrate from synthesis of SiCNWs increases growth rate by several orders of magnitude and enables the direct assembly of freestanding networks of nanowires resembling fabrics. The paper provides a description of this new synthesis mode based on analysis of reaction products sampled in-situ from the gas phase, and on thermodynamic calculations of phase equilibria for the Fe-Si-C system. Experimental SiC nanowires were synthetized in a vertical flow-through FCCVD reactor via the VLS mechanism, using an aerosol of Fe as the catalyst and hexamethyldisilane (HMDS, Si2C6H18) as SiC precursor. The window of reaction conditions explored for this study is summarised in Table 1. It also includes the conditions judged optimal in terms of observed conversion, and which are therefore those used in the experiments in this report, unless otherwise noted. The liquid HMDS is fed through an injector placed at the upper part of the reactor (13 cm below the top flange at 485 °C) at a rate of 0.5 ml/h. The injection system consists of a capillary tube (1/16” OD and 0.010” ID) with a surrounding H2 flow of 60 ml/min to aid the atomization of the liquid. Iron catalyst can be introduced in the reactor by two different means. As a standard case, ferrocene is dissolved in liquid HMDS until saturation (≈16 mg/ml). Alternatively, Fe nanoparticles are formed with a high voltage spark generator (SG) using iron electrodes (98.5 % purity) and carried to the reactor with a H2 flow39. The reactor tube (mullite 660, Øint = 7 cm) was set at a nominal temperature of 1300 °C and a H2 atmosphere is sustained by a 3 lpm H2 flow. Along the reactor tube, and particularly near the hottest zone of the reactor, visible solid products are formed. Fig. 1 Schematic of the reactor for the synthesis of SiCNWs through floating catalyst CVD. It includes a ceramic finger for in-situ collection of nanomaterials, and a system for vacuum extraction of floating nanowires or catalyst aerosol nanoparticles. Explored experimental variables in the synthesis of SiCNWs. 3 Two main systems were used to collect solid products from the gas phase. The first one consists of a thin mullite rod (6 mm diameter) inserted through the whole length of the reactor and kept there during the reaction. It has no form of cooling and can thus be assume to have the same temperature profile as the reactor tube. The second consists of a vacuum extraction system with controllable position to sample material from different parts of the reactor chamber. The system consisted in a 1-m-long ceramic tube (1/4” diameter) extracting 0.5 lpm of the gas inside the reactor by means of a Venturi pump-critical orifice40 and collected with a polyethersulfone (PES) filter at the end. This movable extraction system was also used to determine the evolution of the Fe aerosol. It was measured in real time with a scanning mobility particle sizer (SMPS, GRIMM MODEL 5705) which selects particle size based on a differential mobility analyser (DMA, GRIMM MODEL 5706) to obtain data of the concentration and size distribution of the catalyst. Fig. 1 shows a schematic representation of the experimental set-up and collection systems. The ceramic rod and vacuum filter provide separate means to sample and then analyse the morphology and composition of solid products, however we note that these collection systems are probably size selective (See SI). After extraction, samples were characterized by optical imaging and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Helios NanoLab 600i). Micrographs were used to obtain the diameter and length distribution by image analysis (see SI). The distributions of diameter and length were obtained from inspection of 500 and 170 NWs, respectively. Raman spectroscopy (Raman Spectrometer RENISHAW MoD. Invia) was carried out with a laser wavelength of 532 nm (2.33 eV), using 50x objectives. High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, FEI Talos F200X) and synchrotron x-ray diffraction at ALBA synchrotron facilities (NCD-SWEET beamline) were performed to assess the crystallinity and phase composition of the nanowires. In addition, we calculated the ternary Fe-Si-C equilibrium phase diagram at different temperatures using the CalPhaD method, in order to rationalise the compositional path followed from the Fe catalyst to the growth of SiC via addition of HMDS. These calculations were performed with software ThermoCalc® and the thermodynamic database for Fe-based alloys TCFE9. Results Nanowire characterization Samples consisting of SiCNW webs were successfully synthesised via FCCVD without any substrates and directly collected from the growth zone of the reactor using either a ceramic rod or a vacuum extraction system. Fig 2 presents optical and electron micrographs of standard samples showing the hierarchical structure of these materials. The nanowires are highly crystalline, as shown in the HRTEM image of Fig 2c-d. The interplanar spacing of the crystalline SiC is d = 0.25 nm, coinciding with the (111) plane of 3C-SiC cubic structure (JCPDS Card no. 73- 1665). Stacking faults (SF) a few nanometres long are observed parallel to the growth axis. These SF, formed from dislocation in the atomic lattice, are commonly observed in nano-SiC and allow the formation of nanosegments of different SiC phases28. Raman spectra in Fig. S1 shows the characteristic peeks at 790 and 940 cm-1 corresponding to the transverse optic (TO) and longitudinal optic (LO) mode of SiC. The peak at 940 cm-1 is shifted from the bulk peak (972 cm-1) due to the nanometre dimensions of the SiCNWs41. Other peaks found at 870 and 760 cm-1 are associated to structural defects in the materials, in this case related to the stacking faults found in the nanowires 42. Crystallinity of the SiC NWs over large sample volumes was confirmed with synchrotron X-ray diffraction (see Fig. S2). The Fig. 2 SiCNW materials produced by FCCVD and collected as solids. A) Photograph of an aerogel of entangled SiCNWs forming a freestanding solid. B) SEM micrograph showing the network structure of high-aspect ratio SiCNWs. C) TEM micrograph of a SiCNW with the typical VLS growth tip and stacking faults. D) HRTEM micrograph showing the nanowire 3C crystal structure. The FFT is shown in the insert. (SiCNWs synthesised at standard conditions and 20 min of collection) 4 material is composed predominantly of the 3C phase of SiC, with weaker peaks corresponding to the 6H-SiC phase. This signal confirm that nanosegments of different phases are generated by the stacking faults41. Application of the Scherrer equation in the three main peaks of the 3C-SiC phase result in an average crystallite size of 19.6 nm. The tip catalyst composition after cooling was assessed by EDS and HRTEM (Fig. S3). The catalyst cores observed consisted of the Fe3Si intermetallic. The whole catalyst tip was found to be composed of Fe, O and Si, with some traces of C, similar to other report on SiC nanowire growth using Fe as catalyst. 43,44,45,46 The macroscopic solid produced by this method is a network material, whose bulk properties are often not dominated by intra-particle properties, but rather through their spatial organisation and shape. Hence, there is strong interest in determining the morphology of the nanowires. The formation of a freestanding solid is possible due to the exceptionally high aspect ratio of the SiCNWs (up to 2200 with an average of 773), which favours their entanglement in the gas phase, as also observed for other inorganic nanomaterials14,47. For reference, the high aspect ratio of nanowires grown by FCCVD reported are 214 for SiNW14 and 12.5 for GaAs17. From SEM image analysis of sparse networks, we found NW lengths around 20 μm with a maximum value of 123 μm (Fig. 3c, for more details in length measurement see SI). Diameter size distribution was obtained from image analysis of SEM micrographs of 500 nanowires , including from different samples. Fig. 3a shows the experimental data, which has a log-normal distribution with diameters ranging from 2 to 100 nm, a mean value of 25.4 nm and geometric standard deviation σ = 1.78. The nanowire diameter distribution stems from the size distribution of the catalyst, which is also lognormal. Moreover, metal particle aerosols are intrinsically more polydisperse (σ > 1.36) than metal particles produced on a substrate (σ < 1.34).48 These results confirm that the SiCNWs grow from floating catalyst particles, and suggest that their diameter distribution could be made narrower through catalyst selection methods, albeit at the expense of a lower particle concentration. Interestingly, the SiCNW network material gives rise to strong features in SAXS. Figure 3b shows the radial intensity profile for a self-standing sample. The intensity profile shows clear peaks at mid values of scattering vector (q), with a particularly intense one at a d-spacing of 19 nm. We attribute these features to the form factor of the SiCNWs. Their prominence over the Porod slope suggest smaller diameter polydispersity than in other nanowire ensembles studied previously.49 These results were obtained using ferrocene as catalyst source and in a H2 atmosphere. Interestingly, a mixture of H2 and N2 produced higher concentration of nanoparticles without detectable Fe catalyst content. An example is included in Fig. S4. Fig. 3 Structure of SiCNW networks produced by FCCVD. A) Diameter distribution measured by SEM images analysis of different samples synthesised at standard conditions. B) SAXS intensity profile showing low polydispersity in a single self-standing sample. C) SEM micrograph of a sample collected from the gas-phase for determination of nanowire length. 5 Gas-phase sampling of reaction products The interest then is in determining and rationalising the synthesis conditions leading to selective, fast growth of SiC nanowires by FCCVD. The experimental conditions used in this growth mode correspond to a flow-through reactor, characterised by two main features. Firstly, that both the catalyst and SiC precursor evolve as they travel through the hot tubular furnace. Second, that residence time is very short, of less than 20 s. To gain more insight into the growth mechanism, we equipped the flow-through reactor with two probes for collection of solid reaction products directly from the reaction zone. The premise is that the material collected at different positions along the reactor tube reflects the progression of the reaction through it. Using a ceramic rod introduced in the reaction zone, we could directly collect solid products and relate them to the reaction temperature. In a separate experiment, we could also determine the evolution of the size and concentration of the catalyst aerosol produced with the SG (in the absence of SiC precursors). The correspondence between solid products, temperature profile and catalyst evolution is shown in Fig. 4. This analysis indicates that growth of SiCNWs occurs only in a small region of ≈3 cm in the hot zone, where the temperature reaches 1120 - 1140 °C. The SiCNWs grown at this position form a clear bluish aerogel around the ceramic rod (Fig. 4). Similarly, using a vacuum extraction system, SiCNWs were only found when the extraction probe was positioned below this reaction zone, i.e., deeper into the reactor in the direction of the flow (Fig. S5). Furthermore, the same growth zone was observed independently of the source of Fe catalyst. SiCNW growth concentrated in the range 1120 - 1140 °C using Fe catalyst nanoparticles produced either with a spark discharge generator or from the decomposition of ferrocene (Fig. S6). The concentration and size distribution of the catalyst generated with the high voltage spark instrument was assessed with an SMPS along the reactor. The colour map depicted in Fig. 4 shows that the mean particle number and size remain fairly constant along the whole reactor path, at 1.5 x 107 particles/cm3 and 10 nm, respectively. Essentially, the catalyst particles produced with the SG have a suitable size for SiCNW growth all the way from their entry into the reaction tube until the exit at the outlet and the diameter distribution of the nanowires produced coincides with the catalyst size (Fig. S7 A). The average particle concentration and size distribution of the nanoparticles generated by decomposition of ferrocene are calculated to be 4.2 x 108 particles/cm3 using the size distribution of the nanowires produced with this source. Fig. S7 B shows a comparison in the diameter distribution of the nanowires using both catalyst sources. In addition to SiCNWs, the sampling probes used show other nanostructured solid products of the reaction. However, their growth is not mediated by the Fe catalyst. No traces of Fe were found in these solid products. When using the ceramic rod, microscopic aggregates of Si were found strongly attached to the ceramic in a region corresponding to a temperature of approximately 1050°C. They were only detected in the presence of the ceramic tube and contain no Fe, thus, most likely they form through precursor decomposition50 and solid nucleation on the Fig. 4 Reactions in the synthesis of SiCNW by FCCVD. Collected materials synthesised through the flow reactor, the corresponding temperature profile and catalyst aerosol evolution in the reaction area. 6 porous mullite surface. Similarly, soot particles are produced and without mediation of the catalyst. They are found with both sampling probes, implying that they form through pyrolysis in the gas phase (for more detailed information about the by-products, see SI). A set of control experiments were also conducted to confirm that the sampled NWs grow through floating catalyst, rather than on the ceramic sampling rod, for example. In the first experiment, catalyst particles were produced in the absence of SiC precursors and their deposition on the ceramic rod was analysed. It was found that they attached to the ceramic rod only in sections at temperatures below 600 °C and far from the region where NWs are observed under FCCVD (Fig. S8). In another experiment, NWs were synthesised without inserting any sampling parts in the reaction zone, and collected at the outlet with a vacuum system. The SiCNWs collected with this method were identical to those sampled directly in the reaction zone (Fig. S5E), although their concentration was lower due to losses to the walls and the presence of soot particles. Finally, we collected NWs with a ceramic rod inserted in the reaction zone for different lengths of time (Fig. S10). These last experiments showed almost identical length distributions for different dwell times, and confirmed growth of > 5 μm-long NWs for sampling times as low as 10 s. Discussion A direct outcome of these experiments is a well-defined growth rate. Nanowire growth is only observed over a region of 3 cm, corresponding to a residence time of ≈2.3 s. Taking the nanowire length distribution, the average growth rate comes out as 8.5 μm/s and as high as 50 μm/s. For reference, this is more than three orders of magnitude faster than conventional substrate growth of SiC, (Fig. 5, Table S1). It is also far above the highest rates observed using growth enhancing agents such as rare earths (1 nm/s )51 and Ga (185 nm/s)52. These results are in line with previous studies on growth of SiNW14 and GaAsNW17, and confirm that nanowire growth by FCCVD is inherently orders of magnitude faster than in substrate-based CVD. This is attributed to faster precursor transport because in FCCVD growth the catalyst is completely surrounded by an excess of gas precursors, increasing the availability for precursor incorporation due to a higher collision rate between catalyst and intermediate active species. The question then moves onto the kinetic and thermodynamic factors in this synthetic route that control selectivity towards SiCNW growth. Studies on methyl-substituted silanes clearly show molecular hydrogen and methyl radical as among the first products of the thermal decomposition53. Reports on the pyrolytic decomposition of HDMS propose complex decomposition routes, with a large number of decomposition products and intermediates, and multiple pathways54,55,56. There is consensus about some initial routes for the decomposition of HMDS: Fig. 5 Comparison of SiCNW growth rates obtained experimentally. Values were calculated dividing the average length of the nanowires by the experimental growth time. Meng et al.65 Park et al.66 Panda et al.37 Wu et al.24 Zhang et al.67 Zhou et al.68 Rajesh et al.51 Kim et al.52 Attolini et al.30 Li et al.36 1 This work 0 Growth rate (nm/s) Catalyst enhancer Gas phase precursors Bottom-up growth Low pressure Floating catalyst Standard VLS growth Average Max 7 Me3Si − SiMe3 → 2Me3Si (1) Me3Si → Me2Si + Me (2) Me2Si → C2Hm + SiH2 (3) Where Me is a methyl group (-CH3) and m is the number of H atoms, which can be 2 or 4. Note that for m=2, H2 would be produced in (3). The methyl and silylene radicals are precursors in nanoparticle formation (a competitive route to nanowire formation) and form them in a simplified reaction mechanism as follows: CH4 → Me + CxHy → CNanoparticle (4) SiH4 → SiH2+ SipHq → SiNanoparticle (5) In this way, methyl and silylene radicals polymerize by insertion in its parent precursor until forming nanoparticles. The exact reaction mechanism for the formation of C and Si nanoparticles is still under debate57 and is beyond the scope of this paper. Eq (4) and (5) only show that the path towards C and Si nanoparticles involve the formation of radicals of SiH4 and CH4. The methyl and silylene radicals can also react with hydrogen in the following way: Me + 1⁄2 H2 → CH4 (6) SiH2 + H2 → SiH4 (7) Considering the reaction paths (6) and (7), a hydrogen atmosphere inhibits nanoparticle formation, slowing down their nucleation by neutralising methyl and sylene radicals. This allows the precursors to have a larger lifespan enhancing their chance of impinging into Fe catalysts to form SiC nanowires. A hydrogen atmosphere is thus expected to reduce the effective rate of decomposition of silylene and methyl radicals, following Le Chatelier’s principle, and thus prevent the non-catalysed formation of Si, C and SiC nanoparticles. This role of hydrogen is similar to that observed in FCCVD growth of CNTs47 and SiNWs14,58. In the latter, hydrogen avoids non-catalysed nucleation of amorphous nanoparticles by preventing polymerisation of silane derivates59. Similarly, we can rationalise the formation of different solid products, both catalysed and non-catalysed, by considering the temperature profile in this FCCVD process (Fig4). HMDS is expected to dissociate at a fast rate compared with typical reactor residence times, at temperatures of 700 °C56. At the low Si/H2 molar concentration used in this study (≈0.03 % HMDS), Si nanoparticles formation from silane in H2 would start at around 850°C.60 For comparison, methane decomposition in H2 to form C soot requires temperatures above 1000 °C.61 C2H4, C2H2 Fig. 6 Calculated ternary Fe-Si-C phase diagram and compositional path from Fe catalyst to SiC. A) Ternary isothermal phase diagram at 1200 ̊C. Gray triangles show three-phase invariant equilibria; hatched regions show single-phase regions; for clarity, tie-lines are not shown (hence two-phase regions appear white). B) Compositional path from pure Fe (a) to SiC formation (e) following continuous addition of Si and C. C) Qualitative formation of phases along the proposed compositional path. D) Isopleth section of the phase diagram through pure Fe and SiC. 8 and other secondary products of HMDS may form C soot at lower temperatures, but generally above those found for Si nanoparticle formation. In summary, seen in light of the decomposition of HMDS, selective growth of SiCNW requires the inhibition of nanoparticle formation, which is a side reaction that depletes the reagents for NW formation. This is achieved by utilizing hydrogen atmosphere, which reduces the reaction rate of the side reaction and allows catalysed growth before the onset of nanoparticle nucleation, which would otherwise occur first for Si and then for C. It is also important to consider that in the thermal decomposition of HDMS all initial products and intermediates, and most secondary products, are C-containing silanes and silylenes. This suggests that the species that impinge on the catalyst could contain both Si and C for the subsequent SiC extrusion. Under the premise that the Fe catalyst receives a continuous influx of Si and C, we can produce a qualitative description of the nucleation of the SiCNW based on the thermodynamics of the Si-C-Fe system. Fig. 6 presents the CalPhaD-calculated Fe-Si-C equilibrium ternary phase diagram at 1200 °C, together with a proposed reaction pathway within the diagram, and an isopleth Fe-SiC section through pure Fe and SiC compound. We note that these calculations show the equilibrium phases for a bulk system, neglecting interfacial energy contributions that are not usually negligible in nanosized systems. When accounted for, these contributions tend to shift the phase diagram toward lower temperatures62,63,64. This may explain why the temperature window assessed experimentally, over a narrow length of 3 cm at a nearly constant temperature of 1130 ̊C, is lower than the calculated ≈1170 ̊C (Fig. 6d). However, even if calculations remain qualitative, they allow the identification of expected phases and a rationalisation of the reaction pathway. The dashed line in Fig. 6b illustrates the compositional path starting from a Fe-rich particle (labelled a) exposed to an influx of Si and C, assuming a C:Si influx ratio of 1:3 from HMDS. First, both Si and C enter in solution within the FCC Fe phase. At their limit of solubility (b), a liquid phase forms (c), which will also get enriched in C and Si until the limit of solubility within the liquid is reached (d). Then, the excess C in the liquid leads to the formation of graphite, and upon further addition of Si and C, the liquid composition follows the Liquid-Graphite solvus line until reaching the point of nucleation of SiC compound (e). This analysis has several interesting corollaries of interest to explain the chemical composition of products of the reaction. The ternary diagram shows that SiC will form irrespectively of the initial compositions of the Si-C species impinging on the Fe catalyst since the liquid phase exhibits only equilibria with graphite and SiC phases along its Fe-lean solvus line at T ≈ 1200 ̊C. The initial ratio of Si to C in the liquid will simply shift the fraction of SiC to C(solid) in the final product. The resulting reaction path (phase fraction vs time) is schematically represented in Fig. 6c. The compositions of points (a) through (e) are listed in Table S2. Notably, the C:Si ratio of point (e) is 2.54:1, which is relatively close to that of HDMS (3:1), suggesting that the reaction and growth of SiC can proceed from point (e) with minimal shift of the liquid composition under the influx of Si and C via HMDS. In addition, we note that this phase evolution appears to be the same for all temperatures above the eutectic, as shown in the Fe-SiC isopleth (Fig. 6d). This indicates that the thermodynamic product of a Fe catalyst nanoparticle supersaturated with C and Si, is a SiC nanowire. Finally, it seems important to note that, in spite of neglecting nano-size effects (surface energies) and using a thermodynamic database originally developed for steel metallurgy, we were able to identify the SiCNWs reaction pathway. This opens a promising avenue for the exploration of a broader range of databases for nanomaterial synthesis. A proper integration of surface effects may even allow a more quantitative approach for the design and synthesis of new NW. Conclusions This work shows a method to synthesise SiCNWs through floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition in a flow- through reactor system. This growth mode leads to an exceptionally fast rate, 2 - 3 orders of magnitude above substrate-based processes, due to the high collision rate of precursors and the catalyst nanoparticles aerosol. The NWs reach very high aspect ratios (1800) and entangle to form freestanding solids solely composed of SiCNWs. The growth of SiCNWs is rationalised through analysis of reaction products as they evolve through the reactor. SiCNWs are the only solid produced from the Fe catalyst. They were grown in a hydrogen atmosphere which inhibits the competitive formation of side products (Si, C and SiC nanoparticles) during the pyrolysis of the SiC precursor, allowing the incorporation of Si-C species into the catalyst. SiCNW growth takes place at a temperature 1130 °C, which is close to the expected eutectic point after consideration of size effects. The calculated ternary equilibrium Fe-Si-C phase diagram was used to rationalise the 9 selective growth of SiCNWs. The diagram shows that SiC is the expected thermodynamic product of a saturated liquid of Fe-Si-C, for all practical compositions. These results give further evidence to support the view that virtually all 1D inorganic nanomaterials can be synthesised by floating catalyst chemical vapour deposition and directly assembled as macroscopic network solids. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare Acknowledgements The acknowledgements come at the end of an article after the conclusions and before the notes and references. The authors thank the European Union Horizon 2020 Programme under grant agreement 101045394 (ERC-2021- COG, UNIYARNS), by the Madrid Regional Government (FOTOART-CMP2018/NMT-4367 and UPM/APOYO- JOVENES- F6TCCN-145-GGT34M) and Marie Sklodoska Curie Fellowship SUPERYARN under grant number: 101029091 for generous financial support. The authors thank NCD-SWEET beamline staff at ALBA Synchrotron Light Facility for assistance with synchrotron experiments. D.T. acknowledges support by the Spanish Ministry of Science through a Ramón y Cajal Fellowship (RYC2019-028233-I).