JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 1 Abstract—The field of microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) for photonic integrated circuits (PICs) is reviewed. This field leverages mechanics at the nanometer to micrometer scale to improve existing components and introduce novel functionalities in PICs. This review covers the MEMS actuation principles and the mechanical tuning mechanisms for integrated photonics. The state of the art of MEMS tunable components in PICs is quantitatively reviewed and critically assessed with respect to suitability for large-scale integration in existing PIC technology platforms. MEMS provide a powerful approach to overcome current limitations in PIC technologies and to enable a new design dimension with a wide range of applications. Index Terms—Microelectromechanical Systems, Photonic Integrated Circuits, Silicon Photonics, Photonics, Nanophotonics, Integrated Optics, Nanoelectromechanical Systems. I. INTRODUCTION Photonic Integrated Circuits (PICs) bring the benefits of miniaturization to optics, promising leaps in performance and scalability, as well as a dramatic reduction in cost and power consumption for a wide range of optical systems. The numerous applications of PICs, including high-speed telecommunications , high-performance computing , label-free biosensing , and quantum technologies , have resulted in a rapidly increasing market size and research interest. Common PIC technology platforms use silicon, III-V semiconductors, or silicon nitride as waveguiding material. Silicon is one of the most promising PIC material platforms for large-scale integration, due to its high-quality fabrication processes, heritage from the microelectronics industry, and its high refractive index. Consequently, silicon PIC foundry processes have been introduced in the past decade –, providing standard photonic library components and easy access including prototyping runs using multi-project wafers (MPW) , . This approach drastically reduced the cost of PIC development, making state-of-the-art technology accessible to industry and academia alike, which has resulted in several large-scale PIC demonstrations in recent years – . While these breakthroughs have already accelerated the development and market introduction of PIC-based products, technology is constantly pushed forward to improve performance and add value. In order to bring PICs to an even larger scale, efficient tuning mechanisms are required, to compensate for manufacturing variations and environmental perturbations, or to enable reconfiguration. In this quest for enhancing current PIC technologies, the standard platforms are constantly augmented, e.g. by introducing new materials or process modules, while typically ensuring full compatibility with the existing platform. A promising route for enhancing current PICs is the exploitation of mechanics at the nano- and microscale. MEMS in PICs provide: (1) an efficient tuning mechanism to adjust the operation point of photonic components for large-scale PICs, (2) enhancement of current capabilities (e.g. by introducing bistability and making zero-power consumption states possible), and (3) entirely new capabilities, such as mechanical motion for dynamic coupling optimization to fiber interface. MEMS is a mature technology based on semiconductor manufacturing techniques and has been successfully integrated in numerous high-volume products such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and micromirror arrays. The integration of MEMS in PICs is thus a natural extension, and several implementations of MEMS in photonics have successfully been demonstrated. Previous reviews on photonic MEMS have focused on non- integrated, free-space optical MEMS , , or on individual devices –, MEMS based optical cross connects , and optomechanics . Here, we review the field of MEMS for PICs with a focus on scalable PIC platforms. We introduce the fundamental MEMS actuation principles for PICs, review the state of the art quantitatively by comparing reported devices, and provide guidelines for future development. In Chapter I, we introduce and compare the available tuning mechanisms for PICs (Chapter I.A.), with a focus on MEMS tuning methods (Chapter I.B.). Then, we review the optical functions enabled by MEMS (Chapter I.C.) and compare MEMS actuation mechanisms in terms of their compatibility with PICs (Chapter I.D.). Chapter II presents the current state of the art in MEMS tunable PIC components, with a focus on phase shifters (Chapter II.A), variable couplers (Chapter II.B), switches (Chapter II.C), and beam steering and others (Chapter II.D). Chapter III provides a performance comparison of the MEMS for Photonic Integrated Circuits Carlos Errando-Herranz, Alain Yuji Takabayashi, Pierre Edinger, Hamed Sattari, Kristinn B. Gylfason, Member, IEEE and Niels Quack, Senior Member, IEEE Manuscript received June 15, 2019. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreement No. 780283 (MORPHIC - www.h2020morphic.eu). N. Quack acknowledges funding from the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) under grant No. 157566, and H. Sattari from the Hasler Foundation under grant No. 17008. C. Errando-Herranz (carloseh@kth.se), P. Edinger (edinger@kth.se), and K. B. Gylfason (gylfason@kth.se) are with KTH Royal Institute of Technology SE-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden. A. Y. Takabayashi (alain.takabayashi@epfl.ch), H. Sattari (hamed.sattari@epfl.ch) and N. Quack (niels.quack@epfl.ch) are with École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 2 state of the art of MEMS tunable components, with a focus on large-scale integration in PIC platforms, and outlines the integration prospects for MEMS in PICs. While a special focus is laid on Silicon Photonics, the MEMS concepts apply to the various PIC platforms. A.Tuning Mechanisms in PICs PIC tuning methods modify waveguide properties by leveraging physical effects such as temperature dependence of refractive index, plasma dispersion in semiconductors, Pockels or Kerr effects for materials with a certain crystal symmetry, and displacement generated by optical gradient forces (optomechanics) or MEMS. Figure 1 shows a visual comparison between available tuning methods in terms of their suitability for application in large-scale PICs. The choice of tuning method depends on the material platform and the targeted application. For example, for very large-scale PICs working at telecommunication wavelengths, the high refractive index contrast of the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) platform provides a clear advantage in terms of footprint, and offers a wide range of tuning methods, including thermo- optic (due to the large thermo-optic coefficient of silicon ), plasma dispersion (silicon is a semiconductor), optomechanics, and MEMS. The other mentioned tuning mechanisms are either not available or negligible, such as the Pockels effect (centro- symmetry of the lattice), and the Kerr effect (very low efficiency) . Silicon nitride waveguides feature less efficient thermo-optic tuning (10 times weaker than in silicon ), and lack plasma dispersion mechanisms (SiN is an insulator) and Pockels effect (amorphous structure). III-V compound semiconductors feature plasma dispersion and Pockels tuning but show limited scalability due to their low refractive index contrast and limitations on wafer size . Other than the material platform, key parameters for choosing PIC tuning methods are optical loss, footprint, power consumption, and tuning speed; and each tuning method features inherent trade-offs between these parameters, which are summarized in TABLE I. Thermo-optic tuning uses the temperature dependence of the refractive index of most materials to tune waveguide properties. It is the most common tuning method for Si and SiN photonics, and features low optical loss and generally small footprint, at the expense of large power consumption, limited speed, and a footprint efficiency limited by the thermo-optic coefficient of the waveguide materials and the thermal cross-talk between adjacent devices. Plasma dispersion tuning relies on the change in refractive index caused by carrier injection or depletion in a material with mobile charge carriers (i.e. semiconductors) and provides small footprint and high speed refractive index tuning, but typically also introduces significant optical loss. The Pockels effect in non-centrosymmetric crystals provides a low- power, low-loss, and high-speed path to refractive index tuning, but requires long propagation lengths (large footprint) due to the low electro-optic coefficients of known waveguide materials. Similarly, the Kerr effect requires prohibitively long devices or exotic materials. Optomechanical tuning relies on optical pumping to generate on-chip optical forces that change the waveguiding properties , . This tuning mechanism provides medium/low optical loss and relatively small footprints, with actuation speed limited by inertia of the moving device to the mechanical resonance frequency. A limitation of this method is that, using optical power as the tuning mechanism limits its applications in general-purpose PICs, since, in most cases, they are required to maintain their function independent of the optical power. In contrast, MEMS photonics rely on a change in optical properties of a waveguide by electromechanical actuation. The low-power and low optical loss of MEMS actuators makes them excellent for large-scale PIC tuning. Although their speed is limited by mechanical resonance frequencies, their working principle is not limited by waveguide material platform, making them widely applicable. Moreover, the design freedom arising from electrically driven mechanical movement, significantly different from the change in refractive index caused by other tuning methods, enables new applications. B.Fundamentals of mechanical tuning of PICs To understand how light in PICs can be mechanically tuned, it is instructive to look at a generic mathematical expression for a guided electromagnetic mode. In PICs, the waveguide geometries vary considerably less along the direction of propagation than they do in the perpendicular cross-section, and thus we can approach the analysis by breaking the circuits up in segments with fixed cross-sections. Assuming a harmonic time dependence at an angular frequency  given by the application, and in the absence of material absorption, we can describe the electric (or magnetic) vector field of an electromagnetic wave COMPARISON OF TUNING MECHANISMS FOR PICS Power cons. Optical loss Foot- print Speed Limitations Thermo-optic -- ++ + + Thermo-optic coefficient Plasma dispersion + -- ++ ++ Semiconductors Electro-optic (Pockels/Kerr) ++ + -- ++ Crystal symmetry Opto- mechanic -- + + + Suspended and optical power dependent MEMS ++ + + + Suspended ++ EXCELLENT + MEDIUM -- LIMITED PICs from a scalability perspective. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 3 travelling in the positive z direction along such a waveguide segment as E⃗ (x, y, z, t) = E⃗ 0(x, y)e−i(kz−ωt) (1) where k = 2πne/λ is the wave number, ne is the effective index of the mode, λ is the free space wavelength, and t the time. This expression indicates that the mode can be described by a product of a cross-sectional field profile factor E⃗ 0(x, y) that is maintained during propagation, and a phase factor e−i(kz−ωt). It is possible to mechanically influence both factors: 1) By applying compressive or tensile stress to the waveguide layers, the materials can be strained, which can modify both the material absorption and refraction . a) The introduction of material absorption would cause an exponential decay of the mode amplitude with z. b) A change in waveguide material refractive index would change ne of the mode, yielding a change in phase shift per step along z. The field distribution in the xy plane is also affected. 2) A physical lengthening or shortening of the guide segment along z would modify the phase factor. If this change is achieved by stressing the guide, it would also result in material strain (see 1 above). 3) A displacement of a slab of material within the field of the mode in the waveguide cross-section can yield two effects: a) If the moving material slab supports a guided mode of its own that is well phase matched (i.e. has similar ne), light couples between the two, causing a change in field profile and phase of both modes. b) If the moving material slab does not support a well- matched mode of its own, the motion only changes the field profile and phase of the waveguide mode. This could be introduction of loss, e.g. by material absorption, radiation or scattering by sidewall roughness, or of a phase shift by adding or removing refractive material. In practice, all applications require a certain bandwidth, i.e. the waveguides need to operate over a span of angular frequencies, and thus we need to consider that both E⃗ 0 and ne exhibit frequency dependence (i.e. dispersion). Dispersion can be tuned by effects 1 and 3 above, but 3 is by far the most potent. The strong tuning of mode dispersion by effect 3 is specific to mechanical tuning and differentiates it from most other forms of PIC tuning . By application of the waveguide manipulations described above, several optical functions can be achieved. C.Optical functions enabled by MEMS tuning Fundamental components of a PIC include linear and nonlinear optical devices, optical sources, and photodetectors, and MEMS can contribute to the function of many of these. Linear optical devices greatly outnumber other components in PICs, and thus their performance is of central importance. Linear devices include power splitters, filters, delay lines, lenses, mirrors, phase shifters, modulators, and coupling structures for off-chip interfacing. An arbitrary linear optical system can be built using a large enough array of fundamental building blocks. Each building block features two inputs and two outputs and two degrees of freedom to tune the relative power and the phase shift between the two outputs. As phase shifters can be used to build tunable power splitters , only phase shifters and passive 2×2 power splitters are strictly necessary. However, specific higher function blocks, such as switching, power splitting, or filtering are often used to reduce footprint and increase optical performance. As a central component of linear PICs, the main requirement of a phase shifter is that it covers the complete 2π phase space with minimal optical loss. In general, the phase φ gained by an electromagnetic wave at a wavelength λ, travelling in a waveguide mode with effective refractive index ne, over a length L, is φ = neL λ (2) A phase shift can then be achieved by varying ne or L. Fig. 2a shows a schematic of MEMS actuation approaches to tune ne and L using displacement or strain. Most PIC tunable power splitters, based on directional couplers, work by changing the mode interference between two out-of-plane and b4) in-plane, and b5) longitudinal tuning. c) Switching methods include c1) displacement of an absorbing material; breaking the waveguide continuity using b2) displacement of a waveguide section, or b3) introduction of a photonic crystal, and b4) bending. d) Tunable grating coupler methods include d1) bending of a grating, and d2) changing its period using in-plane actuation. Unless explicitly mentioned, all figures represent waveguide cross-sections. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 4 adjacent mode-matched waveguides, with the power ratio between the two outputs P1and P2 defined by P2 P1 = sin (πLΔne λ ) 2 (3) with L the coupling length, and Δne = ne,1 − ne,2 the difference between the effective mode indexes of the two interfering supermodes. Mechanical tuning can thus be achieved by varying the coupling length L or Δne by displacement (see Fig. 2b). Switching a transmitted signal on and off is central to many PIC applications. In conventional PICs, this is achieved by either introducing absorption (using for example plasma dispersion) or using a phase shifter in an interferometric or cavity configuration. However, the displacement enabled by MEMS naturally enables efficient switching. Since there are many approaches to switching, we will only conceptually describe them in this section. MEMS switching can be achieved 1) by using a MEMS tunable directional coupler or a phase shifter in an interferometric/cavity configuration, 2) by changing the waveguide absorption by introducing a lossy medium, 3) by breaking a waveguide continuity by displacing a part of it or 4) by exchanging it for a photonic crystal reflector, and 5) by changing the wave vector direction using bending. Schematics can be found in Fig. 2c. Tuning of coupling structures to interface PICs with off-chip devices has so far focused on grating couplers. The basic function of a grating coupler can be defined by wave interference, and assuming an in-plane waveguide mode with index ne, leads to Λne − Λnclad sin θ = mλ (4) with m = 0, ±1, ±2 ... the diffraction order, Λ the grating period, nclad the mode index in the cladding, θ the outcoupling angle with respect to the normal, and λ the wavelength. Fig. 2d shows methods for MEMS tuning of grating couplers by using displacement to change θ and Λ. Other important functions in PICs are sources, memories, photodetectors, and nonlinear optics. Although these are not the focus of this review, it is worth mentioning that MEMS has been used to control some of these functions, and a brief review can be found in section II.E. D. MEMS Actuation Principles for PICs The displacements required for MEMS tuning of PIC components lie in the range of tens of nanometers to tens of micrometers, and several types of MEMS actuators, based on different physical principles, fulfill this requirement. The most common MEMS actuation principles are electrostatic, electrothermal, piezoelectric, and magnetic actuation. Here, we provide an overview of the main operating principles suitable for PICs, summarized in Table II. Other known MEMS actuation principles such as pneumatic, shape-memory alloys, electro-active polymers, scratch-drive, phase-change, pyrotechnical, chemical, and biological, are not considered here, due to their lack of integration compatibility with PICs. For a more comprehensive and design-oriented perspective on MEMS actuation, we refer to the review by Bell et al. . Electrostatic actuators are the most common MEMS actuators. For displacement, they leverage the attractive force between charged plates in a capacitor featuring at least one movable plate. A mechanical spring force counterbalances this attractive force, and results in a stable plate displacement which depends on the potential difference. However, beyond the equilibrium point, the system becomes unstable and the movable plate collapses in a phenomenon known as pull-in. The two most common capacitor geometries used are parallel plate and comb drive arrangements. A similar actuation mechanism, recently explored for PICs, is based on the movement generated by the polarization of a dielectric under an external gradient electrical field. This enables actuation of non-conductive waveguides, which can be significant for material platforms such as SiN. A schematic visualization of the two, and an illustration of their operation, is given in Fig. 3. In terms of compatibility with PICs, electrostatic actuation is attractive due to its simplicity. It only requires electrical conductivity in the structural layer and a suitable mechanical suspension. This is particularly true for semiconducting materials such as silicon, in which the actuation mechanism can be integrated within the waveguide layer itself. A limitation QUALITATIVE ASSESSMENT OF THE MAIN MEMS ACTUATION PRINCIPLES FOR PHOTONIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS Actuation Principle Photonics Compatibility Footprint Response Time Stroke Power Consumption Complexity / Cost Maximum Displacement Displacement Resolution Electrostatic ++ + ++ + ++ ++ ++ Thermal ++ ++ + ++ -- ++ ++ -- Piezoelectric + + ++ -- ++ + + ++ Magnetic -- -- ++ ++ -- + ++ ++ ++ EXCELLENT + MEDIUM -- LIMITED 1 Parallel Plate / Comb Drive top view of comb-drive electrostatic MEMS actuators. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 5 arising from the use of the waveguide layer as an electrode, particularly in the case of comb drives, is the limited thickness of single mode guides that precludes the use of high-aspect ratio structures that would be advantageous for large force generation. In order to increase the force and stroke, multiple comb-drive sub-units can be connected in parallel to a single device, which, on the other hand, also increases footprint. Response times lie in the microsecond regime and power consumption is minimal due to the absence of current flow under static conditions. Electrothermal actuators are used for their variety of simple and compact designs and for their large displacements and force output, which allows them to achieve larger stroke than electrostatic actuators. These devices rely on joule heating generated by current flowing through part of the structure, which results in displacement via thermal expansion. There exist two prevalent groups of electrothermal actuators, those based on materials with different coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) and those using differences in electrical resistance achieved by geometric design. In the first case, the materials form a thermal bimorph, so that when the temperature increases, the difference in expansion between the materials results in displacement. The second type includes the hot- arm/cold-arm and chevron/V-type actuators, which employ geometry to locally modify resistance and, consequently, the amount of thermal expansion. The hot-arm is kept long and narrow (increased resistivity), while the cold-arm is made short and wide (reduced resistivity), so that, under actuation, the structure rotates in the direction of the cold-arm. For the chevron or V-type actuator, linear displacement is achieved by using a V-shape geometry where symmetric thermal expansion causes the structure to move in the direction of the vertex. Visual depictions of these electrothermal actuators are provided in Fig. 4. Heat exchange becomes very efficient in small structures (due to 1/d dependence, where d is the device dimension), which allows for faster cooling and, consequently, faster switching. However, high-density integration of such actuators is limited by thermal interaction with the PIC and loss of efficiency due to higher chip temperatures. Additionally, because of constant current flow through the device, there is significant power consumption during static operation, making this type of actuation less ideal for low-power applications. Piezoelectric actuators make use of the piezoelectric effect, in which an applied potential across the piezoelectric material generates strain. These actuators can be made small like electrothermal actuators and responsive like electrostatic actuators but lack the ability to generate large strokes. The need for special piezoelectric materials (crystalline materials without inversion symmetry) and complex fabrication also makes their integration with silicon photonics challenging. Additionally, the generated strain is typically small and must be combined with an elaborate geometry to achieve strokes comparable to the other classes of actuators. Larger strains can be achieved with high strain piezoelectrics and polymers but usually at the cost of reduced output force . Typical geometries consist of a slab of piezoelectric material sandwiched between two electrodes or interdigitated electrodes on top of the piezoelectric. In the first case, an electric field applied between the top and bottom electrodes, generates a negative or positive strain in the horizontal direction of the piezoelectric material, causing it to contract or expand. In the case where the electrodes are interdigitated on top of the piezoelectric, the structure also experiences strain in the horizontal direction. However, because the fixed boundary condition is parallel to the structure, it bends downwards or upwards. In both cases, if the magnitude of the electric field becomes too large (i.e., for large applied voltages and thin piezoelectric layers), the strength of the piezoelectric effect deteriorates. Two common configurations for piezoelectric actuators are shown in Fig. 5. As is the case with electrostatic actuators, the electric field, not the current flow, drives piezoelectric actuation. Consequently, the power consumption of such devices is small, and the actuation speed can be fast. Additionally, because the functional geometry scales in the out-of-plane direction (i.e., thicker piezoelectric layers generate larger displacements), piezoelectric devices can be made quite compact, in principle. Bulk materials, however, are difficult to integrate with standard MEMS processes and the more compatible thin films do not provide the desired displacement; moreover, piezoelectric actuators typically present a strong hysteresis in the actuation curve, presenting challenges for precision position control. Therefore, additional process development is required before piezoelectric actuators find widespread integration in PICs. Magnetic actuation is not commonly applied in PICs, but like piezoelectric actuation, offers some distinct advantages at the cost of increased integration complexity. The most common magnetic actuator uses an externally applied magnetic field to view of a thermal bimorph actuator, b) top view of a V-shape (or chevron) actuator, and c) a hot-arm/cold-arm actuator. which modulates its length, so the overall structure expands/contracts or bends upwards/downwards: a) side view of a sandwiched electrode configuration, b) and coplanar electrodes. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 6 attract a patterned permalloy structure or an embedded permanent magnet attached to the movable section , . This geometry enables bidirectional motion from the attractive/repulsive electromagnetic force when current is applied (see Fig. 6). Magnetic actuators can generate forces up to hundreds micro-Newtons and achieve displacements in the millimeter range with high resolution . In addition, magnetic actuation provides excellent linearity, which is an advantage for precise feedback control. However, the main disadvantages limiting their use in MEMS is the difficulty of integrating high performance magnetic materials and the large currents required to generate electromagnetic forces. We note that, in recent years, integration of magnetic materials with photonic waveguides has attracted significant attention due to their applications in Faraday rotation and optical non-reciprocity . These platforms may lead to future demonstrations of magnetic MEMS actuators for photonics. E.Latching for MEMS in PICs The reduction in PIC power consumption enabled by MEMS can be pushed further by using latching mechanisms. Latching enables non-volatile configuration states where power is only consumed during state transitions. Here, we differentiate between two types of latching mechanisms: 1) latches using additional actuators and 2) latches based on geometrical bistability. The first type makes use of an additional actuator moving perpendicularly to the primary displacement axis . Both actuators include complementary hooks, such that in the latched state, they come in contact with one another. With such a geometry, the latching actuator can move to “unlatch” the primary actuator, and return after the primary actuator has been displaced, preventing it from following suit and effectively latching it in place (see Fig. 7a). By including multiple hooks, several discrete positions can be addressed, including latching resolution below fabrication resolution by exploiting the Vernier effect . The second type is the bistable latching approach, which employs a beam, or network of beams whose geometry has been selected based on the two stable states existing in a precompressed spring . The structure is fabricated and released in one of the two stable states, but if the applied force by the actuation mechanism exceeds the critical bending force of the beam, the entire device “snaps” to the second stable state (Fig. 7b). The pre-compression can be achieved in-plane by suitable design of the geometry or out-of-plane using compressive stress . In principle, stiction forces can also be used for nonvolatile latching, even though stiction is more difficult to control and thus usually avoided. Push-pull actuators are often used to transition between states in bistable latches and to release structures held in place by stiction . II. REVIEW OF MEMS IN PICS A.Phase shifters Here we review the MEMS phase shifters described in the literature, including those reported as part of a larger device, e.g. tunable filters or interferometers. Fig. 8 highlights examples from the literature. A phase shifter on a gold-coated SiN platform using in-plane displacement and parallel-plate actuation, following the concept in Fig. 2a1 was reported in . A similar platform was adapted for out-of-plane displacement of a slab above the waveguide, as in Fig. 2a3, and used both parallel plate and gradient electrical field force actuation , including an in- depth analysis of optical loss . In silicon, the concept in Fig. 2a1 was adapted to achieve very efficient in-plane parallel plate actuation by means of a slot waveguide (Fig. 8b) , . Comb-drive actuators, providing increased displacement ranges, were used in to increase the magnitude of the phase shift. Being a fundamental building block, phase shifters, although central to many devices, are often not explicitly reported. A common use of phase shifters is in tunable ring resonators. Kauppinen et al. used out-of-plane displacement of a SiN cantilever on top of SOI waveguides (see schematic in Fig. 2a3) to tune their effective index , . Errando-Herranz et al. also used out-of-plane displacement on SOI, but released the ring itself, achieving large phase shifts with a simple fabrication (schematic in Fig. 2a2, SEM in Fig. 8c) –. In-plane tunable ring resonators have also been reported on the SOI platform, relying on suspended directional couplers and comb- drive actuators using the concept in Fig. 2a6, to increase actuation range (Fig. 8d) –. Piezoelectric actuation was utilized to tune the optical path length in SiN resonators , . Additionally, strain has been used to tune the effective index of waveguides (Fig. 2a5), and was extensively studied in . This effect was used to phase shift ring resonator waveguides in using a thin film piezoelectric, and in using a bulk piezoelectric substrate. Several phase shifter orthogonal latching dents b) and bistable beams. magnets are embedded in the device layer. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 7 approaches have been reported as switches. For example, an out-of-plane absorbing membrane was used to tune both real and imaginary parts of the effective index in SiN waveguides, in a combination of the concepts in Figs. 2a3 and 2c1 . Efficient tuning was achieved by plasmonic field enhancement in a compact ring resonator in . In , two InP phase shifters using the working principle in Fig. 2a3 were used in an interferometer. MEMS phase shifting in photonic crystal cavities using in-plane actuation has also been reported . B.Couplers Here we review devices that achieve analog control of power coupling. Figure 9 shows examples of these devices using different electrostatic configurations. Tunable power coupling is key for efficient PICs, and multiple papers have reported full transduction ranges with directional couplers. A few devices based on III-V platforms have been reported, such as combining InP with the in-plane MEMS tuning concept in Fig. 2b1 , or GaAs with out-of- plane (Fig. 2b3) , and in-plane parallel-plate actuation. With a similar approach in silicon, tunable coupling was reported using two compact comb drive actuators , , a simpler single-actuator device , and a more stable three actuator system . Tunable couplers using suspended out-of- plane actuation and a single device layer (Fig. 2b3) were also demonstrated , . Tunable couplers are widely used to compensate fabrication variations in ring resonators. The tunable ring resonator from Ikeda et al. includes a comb-drive to control the coupling between bus waveguide and ring . Lee et al. used in-plane parallel plate actuation of waveguides to tune light coupling into a disk resonator , and out-of-plane displacement for a disk and for a microtoroidal resonator . In a more complex system, Li et al. reported tunable coupling between two resonators . This concept was extended to photonic crystal cavities using in-plane comb-drive actuators , . Tunable couplers have also been used to distribute the optical signal from a given input to a set of several outputs at the same time with a well defined distribution ratio of the optical power, commonly referred to as multicast operation . Variable optical attenuators are a special case of couplers that find many uses in PICs, but they have not yet been demonstrated outside of proposals . C. Switches Here we review the various techniques used to implement volatile and non-volatile switching for scalable PICs. A selection of switching mechanisms is shown in Fig. 10. Bakke et al. provided an early implementation of 1×2 MEMS PIC switch in which an input waveguide was laterally deflected by a pair of comb drives towards one of two output waveguides, such as in Fig. 2c4 . Another type of switch relies on a segmented geometry with a movable waveguide section (schematic in Fig. 2c2, SEM in Fig. 10b) . In-plane movable waveguides have recently been implemented in VTT’s micron-scale silicon photonics platform , and switching based on frustrated total internal reflection has been demonstrated . Tunable couplers have been commonly used as switches, and for this purpose, Chatterjee et al. demonstrated in-plane perturbation of a static directional coupler using comb-drive actuation . Out-of-plane variants using absorbing metals are also possible, and have been demonstrated using aluminum , and gold . Takahashi et al. reported a comb-drive actuated in-plane ring resonator acting as a switch between two bus waveguides . By using the tunable coupler concept in Fig. 2b1, an 8×8 switch matrix was demonstrated . The same concept has been applied to switching using tuning of ring resonators , . Out-of-plane switches based on directional couplers (concept in Fig. 2b2) have been scaled up to 50×50 , and 240×240 matrices , –. Furthermore, polarization independence was demonstrated using two waveguide device layers (Fig. 2b3, SEM in Fig. 10a) . Non-volatile switches in PICs are rare, but a few promising devices have been reported. Abe et al. used comb-drive actuators to displace a latching hook and release it once the to ring resonator with comb-drive actuation . b) Out-of-plane variable coupler with high- Q microtoroidal resonator . c) In-plane tuning of a dual PhC cavity . d) Single-photon routing with in-plane tunable directional coupler . a), c), d) reprinted with permission from , , © The Optical Society. plate actuation for slot mode tuning . b) Out-of-plane phase shifting with InP . c) Ring resonator filter with out-of-plane SOI actuator , and d) In- plane comb-drive actuator for tunable ring resonator length, reproduced from with the permission of AIP Publishing. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 8 main actuator was set , . Stiction-based latching has not yet been reported as a non-volatile mechanism, but different reports make use of stiction in other ways. The tunable photonic crystal cavity reported by Chew et al. relies on a push-pull comb-drive to unstick devices . A similar setup could be used for intentional stiction-based nonvolatile latching. The Wu group’s results on large-scale switch matrixes utilize stiction and parallel-plate pull-in for reliable bistable operation, even though the switch is volatile . Switching has also been demonstrated by using an in-plane actuated switch based on displacing a waveguide/photonic crystal reflector (Fig. 2c3, Fig. 10d) . Switching a photonic crystal on and off was also achieved by using a bimorph cantilever to insert a series of tips aligned into the holes in a photonic crystal waveguide . D.Grating couplers MEMS tuning of grating couplers has only recently been explored, with focus on optical beam steering for optical fiber alignment or sensing, or on tuning of transmission spectra. By changing the grating angle using out-of-plane electrostatic MEMS tuning of a suspended grating coupler (schematic in Fig. 2d1, SEM in Fig. 11b), Errando-Herranz et al. demonstrated a spatial shift in the coupling to an optical fiber. This approach was adapted by Yu et al. (Fig. 11a) to tune the grating transmission spectra. A second approach to MEMS tuning of grating couplers relies on in-plane actuation using a comb drive to deform a grating coupler shaped like a suspended mechanical spring (Figs. 2d2 and 11c). With such a structure, the period of the grating Λ is accessible, potentially resulting the large steering angles, as shown in Fig. 11d) . E.Integrated sources and nonlinear PICs MEMS have been recently leveraged to tune the properties of integrated light sources and nonlinear optic properties of waveguides. For example, aligning the emission spectra of distinct single- photon sources is central for optical quantum technologies. MEMS-induced strain has been used for this purpose, and groups have reported spectral tuning of quantum dots in a III-V material platform using electrostatic MEMS , , and in a piezoelectrically-actuated platform combining III-V quantum dots and SiN waveguides . Moreover, electrostatic MEMS in III-V materials have been used to tune the mode volume in a photonic crystal cavity, which in turn tunes the Purcell enhancement, and, in the case of an embedded optical source, its emission rate . For nonlinear PIC applications, MEMS actuation is still relatively unexplored, with proof of concepts using piezoelectric and electrostatic actuation to improve nonlinear optic efficiencies via fine tuning of waveguide birefringence or dispersion. III. DISCUSSION A.Phase Shifters The large number of phase shifters required for large-scale PICs, already reaching the hundreds , requires exceptional device performance in terms of optical loss (insertion loss, IL), power consumption, and footprint. In addition, application- dependent figures such as tuning curve linearity, IL variation with actuation, bandwidth, maximum actuation voltage, and induced noise may also be significant. Since power consumption is minimal for most MEMS actuators, it can be argued that IL is the most relevant figure when discussing the scalability of photonic MEMS circuits. While MEMS phase shifters usually report IL of the same order of magnitude as their thermo-optic counterparts, there are significant differences between designs. In general, the main contributor to losses are transitions (e.g. anchors for waveguide suspension) and waveguide scattering losses due to sidewall roughness. For devices requiring completely suspended waveguides (e.g. single-etch electrostatic actuators), transitions cannot be avoided, and account for IL between 0.1 dB to 1 dB in most devices. Although lower transition losses may be engineered, the large refractive index contrast between silicon and air hinders dramatic improvements, and results in higher waveguide scattering losses compared to oxide-clad devices. Even with state-of-the art silicon PIC foundry platforms, sidewalls typically show rms roughness values of a few nm. © The Optical Society. b) Segmented waveguide switch, reproduced from with the permission of AIP Publishing. c) Tunable directional coupler switch with latching , d) Photonic crystal switch . devices. a) Out-of-plane electrostatically actuated device for spectral tuning , and b) chip-to-fiber alignment . c) In-plane comb-drive actuation for beam steering , with d) potentially large beam steering, reprinted with permission from © The Optical Society. JSTQE-INV-SP2020-08126-2019 9 That roughness is the main contributor to standard propagation losses of 1-2 dB/cm in single-mode silicon strip waveguides. Devices that report large phase shifts rely on deconfined waveguides and large evanescent-field interaction, which leads to higher loss due to high power on the sidewalls. This loss dominates when the gap is reduced significantly (i.e. below fabrication resolution). Devices that rely on out-of-plane displacement of a slab on top of a waveguide, on the other hand, benefit from the near-atomically-flat top and bottom surfaces, and usually feature lower roughness-induced losses. However, reported devices using such an architecture have so far relied on beams that are not entirely phase mismatched to the guided mode, effectively becoming a lossy asymmetric directional coupler , , . Regarding variable loss with actuation, phase shifters that use displacement of beams near waveguides fall into two categories. Devices that rely on reducing a gap below fabrication resolution can see their IL increase with actuation, while devices that increase the original gap can see a decrease of roughness-induced loss. On the other hand, the insertion loss of phase shifters that use in-plane displacement of a stable directional coupler scales with the usually lower waveguide loss, although they may suffer from additional variable IL due to coupling instability. Piezoelectric-based phase shifting, in contrast, does not require deconfined waveguides nor transitions, and as a result, insertion loss can be much lower. The dominant contribution becomes the propagation losses, and even with the largest reported structures, the associated IL remains low , , , . To be able to access all the phase space, a phase shifter must be able to address any shift within 2π. Figure 12 summarizes the maximum phase shift and actuation voltages reported in the literature, and shows that only a few demonstrate a significant maximum phase shift, although, in principle, any of the underperforming devices could be cascaded up to 2π. From Fig. 12, we can conclude that usual MEMS actuation in PICs requires voltage levels below 100 V. We should note that, in MEMS, the actuation voltage is usually a design choice, which trades off with actuation speed through the designed spring constant. A significant technology-dependent feature is the shape of the actuation curve. Evanescent phase shifting is associated to highly nonlinear actuation curves due to the exponential distribution of the evanescent field . The effect can be compensated for by using gap-increasing actuation and leveraging the quadratic response of electrostatic actuators, yielding a quasi-linear actuation range . Another option for better linearity is to change the propagation length instead, removing the exponential dependence of a gap change. Linear phase shifts can also be achieved using piezoelectrics , , , and quadratic with comb-drive actuators , . Device footprint is not specific to phase shifters, but we will highlight a few points here. Shorter interaction lengths are typically required to achieve full power exchange in a coupler, than required for a 2π shift in a phase shifter. The largest phase shifts with silicon waveguides are achieved with in-plane increase of the propagation length by using suspended directional couplers, which comes at the cost of higher IL due to the couplers loss and sidewall scattering . The InP phase shifters reported in also stand out in Fig. 12, although their IL, which is expected to be significant due to waveguide anchors and coupler asymmetry, was not reported. Phase shifters can be cascaded and still seen as a single component, while couplers and switches would require more intricate circuit design to be cascaded. As a result, IL and length/footprint values don’t have much significance unless scaled by the phase shift. In Fig. 13 we use such scaled figures to compare the different actuation principles in terms of static losses and interaction length. Since measured IL values are missing in many reports, some points were estimated using other reported measurements (see Appendix B). Although instructive, care should be taken when analyzing technological trends from this plot, since not all devices scale in the same way. As an example, the IL of the phase shifter in will have a similar value whether designed for very low phase shifts or large ones, due to the need for the two directional couplers with IL of 0.2 dB each. Even with the conservative analysis required, due to estimates and scaling, some trends clearly stand out. First, most electrostatic devices seem to follow a general rule: MEMS phase shifters in the literature.