Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics Emma Batson, Marco Colangelo, John Simonaitis, Eyosias Gebremeskel, Owen Medeiros, Mayuran Saravanapavanantham, Vladimir Bulovic, P. Donald Keathley, Karl K. Berggren Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA E-mail: emmabat@mit.edu December 2022 Abstract. Absorption of light in superconducting electronics is a major limitation on the quality of circuit architectures that integrate optical components with superconducting components. A 10 nm thick film of a typical superconducting material like niobium can absorb over half of any incident optical radiation. We propose instead using superconductors which are transparent to the wavelengths used elsewhere in the system. In this paper we investigated reduced indium tin oxide (ITO) as a potential transparent superconductor for electronics. We fabricated and characterized superconducting wires of reduced indium tin oxide. We also showed that a 10 nm thick film of the material would only absorb about 1 - 20% of light between 500 - 1700 nm. Keywords: transparent, indium tin oxide, electronics Submitted to: Supercond. Sci. Technol. 1. Introduction Integration of photonics on-chip with superconducting electronics is necessary for scalable, accurate readout of photon detection and electro-optical transduction for technologies such as quantum sensing and quantum networking. However, absorption of higher-energy optical photons in superconducting materials causes quasiparticle formation , resulting in losses for the optical circuit and degraded performance of the superconducting electronics. Although physically separating the optical and superconducting components as much as possible can mitigate absorption, ideally these circuits could be composed of superconducting materials engineered to be transparent to other wavelengths present on the same chip. arXiv:2212.08573v1 [physics.app-ph] 16 Dec 2022 Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 2 Transparency and conductivity, let alone superconductivity, may sound mutually exclusive. Indeed, typical superconductors like niobium are highly absorptive across the entire visible range. A film of niobium only 10 nm thick would absorb between 40-60% of all incident light between 500 nmto1600 nm, according to calculations based on measured optical constants . However, transparent conducting oxides such as indium tin oxide (ITO) have been widely studied due to their usefulness in photovoltaics , displays , and sensing . Many of these oxides are in fact degenerately doped semiconductors which, if doped to just the right amount, may superconduct while remaining transparent . ITO in particular has been observed to superconduct by several authors , typically when doped to carrier concentrations around 1020 cm−3to1021 cm−3. Chiu et al. even observed superconductivity in a 220 nm thick ITO nanowire, indicating that ITO could be a viable candidate for fabricating superconducting electronics. Furthermore, several authors have observed that non-superconducting samples of ITO can become superconducting through simple post-processing methods. Mori found that low-temperature annealing of sputtered ITO resulted in superconducting samples, and attributed increased carrier concentration to the introduction of oxygen vacancies. On the other hand, Aliev et al. observed superconductivity in commerically available ITO films processed by electrochemical reduction. They propose the increased carrier concentration is due to intercalation of small positive ions. However, other authors have contested whether such intercalation occurs in reduced ITO , and Liu et al. proposed oxygen vacancies as the dopant in their own electrochemically reduced ITO. Additionally, while all of the above authors report seeing a visible color change in their reduced ITO films, none provide detailed quantitative data that could help determine whether the resulting films are still meaningfully transparent for engineering applications. If we are to optimize ITO for both superconductivity and transparency, we must understand the process by which it becomes superconducting and quantify the effect of this process on its optical constants. In this paper, we use electrochemical reduction to fabricate reduced ITO microwires and characterize changes to its electronic properties, structure and composition, and optical properties. The resulting microwires superconduct with a sharp transition to normal state at the switching current. In addition to confirming the onset of superconductivity, we found a correlation between superconductivity and the formation of a dense layer of nanoparticles, confirmed oxygen removal as the primary doping mechanism in our material, and quantified the resulting changes to refractive index and overall absorption of the reduced films. The transition temperature curve from a 500 μm microwires is shown in Figure 1 (a), while an SEM of the nanoparticles is shown in Figure 1 (b). Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 3 Silicon substrate Reduced ITO nanoparticles Normal ITO a) b) The transition is sharp, with no distinguishable hysteresis, and complete by 3.5 K. b) Superconducting properties of reduced ITO are largely confined to a layer of oxygen- deficient nanoparticles that forms on top of the original ITO surface. 2. Methods Here we describe our methods for generating reduced ITO material, fabricating electronics from reduced ITO, and characterizing the electronic and optical properties and structure and composition of reduced ITO . 2.1. Material Processing We used ITO from two sources for these experiments: material sputtered at MIT, which we refer to as ITO on silicon, and commercially available material from Sigma Aldrich, which we refer to as ITO on glass. For ITO on silicon, RF-magnetron sputtering was used to deposit ITO on silicon substrates at a rate of 0.6 ̊A/s with an argon pressure of 6 mTorr and 60W RF power to a thickness of 130 nm. There were two wafers deposited this way, and the ITO properties differed between the two. The ITO on glass was 120-160 nm thick. The ITO on silicon was used for measurements where having a conductive or opaque substrate was useful, such as electron microscopy or ellipsometry. The ITO on glass was generally more uniform and was used to test repeatability of the process or for testing sensitivity to process parameters. Qualitatively, reduction had similar effects on material from both sources. We reduced the ITO in a three-electrode galvanostatic cell with a 1 M sodium chloride electrolyte, a schematic diagram of which can be found in Appendix A. We drove 300 μA of current from a platinum counter-electrode into the ITO working electrode, and measured the resulting overpotential between the ITO working electrode and an ITO reference electrode which was roughly in equilibrium with the electrolyte. Parts of the ITO submerged in electrolyte exhibited a visible color change, the area of which was measured with calipers and treated as the total reduced area. This area, which was typically around 0.5 cm2 for unpatterned films, was used to calculate current density Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 4 and reduction charge density. Current density was fixed at about 0.6 mA/cm2, slightly higher than the 0.1 mA/cm2 used by Aliev et al. , and total reduction charge density was varied across samples by varying the reduction time. Color change ranged from translucent reddish-brown at low reduction levels ( < 100 mC/cm2), reflective reddish-purple at intermediate reduction levels ( ≈ 100 mC/cm2), and matte gray at high reduction levels ( > 1000 mC/cm2). Finally, reduced samples were annealed for an hour at 160 °C in air. For this paper, we focus on samples reduced to around 100 mC/cm2 or lower. 2.2. Electronics Fabrication We fabricated our reduced ITO wires by directly patterning the reduction process. We spun an insulating photoresist onto our samples and patterned a mask to block reduction current. We reduced the masked samples, and only ITO exposed by the mask became superconducting. More details are provided in Appendix B. We used this direct patterning technique to create five ITO wires of different widths on a single chip on the ITO on glass. All wires were 2750 μm long with four equally spaced metallic contact pads. The reduction time and current were adjusted for a target reduction charge density of about 75 mC/cm2 normalized to the exposed area, which preliminary experiments indicated would maximize transition temperature. Scanning electron microscopy and optical microscopy indicated that the widest wires formed dense nanoparticle films in keeping with the expected reduction charge density, but the narrowest wires, particularly the 100 μm wide wire, appeared under-reduced. An SEM of the 100 μm wide wire is shown in Figure 2(a). 2.3. Material Characterization Superconductivity of the samples was confirmed by measuring sample resistivity in a 4-point probe configuration while sweeping through a temperature range from about 2 - 6 K while applying a current of 10 μA. I − V curves of wires were taken through a 4-point probe configuration at a fixed temperature, 300 mK, while sweeping current. Additionally, normal state resistivity was determined by a room temperature 4-point probe measurement. We studied the surface morphology of the samples with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging. We also took cross- sectional images of cleaved samples with SEM. We characterized the composition of a lamella, prepared by focused ion beam milling, with scanning transmission electron microscopy and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (STEM-EDS). These methods were most successful with ITO on silicon, as an insulating glass substrate can lead to charge buildup. To further study how the oxidation state changed over the depth of the film, we also performed x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) depth profiles on select samples with a Physical Electronics Versaprobe II by alternating XPS collection with argon Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 5 ion milling. Glass substrates could be used here because the XPS includes charge neutralization beams. Ellipsometric measurements and optical modeling were performed with the Semilab SE-2000 spectroscopic ellipsometer at 60◦, 65◦, and 70◦ angles of incidence from 240 nmto1700 nm wavelengths of light. All three angles were fit simultaneously to a Drude-Lorentz model, which has been demonstrated by Baum et al. to be effective for modeling ITO nanoparticles. Ellipsometric measurements were only performed on ITO on silicon, as the transparent glass substrate proved difficult to work with. Details of the ellipsometric models used are given in the Optics Supplementary Materials section. 3. Results and Discussion We next report our findings on the changes to electronic properties, surface properties, film composition, and optical properties caused by electrochemical reduction of ITO. 3.1. Electronic Properties We observed different effects of reduction on sheet resistance depending on our starting material. For ITO on silicon, sheet resistance universally decreased with reduction from around 50 Ω/□ to around 40 Ω/□ regardless of reduction charge density. For ITO on glass, sheet resistance increased with reduction charge density from around 10 Ω/□ to anywhere between 12 Ω/□to90 Ω/□, with larger reduction charge density correlating to larger final sheet resistance. It is unclear why the two types of films perform differently. However, given the different initial sheet resistances, it stands to reason that the ITO on glass was optimized for minimum resistance, and that any conductivity gained by the carrier concentration increase was more than offset by mobility reduction from the doping process. Sheet resistance values are given in Appendix C. We tested films from both sources and with a range of reduction charge densities for superconductivity. As-received films were not superconducting, but all the electrochemically reduced films we tested, ranging from 16 mC/cm2to110 mC/cm2, exhibited superconducting transitions. Our results, shown in Figure 1 (a), were consistent with a dome-shaped dependence of transition temperature on reduction charge density as reported by others in ITO and in line with the behavior of several other superconducting doped semiconductors . The maximum transition temperature observed was 4 K in a sample reduced to about 60 mC/cm2. Further transition temperature values are given in Appendix C. Additionally, we measured the I − V curves and determined the transition temperatures for the five directly patterned ITO wires. As demonstrated by the I − V curve for the 500 μm wide wire shown in Figure 2(b), we were able to obtain sharp transitions to the normal state while ramping up current resulting in hysteretic I − V curves for the widest wires, despite being shunted to about 2 Ω by the underlying normal ITO layer. The I − V curves for the 500, 1000, and 2000 μm wide wires all had similar Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 6 shapes. The 250 μm wide wire lacked hysteresis, but still clearly switched. All four of these wires also had nearly identical transition temperature curves to that of the 500 μm wide wire shown in Figure 1(a). The curves exhibited a transition region around 0.5 K wide, a transition temperature defined by reaching 10% of the 5 K resistivity of 3.5 K, and a small hysteresis. The 100 μm wide wire did not exhibit a clear superconducting regime on its I − V curve and had a broader transition, about 2 K wide, and seemed to just barely have completed the transition to zero resistance at 1.3 K, the bottom of our measurement region. The extracted switching currents, shown in the upper inset of Figure 2(b), do not increase linearly with width, which is consistent for wires wider than the Pearl length due to increased current screening . Additional I − V curves and transition temperature curves are provided in Appendix D. a) b) 20 μm 500 nm inset shows the nanoparticle morphology and transition to non-reduced ITO at the corner. Note the increase in size of nanoparticles near the corner, possibly indicating geometry-dependent reduction current dynamics. b) I − V curve for 500 μm wide wire. The three widest wires (500, 1000, and 2000μm) have similar I − V curves, exhibiting a clear and sharp transition at the switching current into the resistive regime and hysteretic cooling to return to the superconducting state. (Inset) Extracted switching currents for all wires that showed superconducting I − V curves. Switching current increases somewhat quadratically with width, suggesting a nonuniform current distribution as typical of wires wider than the Pearl length. Overall, the four widest wires exhibited I − V curves and transition temperatures suitable for nanowire electronics, while the 100 μm wide wire performed less well. Kowal et al. found that disorder can limit the aspect ratio of wires made of superconducting indium oxide, the parent material of ITO . However, our 100 μm wide wire was also a visibly lighter color and had a degraded transition temperature compared to the other wires, suggesting another explanation for the degraded superconductivity in the 100 μm wide wire. Probably our device widths were limited by reduction current dynamics favoring larger features and under-reducing smaller features, rather than a fundamental Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 7 scaling limitation for superconducting ITO. Narrower superconducting wires might be successfully fabricated if no wide wires are fabricated on the same chip. 3.2. Surface and Composition In addition to the expected electronic changes, we also observed significant surface effects of electrochemical reduction, as seen in Figure 1(a) and Figure 2(a). In particular, we found that reduction caused the formation of a dense nanoparticle thin film on top of the original surface, which has been reported elsewhere , but not previously noted to correspond to superconductivity. However, our depth-dependent composition and optical measurements reported later in the paper found that nearly all reduction- induced changes were localized to the surface nanoparticle region. We also investigated the composition of the reduced ITO films, particularly focusing on the nanoparticles. We especially hoped to determine whether sodium ion intercalation or oxygen vacancy defects were the more significant doping mechanism for our films. Cross-sectional STEM with EDS, as shown in Figure 3(b), did not find sodium above noise levels throughout the film. However, STEM did indicate a general decrease in density of the film toward the surface and possible metallization of hollow nanoparticles, as seen in Figure 3(a). Near the interface with silicon, the ITO appears polycrystalline and fairly uniform. Towards the gold and platinum cap that was applied for processing, there are very low-density voids distributed throughout the ITO. Past the thickness of the original surface, we observe a hollow strip flanked on either side by narrow bright regions of mostly indium and tin. The location of this hollow, metallized structure corresponds to the nanoparticles. Given the low sodium concentrations and metallic appearance of the nanoparticles, we turned to XPS to better quantify film oxygen content. Due to its high energy resolution, XPS can determine atomic concentration of different atoms and even distinguish between oxidation states of metals. We performed depth profiles on two samples on glass: one as-received (Appendix E), the other reduced for 120 s (Figure 4). The as-received sample appeared to be nearly stoichiometric indium oxide with a small percentage of tin, with no significant depth dependence of the peak shapes or atomic concentrations, except for the usual carbon contamination on the very surface. However, the properties of the reduced sample were strongly depth dependent. Ignoring the topmost surface, which shows strong hydrocarbon contamination, in Figure 4(a), we can observe a lower fraction of oxygen near the surface of the reduced ITO, recovering to stoichiometric values by the end of the depth profile. As shown in Figure 4(b), the tin peaks are also much broader near the surface, indicating the presence of multiple oxidation states. Full profiles of oxygen and indium are given in Appendix E. In particular, indium and tin broaden toward lower energies near the top of the film, which are associated with more metallic states. However, there is evidence of oxygen and oxidized indium and tin throughout the depth of the film. We also attempted to analyze the XPS data for sodium. Unfortunately, the sodium Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 8 50 nm Si ITO Au/Pt a) b) (a) High-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of an ITO lamella reduced for 120 s to about 75 mC/cm2 imaged with STEM and EDS. Brighter regions are those that interacted more strongly with electrons. The main film appears polycrystalline, but also exhibits odd nanotextured voids, perhaps where ITO was removed by reduction to reform as nanoparticles, which appear to be hollow. (b) EDS intensity counts corresponding to this area. Sodium signal does not rise above noise levels anywhere in the film, indicating that intercalation may not be a significant source of doping. 1s peak significantly overlaps with a broad, intense peak from indium Auger electron energies, so XPS cannot be used as a clear indicator of sodium presence. Samples reduced to over 1000 mC/cm2 do have a small but definite sodium peak visible despite the indium background, but samples at reduction levels of interest to superconducting electronics do not exhibit an obvious sodium peak. Finally, we confirmed Aliev et al.’s observation that applying an oxidizing electrochemical current can almost fully reverse color change, which they attributed to removal of sodium ions, but one cannot rule out re-oxidation of the material in a water Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 9 a) b) s. The film was sputtered for 1 minute with an argon ion beam between measurements. Carbon contamination is shown for reference; note that the first data point at the very surface is strongly contaminated. After this, overall atomic concentration calculations indicate a gradient, with a lower percent concentration of oxygen near the surface of the material, further suggesting oxygen removal. However, at no point does the film appear fully metallized. XPS showed no clear indication of sodium in this film. (b) High-resolution XPS tin spectra. Near the surface, the tin peaks widen toward lower binding energies, suggesting the presence of lower, more metallic oxidation states. bath. However, we also found that annealing the samples in air at a higher temperature of around 250 °C reversed the color change in a similar manner. Annealing could have replenished oxygen to the film, but seems unlikely to have removed metal ions. This provides further evidence for oxygen deficiency as the primary driver of changes in our film. 3.3. Optical Properties Fitting with least-squares regression to the Drude-Lorentz-Lorentz model, we achieved R2 > 0.997 for all the reduced ITO samples and extracted both physically meaningful parameter values and the complex refractive index resulting from the fit. The parameter values used in the fit are given in Appendix F. Generally, as reduction increases, the nanoparticle layer becomes thicker. Also, the near-UV Lorentz oscillator becomes lower in center energy and higher in amplitude, likely corresponding to oxygen vacancy dopants lowering the band gap energy . The Drude plasma frequency and core permittivity of the nanoparticle layer are mostly independent of reduction time, but are starkly different for the nanoparticles than for pristine ITO. Therefore, these changes are most likely related to the nanoparticle morphology rather than electronic properties, and could be evidence of surface plasmon resonance . From the refractive index, we computed the predicted transmission, absorption, Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 10 a) b) c) thick film of ITO or reduced ITO based on the complex refractive index measured with ellipsometry. The legend shows how long each sample was reduced with 300 μA. Reduced films are more absorbing and less reflective than the original film, but still have similar optical characteristics. and reflection for reduced ITO nanoparticle films with varying thicknesses and angles of incidence, based on the equations derived by Bousquet . The results for a 10-nm- thick film with normal incidence are shown in Figure 5. Although these plots confirm the increased absorption in blue wavelengths, reduced ITO is overall optically very similar to the original film. A 10-nm-thick film of niobium would absorb 40-60% of light over the 500 - 1700 nm range we measured with ellipsometry , compared to absorption ranging from less than 1% to about 20% for reduced ITO. In fact, for wavelengths between 800 - 1700 nm, absorption in reduced ITO is nearly equal to or even less than that of pristine ITO. 4. Conclusion We were able to fabricate transparent superconducting wires by patterning the electrochemical reduction of ITO. Although these wires were much wider than typical superconducting electronics, they exhibited sharp switching from superconducting to Reduced ITO for Transparent Superconducting Electronics 11 normal state at the critical current and transition temperatures from 3 - 4 K. We confirmed that thin films of reduced ITO is twenty to forty times less absorptive than niobium between 600 - 1600 nm, showing quantitatively that superconductivity and optical transparency can be simultaneously achieved. While the simplicity and convenience of electrochemically reduced ITO as a transparent superconductor is appealing, the rough nanoparticle structure means it is likely unsuited for typical nanowire electronics. However, we have determined that the primary reduction mechanism for ITO in our process is oxygen removal rather than ion intercalation. Therefore, we should expect that ITO that is deposited with low oxygen content should exhibit similar superconductivity while achieving a more uniform surface. This is likely the mechanism behind other instances of superconducting ITO , though those materials have not been as thoroughly characterized as we have done here. There are also other materials that show promise as transparent superconductors. Our work with ITO indicates that doped semiconductor-type superconductors may not be the best suited for electronics work unless the doping is performed carefully so as not to disrupt the thin film structure too much. Materials which are transparent superconductors in their stoichiometric forms, such as lithium titanium oxide (LTO) , may prove better for electronics work.