Spin-polarization of topological crystalline and normal insulator Pb1−푥Sn푥Se (111) epilayers probed by photoelectron spectroscopy⋆ Bartłomiej Turowskia, Aleksandr Kazakova, Rafał Rudniewskia, Tomasz Sobolb, Ewa Partyka-Jankowskab, Tomasz Wojciechowskia, Marta Aleszkiewiczc, Wojciech Zaleszczyka, Magdalena Szczepanikb, Tomasz Wojtowicza and Valentine V. Volobueva,d,∗ aInternational Research Centre MagTop, Institute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotników 32/46, Warsaw, PL-02668, Poland bNational Synchrotron Radiation Centre SOLARIS, Jagiellonian University, Czerwone Maki 98, Kraków, PL-30392, Poland cInstitute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotników 32/46, Warsaw, PL-02668, Poland dNational Technical University "KhPI", Kyrpychova Str. 2, Kharkiv, 61002, Ukraine A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Topological crystalline insulator Molecular beam epitaxy Spin resolved photoemission Helical spin-polarization Transition metal deposition Topological transition A B S T R A C T The helical spin texture on the surface of topological crystalline insulators (TCI) makes these materials attractive for application in spintronics. In this work, spin-polarization and electronic structure of surface states of (111)-oriented Pb1−푥Sn푥Se TCI epitaxial films are examined by angle- as well as spin- resolved photoemission spectroscopy (SR-ARPES). High-quality epilayers with various Sn content are grown by the molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) method. Topological - normal insulator transition manifesting itself as band gap opening is observed. It is shown that the gap opening can be induced not only by changing the Sn content of the epilayer but also depositing a transition metal (TM) on its surface. In the latter case, the observed gaping of the surface states is caused by change in surface composition and not by magnetism. We also show that helical spin polarization is present not only for samples of topological composition but also for trivial ones (with an open band gap). The observed spin polarization reaches a value of 30% for the in-plane spin component and is almost absent for the out-of-plane one. We believe that our work will pave the way for the application of surface states not only of topological but also normal insulators based on lead-tin chalcogenides in spin-charge conversion devices. 1. Introduction With the remarkable discovery of topological insulators (TIs) the new era of materials has begun, the era of topolog- ical materials . Recently, many new topologically pro- tected phases of matter have been discovered in various di- mensions from 1D to 3D. These phases include Dirac, Weyl, nodal and chiral semimetals, higher order TIs, etc. . Currently, scientists are actively seeking practical applica- tions using topologically protected states to boost device per- formance . For instance, one of the possible application of TIs is spintronics . Due to their spin-momentum locked helical nature, the surface states of 3D TIs can be used as efficient spin-charge con- verters . Moreover, as a proof of concept, control- lable magnetization switching by spin-orbit torque induced by spin polarized TSS has been successfully demonstrated in TI/ferromagnet heterostructures . Therefore, knowledge of spin-structure of topological materials is of great importance for the development of the field of spin- tronics. Despite its amazing properties, the spin texture of many ∗Corresponding author at: International Research Centre MagTop, In- stitute of Physics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Aleja Lotników 32/46, PL- 02668 Warsaw, Poland Email address: volobuiev@magtop.ifpan.edu.pl (V.V. Volobuev) (A. Kazakov); 0000-0002-6424-988X (T. Wojciechowski); (V.V. Volobuev) interesting topological materials remains relatively unex- plored. Especially fascinating for spin-resolved experiments is the topological - normal insulator transition, where the spin texture of topological material is expected to evolve. It has been proved experimentally that helical spin texture can be preserved even for the normal insulator phase in these materials . This fact definitely widens the range of the materials suitable for spintronic device applications since it does not require band inversion. Topological crys- talline insulators (TCIs) , in which topological protec- tion originates from crystal symmetry, are very sensitive to external perturbations unlike those Z2-TIs protected by the time-reversal symmetry . Therefore, it is easy to observe various topological phases , as well as TCI - normal insulator (NI) transition induced in these materials by various means, e.g. manip- ulating their crystal structure and lattice parameter. TCIs, similarly to TIs, possess topological surface states (TSS) and helical spin-momentum locked texture . Proto- typical TCI based on Sn monochalcogenide have a rock-salt crystal structure with TSS protected by mirror symmetry of {110} planes . The band ordering can be tuned from in- verted into a trivial one by alloying TCI with NI material, e.g. Pb monochalcogenide . Alterna- tively, since the value of the band gap is strongly temperature dependent, band inversion can be easily removed by heat- ing of lead-tin chalcogenide alloy. Topologically protected SS exist on {100}, {110} and {111} faces of TCI crystals . {100} TSS can be easily observed by ARPES be- B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 9 arXiv:2212.00816v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Dec 2022 cause it is the natural cleavage plane of TCI crystals . To obtain the {111} surface, growth by MBE is often ex- ploited . In the latter case topologically protected Dirac cones are revealed in the vicinity of the Γ and M points . The helical spin structure similar to prototypical 3D TI Bi2Se3 is expected in (111)-oriented Pb1−푥Sn푥Se TCI . Among TCIs, Pb1−푥Sn푥Se mixed crystals are of sig- nificance for applications due to their low carrier density and relatively high mobility . The carrier type can be easily controlled and n-type samples required for con- ventional ARPES studies to observe states of both conduc- tion (CB) and valence band (VB) can be grown by MBE . In this work, spin-polarized band structure of (111) Pb1−푥Sn푥Se is studied by SR-ARPES across the topological transition. To our knowledge there are only several works where the spin texture was studied in both TI and NI states . We expect that our work will stimulate fur- ther research toward understanding the spin texture of TCIs and exploring the possibility of using lead-tin chalcogenide based TCIs as active elements of spintronic devices. 2. Experimental methods 2.1. Epilayers preparation The n-type Pb1−푥Sn푥Se 1 μm thick epilayers were grown by MBE in Veeco GENxplor growth chamber, with base pressure bellow 10−10 mbar, using effusion cells with sto- ichiometric PbSe, SnSe as sources. Using Bi2Se3 effusion cell, bismuth doping in the range 0.07-0.1 at. % was em- ployed to tune Fermi energy and obtain n-type films. Half millimeter thick (111)-oriented BaF2 plates, freshly cleaved from the bulk crystal of Korth Kristalle GmbH, were used as a substrate. Epitaxial growth of Pb1−푥Sn푥Se with x푆푛 = 0.15, 0.25 and 0.30 was conducted at 350 °C, with ma- terial flux ratio and deposition rate controlled by quartz crystal microbalance (QCM) placed in front of the sub- strate position. The deposition rate was determined to be 0.2 nm/sec. Real-time in-situ monitoring of structural qual- ity was done by reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED) (see Fig. 1 (a)). After the growth process, with- out breaking ultra-high vacuum (UHV), samples were trans- ferred to Ferrovac VSN40S UHV suitcase (with a base pres- sure of 2×10−11 mbar) for transport to the synchrotron fa- cility . The suitcase was later attached to the preparation chamber of SOLARIS PHELIX beamline end-station to transfer the samples to the measurements setup without breaking the vacuum. 2.2. Characterization techniques Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images (Fig. 1 (b)) were obtained in tapping mode with Bruker MultiMode 8- HR microscope. Composition and additional morphology characterization were done with Zeiss Auriga Cross-Beam Neon 40 Scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with QUAN-TAX 400 Bruker Electron Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) system (Fig. 2). X-ray diffraction Structural investigation of (111) TCI epilayers. (a) Specular spot intensity as a function of Mn deposition. Left inset shows RHEED pattern of 1 μm Pb0.7Sn0.3Se epilayer recorded along azimuths, right inset is RHEED pattern of the same sample after 0.8 Å of Mn deposition, (b) AFM image of the same sample, (c) XRD reciprocal space maps (RSM) of symmetric (222) reflection obtained for Pb1−푥Sn푥Se with Sn content of 0%, 15% and 30%, respectively left to right, (d) XRD 2휃−휔 scans for the 3 samples with the same compositions as the samples used in the ARPES measurements. (XRD) patterns (Fig. 1 (c)) were recorded by PANalytical X’Pert Pro MRD diffractometer with a 1.6 kW x-ray tube using CuK훼1 radiation (휆 = 1.5406 Å), a symmetric 2 × Ge (220) monochromator and 2D Pixel detector. The electronic band structure and spin polarization of the films were examined by ARPES and SR-ARPES at PHELIX Beamline of National Synchrotron Radiation Cen- tre SOLARIS in Krakow (Poland). The end-station is equipped with SPECS GmbH PHOIBOS 225 electrostatic hemi-spherical analyzer and an automated six-axis cryo- genic manipulator. Angular and energy resolutions of the spectrometer were 2 meV and 0.1 °, respectively, with the excitation spot diameter of hundred μms. For SR-ARPES measurements FOCUS GmbH FERRUM 2D VLEED (Very Low Energy Electron Diffraction) spin detector , with an additional spin rotator installed before the entrance flange giving access to all three spin components, was used. De- tailed information about this end-station may be found in B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 9 Ref. . The studied samples were probed by ARPES at the temperature range of 78-298 K with a variable pho- ton energy of 50-90 eV. The intensity of spin-dependent en- ergy profiles was recorded at least at two opposite values of k at 200 K with 70 eV photon energy. Both ARPES and SR-ARPES measurements were performed with p-polarized light in the vicinity of the Γ point in Γ - M direction. To obtain the values of the spin polarization 푃, the asym- metry of the spin-polarized electrons 퐴 was first calculated using : 퐴 = 퐼+ − 퐼− 퐼+ + 퐼− , (1) where 퐼+ and 퐼− are intensities of energy dispersion curves (EDCs) for VLEED target magnetized in opposite direc- tions. Then polarization can be derived as: 푃 = 퐴∕푆, (2) where 푆 = 0.275 is Sherman function coefficient , deter- mined for this detector by measuring a fully polarized elec- tron beam. Finally, spin-resolved EDCs are obtained as fol- lows : 푆퐸퐷퐶↑,↓ = 퐼+ + 퐼− 2 ⋅ (1 ± 푃 ). (3) Operating voltage 15 keV. 2.3. Transition metal deposition on the surface of the epilayers Uncompensated magnetic moments of transition metals (TM) on a surface of TCI may break the mirror or time- reversal symmetry and open band gap as was predicted by theory . To test these predictions, as well as to verify the effect of TM surface doping on the TCI spin texture, iron (Fe) and manganese (Mn) were de- posited on the surfaces of three epilayers in amounts given in Table 1. In both cases, the thickness of deposited TM layers was monitored by calibrated QCM. The condensation rate was measured just before TM deposition on the sam- ple surface. Mn deposition was carried out in the growth chamber of the Veeco GENxplor system at room tempera- ture (RT) to achieve less than 0.5 monolayer (ML) cover- age using Knudsen effusion cell and the samples were deliv- ered to the synchrotron in the UHV suitcase. Fe depositions were performed at the synchrotron facilities, in the prepara- tion chamber of the PHELIX beamline end-station using an available electron beam evaporator to obtain submonolayer surface coverage. After each Fe deposition, samples were immediately transferred to the analytical chamber, where ARPES E(k) spectra and SR-ARPES EDCs were recorded. Deposition of transition metals (thickness in Å) on sur- face of Pb1−푥Sn푥Se epilayers Sample TM 1푠푡 dep. 2푛푑 dep. Sum A - 25% Sn Mn 0.3 - 0.3 B - 25% Sn Fe 0.2 - 0.2 C - 30% Sn Fe 0.15 0.3 0.45 3. Results and discussion 3.1. Structural and compositional characterization Pb1−푥Sn푥Se epilayers that were used in current ARPES and SR-ARPES investigations had high quality similar to that of structures used in previously reported works . Streaky and high contrast RHEED patterns with reflections on Laue semicircle and intense Kikuchi lines (Fig. 1 (a)) point to smooth two-dimensional (2D) growth of the films that result in an atomically flat surface. It is consis- tent with clearly defined contours of atomically flat terraces visible in the AFM image (Fig. 1 (b)). The average RMS roughness is estimated to be below 1 nm. The growth oc- curs in a 2D step-flow mode (see previous growth reports ). The lattice mismatch between Pb1−푥Sn푥Se and BaF2 in a range of 1.2-2% causes screw type threading dis- locations, at which the surface steps are pinned. These dis- locations lead to the formation of a characteristic spiral step structure visible in Figure 1 (b). XRD further confirms the growth of single-phase single-crystalline films. For three samples of the composition used in this work for ARPES measurements, only {111}-type of reflections of the sub- strate and the film are present (Fig. 1 (d)). The typical FWHM value of 휔-rocking curve extracted from (222) RSM (Fig. 1 (c)) is determined to be 200-500 arcsec for 1 μm thick Pb1−푥Sn푥Se films while it equals to 40-70 arcsec for sub- strates. At the same time, the position of the of Pb1−푥Sn푥Se (see the same figure) is a linear function of Sn content. Thus, Sn concentration (푥푆푛) in obtained samples is determined by XRD : 푥푆푛 = 6.1240 − 푎푃푏푆푛푆푒 , (4) where 푎푃푏푆푛푆푒 is Pb1−푥Sn푥Se lattice constant. In addition, elemental EDX analysis is used to characterise the compo- B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 9 200 K with a photon energy of 70 eV in the vicinity of the Γ point. Color is scaled logarithmically on the images. (a) corresponds to topological x푆푛 = 0.30 composition with gapless topological surface states (TSS) and (b) to trivial x푆푛 = 0.15 composition with band gap of 78 meV and high intensity of bulk states (BS). Red and blue dashed lines are guidelines of the surface states, whereas grey vertical dashed lines indicate negative and positive momentum positions where SR measurements are taken. (c), depicted at the bottom. sition of samples. It shows the presence of only Pb, Sn and Se in the films (Figure 2). However, the amount of Bi below 1 at. % is beyond detection range of EDX analysis. Small traces of C that are usually present for every sample loaded in SEM are also detected. The composition of the samples estimated from deposition rate measurement agrees within 2% to the composition obtained from EDX and XRD mea- surements. Upon TM deposition, we found an increase of background noise (see right inset in Fig. 1(a)) as also mani- fested by a decrease of intensity of the specular spot on the RHEED pattern (Fig. 1(a)). No additional spots or rings were observed by RHEED which would indicate the forma- tion of disordered (nanocrystalline or amorphous) TM ad- sorbate on Pb1−푥Sn푥Se surface. 3.2. Spin polarization in pristine TCI and NI epilayers Electronic structure of two Pb1−푥Sn푥Se samples con- taining 30% and 15% of Sn near Γ point of surface BZ at 200 K is presented in Fig. 3 (a) and (b). At this temperature, the studied system turns out to be in the topological (x푆푛 = 0.30) or normal insulator phase(x푆푛 = 0.15) depending on tin content. The TSS crossing at Dirac Point (DP) is visible in the presented TCI spectrum (Fig.3 (a)). The observed band gap of 78 meV in trivial phase (Fig.3 (b)) is in agreement with the semi-empirical Preier’s formula . The SR measurements are performed for three orthog- onal spin components. Typically in topological insulators helical in-plane spin-polarization is expected. Therefore, the spin is supposed to be tangential to the Fermi surface and consequently the out-of-plane and one in-plane component should to be equal to 0. The corresponding SEDCs are ex- tracted at momentum positions marked by vertical dashed grey lines in Fig. 3 (a, b). We found negligible spin polar- ization in the direction normal to the sample plane as well as for a one in-plane component as anticipated. The obtained results for the other in-plane spin components, 푆푥, are pre- sented in Fig. 3 (c) and (d). As expected, it shows helical spin texture, i.e. opposite spin polarization 푃 for the oppo- site wave vectors 푘|| for the TCI case (Fig.3 (c)). In CB, the spin polarization of TSSs reaches moderate values, up to 30%. VB TSSs have opposite helicity with respect to the CB, however the value of spin polarization in the VB drops to 10%. Such reduced values are due to the overlap of VB TSS with spin-degenerate bulk states. Previously in sister material, in (100) oriented PbSnTe same spin polariza- B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 9 iron thickness from 0 to 0.15 Å and then to 0.45 Å deposited on epilayer’s surface. Color is scaled logarithmically on the images; for (c) strong background noise is removed. Gray vertical dashed lines indicate negative and positive positions of momentum for tion of 10% was reported for one of the in-plane components in VB. Typically, the values of spin-polarization is reduced to ~50% due to spin-orbit coupling (SOC) for prototypical Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 Z2 TIs as shown by DFT . Strong SOC is certainly present in Pb1−푥Sn푥Se and responsible for band inversion in these materials. Therefore a similar effect of reduction of measured spin-polarization is expected. Helical spin polarization of the same magnitude is ob- served for the trivial Pb0.85Sn0.15Se sample in which the band gap is open (Fig.3 (d)). This remarkable effect is consistent with previous reports for the material systems in which TI-NI transition was observed . Previously, such an effect explained by the presence of Rashba-split sur- face states that also have helical spin texture. The effect was modelled for Bi2Se3 TI through tight binding calculations. In addition to the TI hamiltonian, Rashba term and electro- static surface potential were taken into account . As the result of changing the sign of a mass parameter, trivial spin- polarized surface resonances having the same helicity as in TI were obtained for the NI phase. Indeed, the giant Rashba effect has been observed previously in (111)-oriented Pb- SnTe(Se) TCIs and may be responsible for the observed spin polarization in the NI phase . The prerequisites of the Rashba effect are broken inversion symmetry and the presence of an electric field gradient. These conditions are automatically fulfilled due to polar nature of the (111) sur- face. However, during our measurements, we did not detect Rashba split states even after changing the energy of inci- dent photons. In addition, no Rashba effect was reported for the extensively studied in the past (001)-oriented TCIs, where spin-polarized SSs were observed for the NI phase . Apparently, the splitting can be so small that it can- not be resolved by ARPES, though detection of the splitting with spin is still possible. It should be noted that the elec- trostatic band bending effect that is observed in PbSnTe(Se) TCIs with (111) orientation can itself be the origin of the spin-polarized surface resonances even at zero value of Rashba coefficient as shown in ref. . Furthermore, observation of helical spin texture in triv- ial samples is consistent with recent transport measurements and theoretical calculations performed for thin Pb1−푥Sn푥Se epilayers . It is known, that the spin-momentum locking in TI TSSs introduces an additional 휋 Berry phase shift be- tween the pair of counter-propagating charge contours at the Fermi surface. It is demonstrated in Ref. , that if inver- sion symmetry is broken (that naturally occurs on the sam- ple surface) the Berry phase quantized to 휋 is attained even for NI sample composition. Weak-antilocalization measure- ments confirmed presence of the 휋 Berry phase for both topological and NI composition of Pb1−푥Sn푥Se epilayers. It was shown, that symmetries present in the system, rather than topological order, are responsible for the Berry phase B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 9 effects . 3.3. Effect of transition metal deposition on electronic and spin structure of TCI A similar effect of TCI-NI insulator transition is detected when an ultrathin amount of transition metal is deposited on the surface of TCI. Fig. 4 presents evolution of elec- tronic structure and the spin texture of x푆푛 = 0.30 epilayer at 200 K upon deposition of Fe. Initially, the system is in a topological state, with the band gap closed by TSSs (Fig. 4 (a)). Deposition of 0.15 Å (Fig. 4 (b)) causes band bend- ing and introduces additional n-type doping to the sample surface. The Fermi level moves upward and a surprisingly large 50 meV gap opens in the middle of the spectrum. Fur- ther deposition of 0.3 Å of Fe (0.45 Å in total) leads to a further slight increase of Fermi energy and wider opening of the surface band gap to 80 meV as presented in Fig. 4 (c). Despite the observed band gap, the surface states (SSs) or so-called precursor states are still detectable in the ARPES spectra. The surface nature of these states is ev- idenced by the lack of their dispersion when the energy of the incident photon is varied (not shown). It should be noted that the background noise was subtracted in Fig. 4 (c) to prop- erly visualise SS and band gap. The pronounced increase of the background noise with Fe deposition suggests a disor- dered TM state on the surface of the film under study. Fig. 4 (d), (e), (f) show SR measurements for different amount of deposited Fe. After the first 0.15 Å Fe deposition, de- spite the gap opening, the helicity of the surface states re- mains unchanged and large spin polarization up to 25 % is still detected. Further increasing the ultrasmall amount of deposited Fe to 0.45 Å leads to a drastic decrease in spin polarization to ∼5%, which we link to the presence of unpo- larized disordered Fe states. These disordered states over- lap with the SS causing an increase in background noise and consequent a decrease in the spin-polarised spectral weight brought by the precursor states. The observed gap opening with TM deposition on the TCI surface have been further corroborated by ARPES and SR-ARPES measurements of several samples with topolog- ical composition. The spin-polarized SSs, as well as an in- duced gap, were detected in all cases of deposition of mod- erate amount of Fe. In order to further confirm the observed effect, we replaced Fe with another TM. Deposition of 0.3 Å of Mn on the surface of Pb0.75Sn0.25Se yields similar results. Opening of 40 meV SS band gap is observed, as well as spin polarization of up to 30% (see Figure 5 (a) and (b) respec- tively) is detected. 3.4. The origin of gaped states induced by TM deposition. Magnetic impurity on the surface of TCI may cause not only gap opening due to the breaking of time reversal or mirror symmetry but also can create a 2D fer- romagnetic state . However, in the latter case, the Fermi energy should lie in the gap, not observed in the ex- periment. Also, there should be a critical temperature of corresponding SR measurements taken at 200 K with a photon energy of 70 eV in the vicinity of the Γ point with 0.3 Å of Mn deposited on the surface. Grey vertical dashed lines indicate the negative and positive momentum of SR measurements. The spectrum are shown with a linear color scale. magnetic transition if the gap has a magnetic origin and is related to the arrangement of magnetic moments. Provided magnetic arrangement, below this characteristic temperature the gap should be always open. On the other hand, other mechanisms can cause the band gap opening, e.g. a sim- ple change of band inversion point or resonant doping . Earlier works involving TM deposition on the surface of TI reported unperturbed and gapless TSS, declaring absence of magnetic gap . Therefore, to investigate the origin of gap opening on TCI surface after TM deposition, temperature dependent ARPES measurements were carried out. Fig. 6 (a) - (d) show evolution of E(푘||) spectra with decreasing tempera- ture for Pb0.75Sn0.25Se sample with 0.2 Å of Fe deposited on its surface. For the epilayer of such composition, topo- logical transition point at which band gap closing occurs is at 254.5 K according to the semi-empirical Preier’s relation . However, we observe a band gap of 65 meV at 200 K (Fig. 6 (b)). The gap reduces further with a temperature de- crease and reaches 24 meV at 130 K (Fig. 6 (c)). Cooling the sample down to the temperature of liquid nitrogen value re- sults in a completely closed gap (Fig. 6 (d)). Thus, the mag- netic gap scenario can be excluded due to the absence of a magnetic transition point below which the band gap should remain constant. The resonance doping scenario also can B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 9 taken with a photon energy of 70 eV in the vicinity of the Γ point. The spectra are shown with a linear color scale. be ruled out, since, for this case, the observed gap should be temperature independent . One should note, that the observation of the band gap induced by TM on the surface of TI is rather unusual since no gap opening was reported so far for the deposition of TM on the surface of bismuth chalcogenide-based topological compounds . In this respect, Pb1−푥Sn푥Se TCI is quite unique. Typically, the band gap of these compounds is temperature and composi- tion dependent. Therefore, the most probable explanation is related to a change of composition-dependent band inversion point with TM deposition. Fig. 7 represents temperature de- pendence of 퐸푔 of Pb1−푥Sn푥Se TCI with x푆푛 = 0.25 and 0.175 calculated according to Preier’s relation and more recent measurements of Ref. , as well as our data ex- tracted from Fig. 6. As one can see, our temperature depen- dence of the band gap reproduces the one calculated for x푆푛 = 0.175. Indeed, since TMs used in this work are relatively light elements, a decrease in spin-orbit strength is expected, hence one can consider TM deposition as a way of chang- ing surface composition toward a trivial side. Nevertheless, we believe that more extensive experiments similar to those as in ref. involving samples with different compositions and different amount of TM must be conducted in the future to confirm unambiguously Sn-composition dependent shift of the band inversion point with TM deposition. 4. Conclusions To sum up, we investigated the electronic and spin struc- ture of high quality TCI Pb1−푥Sn푥Se (111) epilayers by means of conventional and spin-resolved ARPES. The sam- ples that were successfully produced using the MBE method were then transferred to the synchrotron facility inside the UHV suitcase which preserved their pristine surfaces. We showed that helical spin-polarization of the surface states ex- ists not only for topological samples but also for samples of trivial composition. The magnitude of the spin-polarization is of the same order for both types of samples. Moreover, we revealed that TM deposition on the sample surface opens (퐸푔) in Pb1−푥Sn푥Se. Comparison between 퐸푔 extracted from Fig. 6 for x푆푛 = 0.25 with 0.2 Å of Fe deposited (black dashed curve) and 퐸푔 calculated following Ref. for x푆푛 = 0.25 (red line), for x푆푛 = 0.175 (burgundy line) and following Ref. for x푆푛 = 0.175 (green line) the band gap, which forces TCI-NI transition. An additional point to emphasize is that we demonstrated modification of the band structure at the interface between TM and TCI. This should be taken into account in the real spintronic devices combining TCI and magnetic material based on TM. CRediT authorship contribution statement Bartłomiej Turowski: Writing - original draft, Investi- gation, Analysis. Aleksandr Kazakov: Investigation, Anal- ysis, Writing - review & editing. Rafał Rudniewski: In- vestigation. Tomasz Sobol: Investigation. Ewa Partyka- Jankowska: Investigation. Tomasz Wojciechowski: In- vestigation. Marta Aleszkiewicz: Investigation. Wojciech B. Turowski et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 9 Zaleszczyk: Investigation. Magdalena Szczepanik: In- vestigation, Supervision. Tomasz Wojtowicz: Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - review & editing. Valentine V. Volobuev: Writing - original draft, review & editing, Conceptualization, Investigation, Analysis, Supervision. Declaration of Competing Interest The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Acknowledgement The work is supported by the Foundation for Polish Sci- ence through the IRA Programme co-financed by EU within SG OP (Grant No. MAB/2017/1). The authors thank NSRC SOLARIS for beamtime allocation and T. Dietl with T. Story as well as G. Springholz for valuable discussions.