Quantum well confinement and competitive radiative pathways in the luminescence of black phosphorus layers Authors Etienne Carré1,2, Lorenzo Sponza1, Alain Lusson2, Ingrid Stenger2, Sébastien Roux1,2, Victor Zatko3, Bruno Dlubak3, Pierre Seneor3, Etienne Gaufrès4, Annick Loiseau1 and Julien Barjon2* 1 Laboratoire d’Étude des Microstructures (LEM), UMR 104 CNRS-Onera, Université Paris Saclay, 92322 Châtillon, France. 2 Groupe d’Etude de la Matière Condensée (GEMaC), CNRS-UVSQ, Université Paris Saclay, 45 Avenue des Etats-Unis 78035 Versailles, France 3 Unité Mixte de Physique, CNRS -Thales, Université Paris-Saclay, 91767 Palaiseau, France. 4 Laboratoire Photonique Numérique et Nanosciences, CNRS - Institut d’Optique - Univ. Bordeaux, 33400 Talence, France *Correspondance : julien.barjon@uvsq.fr Abstract: Black phosphorus (BP) stands out from other 2D materials by the wide amplitude of the band-gap energy (Eg) that sweeps an optical window from Visible (VIS) to Infrared (IR) wavelengths, depending on the layer thickness. This singularity made the optical and excitonic properties of BP difficult to map. Specifically, the literature lacks in presenting experimental and theoretical data on the optical properties of BP on an extended thickness range. Here we report the study of an ensemble of photoluminescence spectra from 79 passivated BP flakes recorded at 4 K with thicknesses ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm, obtained by mechanical exfoliation. We observe that the exfoliation steps induce additional defects states that compete the radiative recombination from bound excitons observed in the crystal. We also show that the evolution of the photoluminescence energy versus thickness follows a quantum well confinement model appreciable from a thickness predicted and probed at 25 nm. The BP slabs placed in different 2D heterostructures show that the emission energy is not significantly modulated by the dielectric environment. Introduction Confinement effects in 2D materials have attracted considerable interest because of their layered and exfoliable structures that allow angstrom scale increment of the thickness, from monolayer to bulk. Hence, ultrathin layers of 2D semiconductors, such as the MoS2 and other TDMCs, have demonstrated stunning physical properties, of high significance for optoelectronics and spintronics1,2. In this context, black phosphorus (BP), firstly exfoliated in 20143,4, stands out from other 2D materials by the peculiar and strong confinement effects on its physical properties. One emblematic feature is the wide amplitude of the band-gap energy (Eg) that sweeps an optical window from Visible (VIS) to Infrared (IR) wavelengths, depending on the number of layers. Indeed, the optical activities in bulk and monolayer BP are centered at 0.3 eV and 2 eV5, respectively, corresponding to an amplitude energy Eg-BP =1.7 eV considerably wider compared with that observed in the MoS2 family, roughly Eg-MoS2 = 0.3 eV6. Moreover, this variation of Eg-BP spreads over a large layer number and, for instance, a significant photoluminescence (PL) energy modulation is still observed in the range of 20-30 BP layers.7 These singularities make the optical and excitonic properties of BP difficult to map. Specifically, the literature lacks in presenting experimental and theoretical data on the optical properties of BP on an extended thickness range. The difficulty to probe BP samples is, furthermore, exacerbated by the poor sensitivity of the detectors in the IR optical range and by the fast and intrinsic photodegradation of BP when placed in ambient conditions.8,9 The intercrossing of dielectric, geometrical, defects and mechanical effects with quantum confinement effects also need to be clarified in the ultrathin, thin and bulk-like exfoliated BP flakes. Theoretical5,10 and experimental11–15 studies have been focusing on the behavior of few layers BP emitting in the visible / NIR range. In particular, few works analyzed the strong and anisotropic absorption/emission bands associated to the direct band gap in BP in the 1-4 layers regime11,12,16. BP samples were also investigated in the semi-bulk and bulk-like thickness ranges, i.e. arbitrary 4 nm to 40 nm and over 400 nm.17,18 The study of infrared luminescence of thicker layers of BP has accelerated, partly driven by the emergence of infrared optical applications such as BP based photodetectors and lasing.7,17,19,20 More recently, the fingerprints of bulk BP PL spectra at 2K were also reported, showing the existence of free and bound excitons energy around a refined value of the bandgap of 0.287 eV at cryogenic temperature21. Here we report on an unprecedented ensemble of low temperature PL spectra from 79 passivated BP flakes with thicknesses ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm, obtained by mechanical exfoliation. We observed that the exfoliation steps induce additional defects states that compete the radiative recombination from bound exciton observed in the as-grown crystals. We described our data set with a quantum well model applied to a thickness dependent BP slab and we identified a correlation between the optical band gap energy variation and the footprint of the electron-hole wave function within a BP bulk crystal. Finally, we evidenced that the dielectric environment does not modulate the photoluminescence energy from BP layers sandwiched in different 2D heterostructures. Main text Defect-related emission from exfoliated crystals. The BP crystals were purchased from HQ Graphene and were mechanically exfoliated by an usual repeatable stamping process in a glovebox under argon atmosphere (<0.5 ppm O2, <1 ppm H2O) to prevent BP degradation. The thickness of the flakes was characterized by combining optical and Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), both installed in the glovebox. A custom-built transfer box was used to transfer the samples into an Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD) chamber to perform a homogeneous deposition of a 10 nm Al2O3 passivation layer. Further details on the sample preparation and PL characterization can be found in the supplementary information file [SupMat1]). In Figure 1 we compare representative photoluminescence spectra recorded at 4K from: an as- received BP crystal (1a); a crystal resulting from a single-stamping exfoliation deposited on a Si/SiO2 substrate (1b); and a thick BP flake (700 nm) obtained from a multiple-stamping exfoliation deposited on substrate (1c). The corresponding photography and optical images are shown in Figure 1d. As described in21, the PL of the as-received crystal consists of two structures. A fine emission signal is formed mainly of free and bound excitons (I°X) lines, and is highlighted by the pale-blue strip in the Figure 1a-c. A second contribution at about 20 meV lower energy is related to defect-assisted recombination. Because size effects are negligible at this thickness, as we will demonstrate below, the PL fingerprints are expected to look similar in all three samples. Surprisingly, even if the overall PL emission bands fall in the same tight energy interval (50 meV), the line shape is significantly modified. The excitonic fine structure of BP crystal (sharp peak) clearly disappeared leaving a broadened emission line for the sample resulting from multiple-stamping exfoliation (Figure 1c). The characteristics of this emission peak (line widths ranging from 15 meV to 45 meV) are consistent with the PL spectra reported in the literature for different thick flakes obtained via exfoliation7,17,19,20, but its origin has not been elucidated yet. BP chip obtained after a single-stamping exfoliation step, and (c) from a 700 nm thick flake obtained after multiple-stamping exfoliation steps. The excitation wavelength is 532 nm and the fluence is 2.102 optical images corresponding to the three samples analysed in (a,b,c) from top to bottom. Labels 1 to 4 refer to the areas where spectra in (b) are recorded. (e) Raman spectra recorded from areas 1 and 4 of the sample (b) with a 633 nm excitation laser. To investigate it, we operated a single-stamping exfoliation of a BP crystal, i.e. we stamped the crystal with PDMS only once, hence obtaining a BP chip of micron scale thickness, corresponding to an intermediate thickness sample of a measure between the size of the BP crystal and the ultrathin samples commonly reported in literature. Low temperature micro-PL spectra recorded at different selected areas of this BP chip (areas labeled 1 to 4 in the image of the sample in Figure 1d) interestingly exhibit different PL line shapes (Figure 1b). On one hand, a bright and narrow band dominates the emission fingerprint for areas 1 and 2. The emission energy and linewidth present strong similarities with those of the I°X bound exciton found in the pristine crystal21. Furthermore, micro-Raman measurements performed in the same region indicate a good structural quality with a narrow linewidth for all BP Raman modes, (see Figure 1e). We associated these spectral signatures to a low-defective zone of the BP sample where the radiative pathway is driven by bound excitons. On the other hand, the area 4 displays a broad emission band centered at lower energy, similar to the low-energy emission band of the BP crystal reported by Carré et al.21. We observed that this area is characterized by an overall broadening of the Raman modes (Figure 1e), suggesting the presence of an additional defect density caused by the exfoliation process. An intermediate situation with the coexistence of the two bands is observed in some regions of the chip, alike area 3. They reproduce the overall macro PL spectrum recorded on the crystal. Our micro-PL and micro-Raman analysis of BP samples resulting from single- and multiple-stamping exfoliations clearly indicate that the emergence of this band is concomitant with the formation of defects upon exfoliation. In the light of these observations, we conclude that the exfoliation based on PDMS stamping, commonly used for producing BP samples, induces deep changes in the nature of the luminescent process in BP layers, resulting in a broad emission band that may rely to the low- energy band observed in the pristine crystal in macro PL. The anisotropic structure of BP and the low value of the Young modulus, compared to other 2D materials, could explain the high sensitivity of BP to the mechanical exfoliation processing. photoluminescence spectra of BP flakes at different thicknesses probed at 4 K and excited at a wavelength of 532 nm and at a fluence of 3.104 W.cm-2. The grey line indicates the part of the spectra disturbed by the CO2 absorption band. (c) Evolution of the PL peak energy as a function of the thickness (black bullets and circles) and its fit based on a quantum well (QW) model. (red dashed line). The bound exciton energy of the BP crystal at 4 K is marked as a horizontal blue line. A black dashed line indicates the threshold thickness at 25 nm. The blue star corresponds to the energy of the PL peak shown in Figure 1c. Quantum-confinement on a large thickness range To further investigate the characteristics of this emission peak, we probed the photoluminescence of 79 BP exfoliated flakes at 4K, with a thickness ranging from 4 nm to 700 nm (see SupMat1 in the supplementary information file for details on PL measurements procedure). The AFM image of a representative thin sample is displayed in Figure 2a whereas a set of optical and AFM images of other flakes are presented in SupMat2. Figure 2b presents the normalized PL spectra at cryogenic temperature of typical BP flakes. The grey line indicates the part of the spectra disturbed by the CO2 absorption band coming from the free-space part of the collection beam in our apparatus. In all exfoliated samples we probed, the luminescence spectra consist in a single and broadened emission band. This observation is consistent with the PL spectra reported in the literature for different thicknesses7,17,19,20 with a line width ranging from 15 meV to 45 meV. Note that the PL band from the thickest flakes coincides with the broadened band reported in Figure 1c. For each flake, we associate the energy of the emission to the maximum of the PL spectrum. When it falls in the CO2 absorption range (gray rectangle in Figure 2b), for example for the 92 nm film, the PL signal is modeled with a Gaussian peak and the energy at maximum is extrapolated. The evolution of the PL peak energy over the wide thickness interval considered, from about 10 to about 1000 layers, follows two distinct regimes with a transition thickness (Lb) around 25 nm (about 50 layers), as highlighted by a black dashed line in Figure 2c. At thicknesses higher than Lb, the PL energy evolves moderately, from 0.27 eV to 0.32 eV, and remains close to that of the bound exciton (0.275 eV at 2 K, green line in Figure 2c). These values are, in average, slightly lower than those presented in the literature for the same thickness range (0.32 eV20 and 0.31 eV17 for 70 nm and 220 nm-thick BP layers probed at 80K, respectively) but this can be explained by the fact that the gap of black phosphorus blueshifts with temperature22,23. Measures have been taken at two different excitation fluences: black bullets and empty circles correspond to laser powers of 3x104 and 3x103 W·cm-2, respectively. No degradation was observed under exposure, i.e. no trace of the laser spot under the microscope and no decrease of the luminescence signal over time. We only notice a weak dependence of the peak energy on the excitation fluence, which could be ascribed to the Burstein Moss effect24,25 (more details in supmat3). At thicknesses lower than Lb, the peak energy increases significantly, reaching 0.7 eV for the 4 nm-thick BP flake, which is much higher than what is reported in literature7 because of the different experimental conditions. The evolution of the experimental peak energies as a function of the thickness is well described by the law E = ħ2π2 2m∗L2 + E0, where E0 is an offset energy and L is the thickness of the slab. This is the energy behavior of two independent particles of opposite sign moving freely with an effective reduced mass m* inside an infinite- barrier quantum-well (see red fit in Figure 2c and SupMat6). Fitting the law with parameters E0 = 0.279 eV (Average energy of PL measurements on the 700 nm thick flake) and the measured thicknesses, we extract an effective mass of m*=0.049m0 (m0: mass of the electron in vacuum). Intriguingly, the effective mass extracted from our measurements is comparable to the exciton effective mass (mw) predicted for the bulk by previous calculations21,26,27 including the anisotropic Wannier model introduced by some of us21. representing the electron-hole z-distance probability zP(z) inside a bulk-BP slab. (b) Variation of the photoluminescence peak energy with the thickness. hBN / BP / hBN (red triangles) and SiO2/BP/Al203 (gray dots) heterostructures. c Comparison of the emission band energy variation in BP and MoS26,28,29 . Red arrows indicate the limit beyond which the energy band gap varies by less than 3% of the total band gap modulation from the monolayer to the bulk. We explored further this similarity by reverting to our bulk Wannier model and calculating the corresponding probability P(z) of finding an electron-hole pair of vertical extension z and the distribution of the average electron-hole pair vertical distance |z|P(z). A plot of these two quantities is reported in Figure 3a while the details of the calculation are discussed in the SupMat5. The result is that both distributions start being negligible at around Lw = 25 nm which indicates that, in the bulk, excitons extend in the stacking direction for Lw = 25 nm at most. In a BP slab, the same exciton would start “feeling’’ the presence of the surfaces for thicknesses L < Lw , thus entering into a quantum well regime. After the similarity of the effective masses, it is remarkable that also the threshold thickness for the quantum well regime measured experimentally (Lb) is so close to a corresponding quantity predicted for the bulk exciton (Lw). Finally, we notice that in our bulk excitonic model, the kinetic contribution to the energy was much more sensitive to changes of the parameters than the potential contribution. If this is still the case in the BP slabs, then the PL signature should not be affected by changes of the dielectric environment. Experimentally, we tested this hypothesis by comparing the evolution of the photoluminescence energy of some hBN / BP / hBN heterostructures (hBN has a dielectric constant of about 330) with the SiO2/BP/Al2O3 samples studied above (the dielectric constant of alumina is around 931). More details on the heterostructures fabrication and their luminescence are given in the SupMat4. Results are reported in Figure 3b in red triangles (hBN encapsulated) and grey bullets (alumina-passivated samples of Figure 2). The superposition of the PL energy as a function of thickness demonstrate that, indeed, the quantum confined emission is not significantly affected by changes of the dielectric environment, at least in this range of thicknesses. This can be explained by the fact that, at these thicknesses, the wavefunctions of the particles are much more strongly affected by the confinement than the screening of their interaction. We notice also that this feature justifies “a posteriori’’ the independent-particle approximation implicit in the two-particle quantum well model, which nicely describes the observed emission behavior. The characteristics of this quantum well regime depict a quite unique situation among the 2D materials. Indeed it is found to start below a threshold thickness Lb of about 25 nm, corresponding to about 50 layers and the increase of the peak energy is quite slow upon reducing thickness as attested by the very low effective mass of particle pair (m*=0.049m0) involved in the model. For a comparison, in MoS2 the PL energy enters the quantum well regime at a thickness of about 5 layers (Lb=2-3 nm) and increases steeply (see Figure 3c). This slow change of the emission energy may be an advantage for possible applications because it makes the modulation of the emission easier to control. Furthermore, we observed that these characteristics are robust against changes of the substrate or the passivation layer, which may be another advantage as it simplifies the integration of BP slabs in actual devices. Finally, we noticed that these two quantities (the threshold thickness and the pair effective mass) together with the low sensitivity to changes in the dielectric medium are common also to the bulk excitonic model we introduced in a previous study. These similarities suggest that excitons are somehow involved in the formation and the evolution of the broadened emission band we studied. Conclusions To conclude, our work reports the evolution of luminescence at cryogenic temperature of many exfoliated slabs of black phosphorus over a wide and so far unexplored range of thicknesses. Without being able to identify clearly the origin of the broad luminescence emission peak from exfoliated BP samples, our measures and analysis allows us to formulate the hypothesis that the robust quantum well emission we observed comes from excitons whose recombination pathways are altered by some structural disorder or defects introduced by the exfoliation procedure itself. This peak coincides with the low-energy band of the bulk crystal spectrum at very large thickness. As a consequence, this emission has properties that are unique to black phosphorus slabs. They are related to the high softness of the material, which explains the impact of the exfoliation on the photoluminescence properties, and to the low effective mass of paired particles that explains the exceptionally wide range of thicknesses over which the quantum well emission can be observed, contrasting with other semiconducting 2D materials. Acknowledgments. The authors acknowledge funding from the French national research agency (ANR) under the grant agreement No. ANR-17-CE24-0023-01 (EPOS-BP). This project has also received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grand agreement N° 881603 (Graphene Flagship core 3).