Unconventional localization of electrons inside of a nematic electronic phase L. Farrar,1 Z. Zajicek,2 A.B. Morfoot,2 M. Bristow,2 O. S. Humphries,2 A. A. Haghighirad,2, 3 A. McCollam,4 S. J. Bending,1 and A. I. Coldea2, ∗ 1Centre for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Department of Physics, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom 2Clarendon Laboratory, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK 3Institute for Quantum Materials and Technologies, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany 4High Field Magnet Laboratory (HFML-EMFL), Radboud University, 6525 ED Nijmegen, The Netherlands (Dated: December 14, 2022) The magnetotransport behaviour inside the nematic phase of bulk FeSe reveals unusual multiband effects that cannot be reconciled with a simple two-band approximation proposed by surface-sensitive spectroscopic probes. In order to understand the role played by the multiband electronic structure and the degree of two-dimensionality we have investigated the electronic properties of exfoliated flakes of FeSe by reducing their thickness. Based on magnetotransport and Hall resistivity measurements, we assess the mobility spectrum that suggests an unusual asymmetry between the mobilities of the electrons and holes with the electron carriers becoming localized in- side the nematic phase. Quantum oscillations in magnetic fields up to 38 T indicate the presence of a hole-like quasiparticle with a lighter effective mass and a quantum scattering time three times shorter, as compared with bulk FeSe. The observed localization of negative charge carriers by reducing dimensionality can be driven by orbitally-dependent correlation effects, enhanced interband spin-fluctuations or a Lifshitz-like transition which affect mainly the electron bands. The electronic localization leads to a fragile two-dimensional superconductiv- ity in thin flakes of FeSe, in contrast to the two-dimensional high-Tc induced with electron doping via dosing or using a suitable interface. Among different classes of unconventional superconduc- tors, iron-based systems display rich physics due to their multiband structure and the competition between different electronic interactions . Iron-chalcogenides are among the most strongly correlated iron-based superconductors and, due to the large intra-atomic exchange caused by the Hund’s cou- pling, the correlation strengths are expected to be strongly or- bitally dependent . This orbital differentiation can lead to an orbital-selective Mott transition, or spectral weight transfer, where the band with dominant dxy orbital appears more insu- lating while other bands with dxz and dyz orbital character re- main metallic . As a result, electronic and superconduct- ing properties are likely to be influenced by these effects, as seen in orbitally-dependent band shifts in angle-resolved pho- toemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in iron-chalogenides and orbital-dependent Cooper pairing . FeSe is a candidate system in which the presence of the lower-Hubbard band establishes the important role of elec- tronic correlations, orbital-dependent band shifts in the ne- matic phase and Fermi surface shrinking [7–10]. The strength of these effects can be suppressed by isoelectronic substitu- tion with sulphur [11–13]. The interatomic Coulomb repul- sion in FeSe can produce a strongly renormalized low-energy band structure where the van Hove singularity sits remarkably close to the Fermi level in the high-temperature electron liquid phase . ARPES studies under strain suggest that in FeSe one electron pocket either is missing or the spectral weight is transferred between its two electron pockets . Fur- thermore, neutron scattering suggests the coexistence of both stripe and N`eel spin fluctuations with a substantial amount of spectral weight transferred towards stripe spin fluctuations in- side the nematic phase . The lack of long-range antifer- romagnetic order in FeSe has been linked to the competition between different types of magnetic order that can lead to sig- nificant magnetic frustration . Transport properties of systems with orbitally-dependent correlations are predicted to display a coherence-incoherence crossover as a function of temperature and, in ad- dition, nematic iron-based superconductors are prone to anisotropic single-particle scattering enhanced by interband spin or charge fluctuations . In the presence of spin fluc- tuations, the scattering is strongly influenced by quasiparti- cles close to hot spots at Fermi surface locations where the nesting is strong . Furthermore, the large fluctuating moments with N`eel and stripe magnetic instabilities are likely to strongly affect the magnetotransport behaviour. Mag- netotransport studies of FeSe and FeSe1−xSx have identified a linear resistivity regime and a large magnetoresistance inside the nematic phase . However, the low-field magneto- transport data in the normal state suggest that, in addition to one hole and one almost compensated electron band, the ne- matic phase of FeSe exhibits an additional tiny electron pocket with a high mobility and non-linear Hall coefficient that can also be found in the low pressure regime . Ad- ditionally, the amplitude of the quantum oscillations at low temperatures and high magnetic fields indicates that hole car- riers are likely to be more mobile than electron bands , and the highly mobile holes and enhanced spin fluctuations also dominate the high-Tc pressure phase of FeSe . Among iron-based superconductors, FeSe displays an anomalous electronic nematic state, strong electronic correla- tions and orbitally-dependent band shifts that can influence its superconducting pairing. Here, we report a detailed magneto- transport study of thin flakes of FeSe that reveals unconven- tional transport in which the hole carriers remain highly mo- bile, whereas the mobility of the electron carriers is low, with arXiv:2212.06196v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 12 Dec 2022 2 hardly any temperature dependence, inside the nematic phase. This suggests an unusual localization of negative charge car- riers that may be caused by orbital-dependent enhanced cor- relations, scattering of spin fluctuations and/or a topological electronic transition. As the superconductivity is suppressed by reducing the flake thickness, it suggests that the electron pockets participate actively in the superconducting pairing. By doping, electron pockets expand enabling the high-Tc su- perconductivity. In this paper, we present a detailed magnetotransport study of exfoliated thin flakes of FeSe as compared with bulk single crystals. The mobility spectrum and a two-band model reveal that the mobility of the holes in thin flake devices is much higher than that of electrons. Electrons become localized at low temperatures, due to the enhancement of the orbitally- dependent correlations and enhanced anisotropic scattering in two-dimensional devices. From quantum oscillations we find that the size of the extremal hole orbit is smaller and the effec- tive mass of the hole band is lighter than in bulk. In the low- temperature regime, the resistivity shows a linear dependence down to the lowest temperatures but Fermi liquid behaviour is restored in the cleanest flake, where quantum oscillations are present. While the thinner devices could be sensitive to increased impurity and surface scattering, the reduction in Tc in thin flakes is directly correlated with the suppression of the nematic phase and the localization of electron carriers. RESULTS Transport properties of thin flakes of FeSe. Fig. 1(a) shows the temperature dependence of the normal- ized zero-field resistance, ρ(T)/ρ(300K), for a bulk crystal and six different thin flake devices with thicknesses in the range t =14-125 nm. Bulk FeSe undergoes a tetragonal to orthorhombic distortion at Ts ≈ 90 K without any accompa- nying long-range magnetic order, followed by the onset of su- perconductivity at Tc ∼ 9 K . These parameters in single crystals are sensitive to the growth conditions and the impu- rity level; the suppression of Tc is affected by the increase in the amount of disorder, as measured by the residual resistivity ratio (RRR), which linearly correlates with the suppression of Ts . In thin flakes, the superconducting transition tem- perature, Tc, is already lowered from the bulk single crystal value to 7.2 K for a t = 125 nm device, decreasing further to 3.6 K for a t = 14 nm device, as reported previously . The suppression of superconductivity in the t = 125 nm device oc- curs despite the high residual resistance ratio of RRR ∼ 32, which is similar to bulk crystals from the same batch . In thinner flakes, the RRR value falls as a function of decreasing thickness, reducing to 5.5 in the t = 14 nm device as shown in Fig. S4(c) in the SI Appendix , being similar to the effect of impurity scattering by Cu doping in FeSe . Similarly, the emergence of the nematic phase at Ts, which results in significant in-plane distortion of the Fermi surface t = 28 nm ρ (B)/ρ (0) xx xx a 28 nm 14 nm Bulk 58 nm 24 nm 125 nm 100 nm b d bc e f t = 125 nm t = 125 nm Nematic SC ρ(T)/ρ(300 K) ρ (B)/ρ (0) xx xx t = 28 nm Magnetotransport of thin flakes of FeSe. (a) Temperature dependence of the normalised zero-field resistance ρ(T)/ρ(300K) for a bulk crystal and different thin flake devices (t = 14-125 nm). Data are vertically offset and this panel is updated with new data from Ref. . (b) Inverse thickness t dependence of the superconducting transition temperature, Tc, and the structural transition temperature, Ts. Bulk values are shown on the left with light orange symbols. The dashed line is a fit to the Cooper model and the solid line is a guide to the eye for the changes in Ts with the thickness t . (c-f) The magnetic field dependence of the longitudinal and transverse components of the resistivity, ρxx and ρxy, at different constant temperatures for two devices with t=125 and t = 28 nm. and orbitally-dependent band shifts , becomes smeared and less defined for thinner flakes. Fig. 1(b) shows the varia- tion of Ts and Tc as a function of inverse thickness (1/t) for different devices, revealing that both are suppressed for thin- ner flakes; interestingly, we find a linear dependence between Ts and Tc, as found in Cu-substituted FeSe (see Fig. S4(b) in SI Appendix ). As these two parameters are correlated and are suppressed as the RRR ratio is reduced, it suggests that the two-dimensional confinement, enhanced fluctuations 3 and surface impurity scattering, play an important role in the suppression of Tc in thin flakes of FeSe . Low-field magnetotransport behaviour Figs. 1(c-f) show the field dependence of the longitudi- nal magnetoresistance normalized by the zero-field value, ρxx(B)/ρxx(0), and the Hall resistivity, ρxy, for two different devices with t =125 and 28 nm, respectively. FeSe is a multi- band stoichiometric compound in which charge compensation requires that n = ne = nh. At high temperatures in the tetrag- onal phase, the magnetotransport properties of bulk FeSe can be accurately described using a compensated two-band model, as detailed in the SI Appendix . This model corresponds to a hole pocket at the Brillouin zone centre and an electron pocket at the corner of the Brillouin zone . This two-band picture also describes the high temperature magnetotransport behaviour of thin flakes whereby the magnetoresistance does not saturate and ρxy shows a linear dependence on magnetic field (see Fig. S5 in the SI Appendix ). Inside the nematic phase (below 75 K), the Hall component ρxy of bulk crystals of FeSe displays non-linear behaviour in magnetic field and a negative slope and a deviation from the compensated two-band behaviour, whereas all thin flake devices display a positive Hall component in magnetic field (see also Fig. S5 in the SI Appendix ). To visualize the dif- ferences between the bulk and thin flakes, Fig. 2(c) shows the temperature dependence of the Hall coefficient, RH = ρxy/B in low magnetic fields (B < 1T). All the thin flake devices have a positive Hall coefficient below Ts suggesting that the transport behaviour becomes increasingly dominated by the hole-like carriers. We detect a local maximum in RH around 65 K for the t = 125 nm, which is close to the temperature at which the Hall coefficient of bulk FeSe and also the resistivity anisotropy under strain changes sign . These striking changes in transport behaviour could signify the de- velopment of anisotropic scattering effects inside the nematic phase which can be enhanced by lowering the temperature and reducing the thickness. The ρxy(B) component deviates from a linear dependence in magnetic field in the same tempera- ture regime (see corresponding derivatives in Fig. S5 in the SI Appendix ). However, linear dependence is detected at the lowest temperatures, in the regime of isotropic scattering caused mainly by impurities, and at the highest temperatures, where electron-phonon scattering becomes important, similar to other reports on thin flakes . Overall, the behaviour of the Hall coefficient in thin flakes of FeSe is in stark contrast to bulk FeSe, in which RH becomes negative below the nematic transition, as seen in Fig. 2c. Mobility spectrum To analyse in detail the origin of the changes inside the ne- matic phase, we perform a mobility-spectrum analysis of the bulk bulk e1 bulk e2 bulk a b d c e f B < 1 T Ts t = 125 nm 30 K 45 K 75 K 125 nm 14 nm T = 30 K 60 K 20 K e1 e2 e2 e1 bulk e1 max max The changes in the carrier mobilities with temperature. (a) Temperature dependence of the normalized mobility spectra to the maximum value s(μmax) of electron-like (negative) and hole- like (positive) carriers for a t =125 nm device. (b) A compari- son of the normalized mobility spectra to the to the maximum value s(μmax) for a bulk crystal and different thin flake devices of FeSe at T = 30 K. The spectra are vertically offset for clarity. Dotted line shows the mobilities of the electron charge carrier e1 and the ar- row indicates the highly mobile electron, e2, found only in the bulk. (c) The temperature dependence of the low field Hall coefficient RH (extracted for B < 1 T) for a bulk FeSe crystal and three thin flake devices. d) Temperature dependence of the carrier density extracted using a compensated two-carrier model n = ne = nh (see SI Ap- pendix ). Temperature dependence of carrier mobilities for (e) the hole-like carriers, μh, and (f) electron-like carriers, μe, for vari- ous samples. The data points for the bulk single crystals of FeSe and the three-carrier model parameters are from Ref. and the solid lines are guides to the eye. The vertical arrows indicate the position of Ts. magnetotransport data (Fig. 2). This approach has previously been successful in characterising the transport behaviour of bulk FeSe and other multi-band systems . The mod- 4 elling is based on the methodology detailed in Ref. , which eliminates the need for making a priori assumptions on the transport parameters in a multicarrier system and describes the mobility spectrum, s(μ)=eμn(μ), with the negative elec- tron charge assigned to a negative value of mobility. Fig. 2(a) shows the evolution of the normalised mobility spectrum s(μ)/s(μmax) for the t = 125 nm device as a function of tem- perature. The height of s(μ) could be linked to the variation of the number of carriers, n(μ), whereas the width of the peak of s(μ) relates to a distribution of relaxation times and the magnetic field resolution, such that μB < 1 (see Fig. S9 in the SI Appendix ). As a function of temperature, the mobility of positive charge carriers increases strongly with decreasing temperature reaching μh ∼ 1200 cm2V−1s−1 at 10 K. On the other hand, the electron mobility has a much weaker increase with decreasing temperature, and below 50 K the corresponding mobility peak position only shifts slightly from |μe1| ∼ 300(50) cm2V−1s−1. As the mobility of the holes is larger than that of electrons, it explains the positive sign of the Hall coefficient in thin flakes, shown in Fig. 2(c). Next, we compare the mobility spectrum of two different flake devices with those of the bulk crystal at 30 K, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The bulk mobility spectrum has a complex shape for the electron-like charge carriers, that could indicate the presence of an additional highly mobile electron band, e2, (or the existence of sharp changes in curvature of the Fermi surface for electron-like flower shape pockets in Fig. 4(b)), besides the mobility shoulder corresponding to the high car- rier density electron band, e1. This behaviour is in agreement with a previous report indicating a broad mobility spectrum for electrons, with the highly mobile carriers assigned as ultra- fast Dirac-like carriers in bulk FeSe . This highly mobile carrier, e2, is not visible in any of the thin flakes, even for the 125 nm flake which has a similar value of RRR to that of the bulk. This suggests a high sensitivity of the electronic structure, in particular the electron pockets, to reduced inter- layer coupling and enhanced two-dimensional confinement. Fig. 2(b) also shows that the mobilities of both electron and hole carriers in general decrease with the thickness of the flakes and reduced RRR ratio (see Fig. S4(c) in SI Appendix ). In the case of the thinnest flake with t = 14 nm, both the electron e1 and hole mobilities have been drastically re- duced, as compared to the bulk crystal (|μe1| = 80 and μh = 160 cm2V−1s−1 at 30 K). To provide quantitative insights into the behaviour of the charge carriers in the thin flakes, we simultaneously fit the two resistivity components, ρxx and ρxy, to the compensated two-band model using the values from the mobility spec- trum as starting parameters. Figs. 2(d-f) show the tempera- ture dependence of the carrier density n = nh = ne, and the field-independent mobilities μh and μe, compared with those for the bulk single crystals of FeSe . At high tem- peratures, the extracted values for n are similar to those of bulk samples, which show a relatively constant carrier den- sity of n ≈ 3 − 4 × 1020 cm−3. Unexpectedly, the carrier density shows a marked reduction of more than a factor of 2 at 45 K, before rapidly increasing back to the high tempera- ture value below 10 K. This drop in carrier density below Ts cannot be reconciled with the expectation that the Fermi sur- face pockets should only deform but not change size inside the nematic phase, in the absence of any spin-density wave order. This anomalous behaviour may be caused by the onset of strongly anisotropic scattering at the Fermi surfaces below Ts , arising from the presence of strong spin fluctuations , as different parts of the Fermi surfaces that are nested by the antiferromagnetic ordering vector will experience a dramatic increase in the scattering rate . The calculated drop in the effective carrier density, n, in the absence of any change in the Fermi surface volume, could be a manifestation of strongly anisotropic scattering inside the nematic phase or that some of the charge carriers become more localized and do not contribute to transport behaviour. However, n recov- ers its value in the low temperature limit for t=125 nm flake where the isotropic impurity scattering dominates, similar to the bulk behaviour . Figs. 2(e,f) show the extracted mobilities from the two-band analysis which confirms the striking difference in the mobil- ity behaviour of the two types of charge carriers (μh and μe1). For all the measured thin flake devices, the hole mobilities are much larger than those of electrons, exhibiting a simi- lar temperature dependence to that of the bulk band. There is a slightly decreased mobility of μh = 810 cm2V−1 s−1 at T =10 K for the t =28 nm sample, attributed to the increasing importance of surface scattering due to the increasing surface- to-volume ratio in thinner samples as well as the reduction of the residual resistivity ratio due to other extrinsic effects (ad- ditional scattering from charged centres in the SiO2 substrate). In contrast to the behaviour of the holes, the electron mobility of thin flakes displays a much weaker temperature dependence that deviates significantly from the bulk e1 value. Actually, the electron mobility plateaus in thin flake samples at low tem- peratures, as is clearly seen in the mobility data of Fig. 2(f). The contrasting behaviour of the mobilities of the holes and electrons is unexpected and correlates with the suppression of superconductivity in thin flakes in two-dimensions. This be- haviour in FeSe is different from that found in iron-pnictides where electrons are often more mobile than holes . Our findings are in broad agreement with the results of terahertz spectroscopy in FeSe thin films that detect that the scattering time of the hole carrier becomes substantially longer than that of the electron at lower temperatures . Highly mobile hole carriers were also found in the high-Tc phase of bulk FeSe un- der pressure . High-field magnetotransport Figs. 3(a) and (b) show the magnetotransport behaviour of a t = 58 nm flake in high magnetic fields up to 37.5 T. The Hall resistivity is observed to be strictly linear in magnetic field as expected for a perfectly compensated two-band sys- tem. However, the longitudinal magnetoresistance exhibits an 5 0 5 10 15 T (K) 0 20 40 60 xx ( cm) 20 30 40 -2 0 2 / bulk S1 bulk S2 20 30 40 B (T) -2 0 2 / xy flake t=58 nm xy e f g h T=0.37 K t=58 nm a b c d 1/B (1/T) T (K) F = 595 T 0 500 1000 0 1 2 A (a.u.) bulk S1 bulk S2 0 500 1000 F (T) 0 1 2 A (a.u.) flake t=58 nm B δ δ β γ α 0 10 20 30 (T) 0 10 20 30 40 50 xx ( cm) B||ab 4.28 K 3.3 K 2.1 K 1.36 K 1.11 K 0.9 K 0.67 K 0.36 K 0 10 20 30 B (T) 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 xy ( cm) B ||c 0 10 20 30 B (T) 0 50 100 150 xx ( cm) B ||c TFL as a function of B for a t = 58 nm flake at T = 0.37 K. The dashed lines are fits to a two-band model with μh= 1017 cm2V−1s−1 and μe= 231 cm2V−1s−1. (c) In-plane resistivity as a function of magnetic field at different fixed temperatures. (d) Low temperature zero-field resistivity is a linear fit to the data. The arrow indicates the crossover to a Fermi liquid T 2 behaviour below TFL (dotted line). (e) Quantum oscillations, ∆ρxy/ρxy, of the t = 58 nm flake and two bulk single crystals in ρxy for S1 and ρxx for S2. (f) The corresponding FFT spectra from (e) for the flake and the bulk sample. The amplitude of the oscillations of the t = 58 nm flake is multiplied by a factor of 10 in (e) and (f). (g) The temperature dependence of the oscillation amplitude for the t = 58 nm flake. A Lifshitz-Kosevich (LK) fit (solid line) yields an effective carrier mass of meff = 3.1(2)me for the hole pocket δ, located at the centre of the Brillouin zone. (h) The corresponding Dingle plot for the estimation of the slope which gives TD = 4.5(4) K. unconventional B1.6 dependence for different devices (Fig. S6 and Fig. S7 in the SI Appendix ), similar to that found in bulk FeSe at high magnetic fields . Fig. 3(c) shows in- plane magnetotransport studies that are not affected by orbital effects, as the current and magnetic field are parallel to each other; the linear high field extrapolation is used to access the low temperature normal resistivity, as shown in Fig. 3(d). We find that the low temperature resistivity has a linear temper- ature dependence to the lowest temperatures for most of the measured flakes (Figs. S7(f) and S8(b) in the SI Appendix ), except for the one which displays quantum oscillations, as shown in Fig. 3(d). A crossover transition to the Fermi liquid behaviour occurs below 5 K for t = 58 nm, but this crossover is highly sensitive to the degree of impurity scat- tering, as found in FeSe1−xSx and Cu-substituted FeSe . Linear dependence at the lowest temperature is found for a flake with t =100 nm (Fig. S7(f) in the SI Appendix ) and it describes the resistivity behaviour below 50 K for both orthorhombic directions in another flake in Fig. S8 in the SI Appendix . This behaviour is often a hallmark of scatter- ing by spin fluctuations in the vicinity of an antiferromagnetic critical point . At the lowest temperatures we have detected quantum os- cillations for one of the flakes with t = 58 nm, both in ρxx and ρxy components (Fig. 3(a) and (b)), with the amplitude of the signal in the Hall component being stronger. Fig. 3(e) shows quantum oscillations in the ρxy component having an amplitude a factor of 10 smaller than bulk single crystals . The fast Fourier transform (FFT) spectra help to iden- tify the extremal areas of the Fermi surface pockets normal to the applied magnetic field, Aki, via the Onsager relation, Fi = Akiħ/(2πe) . The low temperature experimental Fermi surface of FeSe is composed of one warped cylindri- cal hole band at Γ with oscillation frequencies β (kz = 0, F = 164 T) and δ (kz = π/c, F = 664 T), and potentially two warped cylindrical electron Fermi surfaces that are lo- cated at the corners of the Brillouin zone (see Fig. 3(f) and Fig. 4(b)) . Fig. 3(f) shows the dominant oscilla- tion frequency of the t =58 nm thin flake is 595 T, which is likely to correspond to the largest orbit at the Z point of the hole band δ. The signal from the hole bands was also found to be dominant in the ρxy for bulk crystals . The observed reduction in the size of the extremal area of the Fermi sur- face of the thin flake could suggest a reduction of kz warping due to an increase in the degree of two-dimensionality in the thin flakes. The cyclotron-averaged effective masses of the 6 quasiparticles extracted from the temperature dependence of the amplitude of the quantum oscillations in Fig. 3(g) (using raw data from Fig. S6(a) in the SI Appendix ) is found to be ∼ 3.1(2) me, slightly lighter than ∼ 4.5(1) me, found for the bulk δ pocket . Scattering In order to quantify how the amplitude of quantum os- cillations is affected by impurity scattering, we estimate the Dingle temperature, TD, as shown in Fig. 3(h) and detailed in the SI Appendix and Ref. . The slope gives a TD = 4.5(4) K which corresponds to a quantum mean free path of lq ∼ 140 ̊A for the t = 58 nm device. The quantum scattering time, τq = ħ/(2πkBTD), corresponds to the time taken to fully randomise the linear momentum of an electron; it is found to be τq = 0.27(2) ps, corresponding to a quantum hole mobility of μq ∼ 158 cm2/Vs. This quantum scattering time for the δ hole pocket is almost a factor of 3 shorter than in bulk FeSe, where τq = 0.7(1) ps, as shown in Fig. S2 in the SI Appendix . This could indicate an increase in the impurity and surface scattering in this thin flake, as its RRR is smaller than the bulk (Fig. 4(b)). Furthermore, the classi- cal mobility from the two-band model yields a value close to μh =1017 cm2V−1 s−1, corresponding to a classical scatter- ing time of τh ∼1.8 ps, using the effective mass from quan- tum oscillations of 3.1(2) me. The large difference (a factor of 6) between the two scattering occurs due to the sensitivity of the quantum mobility to both small and large angle scattering events, while the transport mobility is mainly dominated by large angle scattering . DISCUSSION The unconventional behaviour in magnetotransport of thin flakes of FeSe suggests the strong sensitivity of the quasipar- ticle scattering and Fermi surface inside the nematic phase (Fig. 4(a)). Below Ts, there are significant changes in the shape of the Fermi surface caused by orbitally-band depen- dent shifts . The 3D hole pocket, centered at the Z point, is pushed below the Fermi level due to orbital or- dering, and the in-plane pockets become strongly elongated (Fig. 4(a)). This change of the in-plane anisotropy is not ex- pected to change the carrier density, n, by a factor of 2 inside the nematic phase , which normally occurs when the Fermi surface undergoes a significant reconstruction, as for BaFe2As2 in the presence of the SDW phase . Thus, the drastic changes in the Hall coefficient and carrier densities of FeSe, imply either that certain charge carriers inside the ne- matic phase scatter much more, or get redistributed onto more localized dxy bands, and thus do not participate in conduction. Additionally, the small quasi-two dimensional Fermi surface pockets could also suffer topological changes inside the ne- matic phase (Fig. 4b), as found in thin films of FeSe or 0 50 100 T (K) -20 -10 0 10 20 RH (10-9 m3/C) t=125 nm bulk S3 bulk S4 hole transport electron transport impurity scattering nematic scattering high T scattering T* γ Z δ Q a b d d d xy yz xz γ,α Ts Fv γ,α A dence of the Hall coefficient in bulk single crystals (S3 from Ref. and S4 from ) as compared with a clean t = 125 nm flake of FeSe, with similar RRR ∼ 32 value (Fig. S4(c) in the SI Appendix ). The potential different regimes of scattering are illustrated by different coloured regions, as detailed in Ref. . Inside the ne- matic phase, the orbital ordering and spin-orbit coupling can gener- ate sizable in-plane anisotropy in susceptibility below T ∗ ). (b) Schematic Fermi surface of FeSe at low temperatures based on quan- tum oscillations for kz = π/c . The electron orbits in the corner of the Brillouin zone reflect different representations induced by orbital ordering, spin-orbit coupling and strain [13, 53–55], from two electron pockets (top corners) to a single peanut pocket (bottom right) or a single peanut with two small pockets (bottom left). The small arrows indicate the variation of the Fermi velocity when the magnetic field is normal to the plane of the pocket that could gen- erate electron and hole contributions to the Hall effect . The dominant orbital character of the Fermi surface is shown in the top left corner. Hot spots can be generated at the crossing point between elliptical electron pockets . induced by small applied strain . The Hall coefficient, in the low field limit, is very sensi- tive to the momentum-dependent scattering and the curvature of the Fermi surface. The Fermi surface topology and the changes in curvature from convex to concave around a pocket, 7 leads to the variation of the scattering path vector, lk = vFτk. The enclosed area swept by the lk vector, as k moves around the Fermi surface, will change sign, which directly affects the sign of the Hall conductivity (see Fig. S10 in the SI Appendix ). The Fermi surface of FeSe at low temper- atures has an elliptical hole pocket and one or two electron pockets, as represented in Fig. 4(b). The difference between the Hall coefficient of bulk and thin flakes in Fig. 4(a) could be linked to a topological change of the Fermi surface, in- duced by orbital ordering ; this could transform a flower- shape pocket, with convex and concave curvatures and nega- tive Hall coefficient, into an elongated ellipse in thin flakes, with a convex curvature that gives a positive Hall coefficient (Fig. 4(b) and Fig. S10 in the SI Appendix ). The small electron pocket e2 pocket of the bulk (α pocket) is absent in the mobility spectrum of thin flakes of FeSe. As the inner electron band is located very close to the Fermi level, it is highly sensitive to small changes in energy (∼ 3meV), upon reducing the thickness of the flakes, and under applied uniax- ial strain. This pocket already disappears in thin films of FeSe (Fig. 4(b)), due to the orbital and momentum-dependent energy splitting at the M point that is larger for thin films (∼ 70 meV) than in bulk (∼ 50 meV) . Further- more, ARPES studies of bulk FeSe under strain, that probe the surface and bulk layers up to ∼ 10 ̊A , usually detects a single electron pocket in the corner of the Brillouin zone that can be induced by applied strain (Fig. 4(b)). The strong disparity between the hole and electron mobil- ities behaviour (up to a factor of 6 at 10 K), and the obser- vation of the rather temperature-independent mobility of the electron carriers below 50 K could imply an enhancement of the orbitally-averaged effective masses and/or orbitally- dependent scattering that affect mainly the electron pockets. The proximity to a van-Hove singularity caused by orbitally- dependent shifts in FeSe can also amplify the small angle scattering processes for the electron pockets. Using the low temperature mobility values of electrons of μe= 231 cm2/(Vs) and τ ∼ 1.8 ps, from the two-band model (Fig. 3(a) and (b)) one can estimate the effective mass to be ∼ 13 me for the t = 58 nm flake. This value is much larger than the orbitally- averaged effective mass of ∼ 7 me of the electron pocket γ for bulk crystals (Fig. 4(b)) and it would be difficult to detect experimentally in quantum oscillations (Fig. 3(f)). Assuming that the effective masses of heavy electrons are the same for the bulk and thin flakes, then the changes in mobilities be- tween electron and hole carriers could reflect an anisotropy in scattering (classical scattering time being ∼ 0.9 ps for elec- trons and 1.8 ps for holes). Interestingly, the effective mass extracted from ARPES studies is much smaller, ∼ 1me for a single momentum direction and it can be enhanced in thin films and flakes of FeSe up to ∼ 4me both using K-dosing of FeSe and ionic liquid gating . Orbitally-dependent band shifts and renormalizations were detected previously in FeSe, with the dominant dxy hole band being the most renor- malized by a factor of 8 as compared with a factor 2.5-3.5 for the dxz and dyz orbitals . Interestingly, the part of the electron pockets with dxy character can become completely incoherent (Fig. 4(b)) and hard to detect in surface-sensitive experiments . Alternatively, there is an exchange of dxy spectral weight from one electron pockets towards the other electron pocket, as suggested by recent ARPES studies un- der strain . Furthermore, the orbitally-dependent pairing between electron and hole pockets was detected from surface studies using STM measurements of FeSe . The Hall coefficient RH of FeSe increases with decreas- ing temperature and has an inflection point at T ∗ ∼ 75 K, for both bulk and thin flakes, as shown in Fig. 4(a). On cooling RH starts deviating and n is significantly reduced inside the nematic phase, as if there is a loss of available charge carriers. (Fig. 2(d)). At the temperature T ∗, ap- plied strain has the weakest effect on resistivity and the trans- port anisotropy changes sign . The change in resistiv- ity anisotropy coincides also with the temperature at which a large anisotropy develops in the local spin susceptibility . Thus, the anisotropy of the local magnetism affects the quasiparticle scattering and the coherent coupling between lo- cal spins and itinerant electrons. The sign of the Hall co- efficient is always positive in thin flakes but negative in the bulk below ∼ 60 K, despite having similar RRR values. The Hall coefficient is also positive in Cu-substituted FeSe with large impurity scattering and in thin films of FeSe1−xSx . Furthermore, it also becomes positive by us- ing the isoelectronic sulphur substitution in single crystals of FeSe1−xSx (for x > 0.11) , due to subtle changes in the band structure and spin-fluctuation scattering . At lowest temperature, there is a crossover from inelastic to impurity-dominated scattering, when the n value normally re- covers to the high-temperature tetragonal case (Fig. 4(a)). The very large increase in RH observed in the thinnest t = 14 nm flake resembles the behaviour of thin films of FeSe with lower RRR values . Recently, it was shown theoretically that the impurity scattering in FeSe can give rise to anisotropic scattering and anisotropy in resistivity . Furthermore, a strong role of orbital-differentiation on the temperature de- pendence of RH has also been found in other systems, like Sr2RuO4 and FeCrAs . Despite the lack of long-range magnetic order in FeSe, there is a large energy range of magnetic fluctuations due to the relatively small spin-fluctuation bandwidth together with the low-carrier density . In zero-magnetic field in thin flakes, we detect a linear resistivity below 50 K in most flakes, (Fig. S8(b) in the SI Appendix ) except in the cleanest samples in which a crossover to Fermi liquid be- haviour occurs, Fig. 3(d). The linear resistivity occurs for both orthorhombic directions consistent with scattering by critical antiferromagnetic fluctuations in the presence of dis- order which is strongly enhanced at hot spots on the Fermi surface where the nesting is perfect (Fig. 4(b)) . In the presence of spin fluctuations, the quasiparticle cur- rents dressed by vertex corrections acquire the character of the majority carriers and lead to a larger absolute Hall coeffi- cient with a marked temperature dependence . Addition- 8 ally, the localization of electrons could be enhanced by spin- fluctuations that affect interband scattering between ellipti- cal electron pockets, like the N`eel-type fluctuations, as com- pared with interband stripe order fluctuations between holes and electrons (Fig. 4(b)). Short-range, weak N`eel fluctuations strongly suppress the s± superconducting state and can lead to a low-Tc d-wave state . CONCLUDING REMARKS In summary, we have performed a detailed study of elec- tronic transport of high quality FeSe thin flakes and identify an unusual localization effect of negative charge carriers in- side the nematic phase. This disparity between hole and elec- trons emphasizes the anomalous transport inside the nematic phase, driven by the subtle interplay between the changes in the electronic structure of a multi-band system and the un- usual scattering processes induced by orbital-dependent en- hanced correlations and/or anisotropic spin fluctuations. The two-dimensional confinement of thin flakes affects the mobil- ity of the electron-like carriers significantly but also plays a role in their superconductivity which is suppressed. These ef- fects emphasize the complexity and sensitivity of the electron pockets in FeSe-based systems which are involved in the sta- bilization of a two-dimensional high-Tc superconductivity via electron doping induced by interfacial effects or dosing. Materials and Methods. Thin FeSe flakes were mechani- cally exfoliated from high quality single crystals onto silicone elastomer polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) stamps. Flakes of suitable geometry and thickness were then transferred onto Si/SiO2 (300 nm oxide) substrates with pre-patterned Au- contacts using a dry transfer set-up housed in a nitrogen glove- box with an oxygen and moisture content <1 ppm. To min- imise environmental exposure, a capping layer of thin (∼20 nm) hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) was transferred on top of the FeSe flake. The thickness of each sample was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM) after all magneto- transport measurements had been performed. Magnetotrans- port measurements at temperatures down to 2 K and magnetic fields up to 16 T were performed using a Quantum Design Physical Property Measurement system (PPMS) in Oxford, with high field measurements performed at the High Field Magnet Laboratory in Nijmegen (up to 37.5 T) in a Helium-3 cryostat. The magnetoresistance and Hall resistivity contribu- tions were separated by symmetrizing and antisymmetrizing the data obtained in positive and negative magnetic fields. The non-ideal flake and contact geometries were accounted for by numerically evaluating the resistance to resistivity conversion factors. Details of these calculations are provided in the Sup- plementary Information (Fig. S1 in the SI Appendix ).