Topological Phases in Coupled Polyyne Chains Nisa Ara1, вҲ— and Rudranil Basu1, вҖ  1Department of Physics, Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani, Zuarinagar, Goa 403726, India We study the electronic properties of coupled parallel Polyyne chains in a couple of symmetric stacking arrangements, namely the AA stacking and the stacking AB, with the single and triple carbon bonds of one chain aligned (AA) and anti-aligned (AB) with those of the other chain.Both these arrangements described by tight binding Hamiltonians, whose parameters are calibrated by matching low energy dispersion provided by first principle calculations, fall in the BDI class of topological classification scheme. We calculate the topological invariants for all the three topological phases of the system: one for the AA stacking and 2 for the AB one. In the AA stacking, both the insulating and the metallic phase belongs to the same topological phase. Whereas, the model exhibits two different values of the topological invariant in the two different insulating phases (structurally differentiated by transverse strain). In this later stacking though transition between two distinct topological phases with the closure of the gap is practically unachievable due requirement of high amount of transverse strain. We also show existence of 4 non-zero energy edge modes in the AA stacking and that of 2 zero energy edge modes in one of the topological phases for the AB stacking. INTRODUCTION Being one dimensional, the Su-Schrieffer-Heeger (SSH) model probably is the simplest system with crys- talline symmetry, showing non-trivial, gapped topolog- ical phases [1вҖ“3]. Real systems, ranging from the origi- nal hydro-carbon polyacetylene chain, the pure carbon Polyyne to the artificially prepared array of photonic crystals or array of cold atoms can be modelled by the SSH Hamiltonian [4вҖ“8]. For polyacetylene, the two dif- ferent topological phases are realized via two different dimerizations[9вҖ“11]. Controlled by two alternate hop- ping parameters, the phases are distinguished by their ratio, whereas the critical point corresponds to the ratio to be unit and closure of the band gap in its electronic structure . Recently, richer structures in bulk conductivity of a system of a coupled Polyyne chains were predicted via first principle calculations, supported by tight binding computation . For realistic spatial separation be- tween the chains, the system becomes conducting for a highly symmetric stacking (we call that AA, keep- ing in mind the convention used in multi-layer graphene literature), caused by inter-chain van der Waals cou- pling. However, a drastic gap opening happens as one slides one chain with respect to the other, hence break- ing particle hole symmetry. Eventually the particle hole symmetry is restored if the sliding is large enough and one gets another commensurate stacking (AB). This par- ticular stacking, in the context of polyacetylene, can be thought of as a coupled chain with altered dimerization. For AB stacked Polyyne ladder, we perform a first prin- ciple calculation matching against a tight binding one for low energy states of bands near the Fermi level. Topologically non-trivial Hamiltonians are classified in вҲ— p20210035@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in вҖ  rudranilb@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in 10 classes based on the discrete symmetries - time re- versal (T), charge conjugation (C) and chiral symmetry (S). SSH chain are symmetric under all these transfor- mations and falls in the BDI class with T 2 = C2 = 1 and S = TC. The coupled Polyyne chain sys- tem in AA and AB stackings are described by drasti- cally different coupled SSH Hamiltonians, despite both enjoying the T, C, S symmetries and falling in the 1- dimensional BDI class. The various topological phases within the 1-dimensional BDI class are characterized by the first fundamental group of the space of Hamiltonians and these are integer valued, succinctly captured by the winding number known as Zak phase . For chains with open boundary condition, presence of modes of the Hamiltonian localized at the edge of the system is an- other way to probe topologically non-trivial nature of a system . In the present work we characterize the various topo- logical phases of the coupled Polyyne chains for the AA and the AB stacking. We observe that irrespective of the distance between the chains in the AA stacking, and hence oblivious to the fact whether the system is in metallic or insulating, the Zak phase remains fixed. We also notice finite energy edge modes in the insulating regime of AA stacking case. However, in the AB stacking, the system remains insulating with a gap-closure taking place at certain proximity of the chains and again getting back to the insulating phase for further decrease in the inter-chain distance. These two insulating phases have two different Zak phases. Zero energy edge modes are present in that topological phase in AB stacking, which is characterized by larger separation and hence weaker inter-chain van-der Waals coupling. However, the zero- energy modes disappear in the other phase, which can be accessible by strong inter-chain coupling and hence by bringing the chains too close (in comparison to the Polyyne bond lengths). The organization of the paper is as follows. In sec- tion I, we discuss about the model, demonstrating with the coupled chain system in both the AA and AB stack- arXiv:2212.01058v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 2 Dec 2022 2 ing, write their corresponding Hamiltonian and energy dispersion relations. We show the matching of the tight binding results with ab-initio calculation for the AB case here, at the level of dispersion relation. In section II, we present the Zak phase calculations. In section III, we present analytical calculations of the edge modes. I. THE MODEL A single carbon Polyyne chain is composed of carbon atoms with alternate triple and single bonds [21вҖ“24]. Single Polyyne chain has a unit cell, consisting of two sublattices a( Мғa) and b( Мғb). The lattice spacing is A. We consider unequal nearest neighbour (NN) hopping ampli- tudes with equal site separation length which is an off-set to bond length alternation in the chain. To work with two coupled carbon chains we also introduce inter-chain hopping amplitudes (NN only) which are effectively due to van der Waals interactions. The two symmetric stack- ings of coupled carbon chains are shown in the Fig. 1(a) and (b). The unit cell has four lattice sites, and lattice period as A. In the AA stacking, the triple bonds and the single bonds of the chains are aligned next to each other, whereas the pattern is altered in the AB stacking. These models are comparable to coupled SSH chains or the SSH ladder in [25вҖ“27]. A. AA Stacking In Fig. 1(a) we have two carbon chains in perfect AA stacking. The intra-chain hopping parameters are t1 = 3.682 eV and t2 = 3.92 eV as obtained from the first principle calculations . The tight binding Hamiltonian for this system is HAA =t1 пҝҪ p aвҖ  pbp + t2 пҝҪ p aвҖ  p+1bp + t1 пҝҪ p МғaвҖ  p Мғbp+ t2 пҝҪ p МғaвҖ  p+1 Мғbp + Оі1 пҝҪ p ( МғaвҖ  pap + МғbвҖ  pbp) + h.c. (1) Apart from time reversal and charge conjugation, Hamil- tonian has on-site chiral symmetry, i.e. under transfor- mations a вҶ’ вҲ’a and Мғb вҶ’ вҲ’ Мғb, H вҶ’ вҲ’H. The tight binding Hamiltonian in Fourier space is HAA = пҝҪ k ОЁвҖ  k пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 f Оі1 0 f вҲ— 0 0 Оі1 Оі1 0 0 f 0 Оі1 f вҲ— 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё ОЁk, (2) where ОЁвҖ  k = (cвҖ  k dвҖ  k МғcвҖ  k МғdвҖ  k) is a four-component fermion and f = t1 + t2eвҲ’iAk. The four energy bands are given by, Оө = Вұ|f| Вұ Оі1. We write the Hamiltonian kernel in terms of Pauli-matrices (3) The inter-chain NN hopping parameter has been mod- elled to acquire a gaussian dependence on the sepa- ration of the chains d , Оі1(d) = t0 exp пҝҪ вҲ’ d2 Оә0d0 2 пҝҪ , (4) here d0 = 3.78 МҠA is the relaxed inter-chain separation and Оә0 = 0.4 is the gaussian width controlling parameter and t0 = 3.063 eV gives best match for energy bands to that of obtained from first principle calculations . The system is insulating for Оі1 < |t1 вҲ’ t2|, whereas for Оі1 вүҘ |t1 вҲ’ t2| the lowest energy conduction and the valence bands cross and we find couple of nodal points as shown in Fig. 1(c). B. AB stacking We obtain AB stacking by sliding one of the chains by keeping them parallel to obtain opposite dimeriza- tion as shown in Fig. 1(b). Since we are considering only inter-chain NN hopping, couplings between different sub- lattice sites contribute. A very similar stacking has been discussed in as coupled SSH chains (ladder sys- tem). The tight binding Hamiltonian for this system is HAB =t1 пҝҪ p aвҖ  pbp + t2 пҝҪ p aвҖ  p+1bp+ t1 пҝҪ p МғaвҖ  p Мғbp + t2 пҝҪ p МғaвҖ  p+1 Мғbp+ Оі2 пҝҪ p aвҖ  p+1 Мғbp + Оі3 пҝҪ p МғaвҖ  pbp + h.c. (5) AB stacking preserves all the symmetries that are in AA case (Hamiltonian has on-site chiral symmetry under transformations a вҶ’ вҲ’a and Мғa вҶ’ вҲ’ Мғa). The tight binding Hamiltonian in Fourier space is (considering Оі2 = Оі3). HAB = пҝҪ k ОЁвҖ  k пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 f 0 Оі2g f вҲ— 0 Оі2 0 0 Оі2 0 f Оі2gвҲ— 0 f вҲ— 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё ОЁk. (6) where g = eвҲ’iAk. In terms of Pauli-matrices the Hamil- tonian kernel in (6) is, Re(f)1 вҠ— Пғx + Im(f)1 вҠ— Пғy. (7) We get four bands ОөвҖІ=Вұ пҝҪ |f|2 + Оі22 Вұ 2Оі2(t1 + t2) cos | Ak 2 |. In AB stacking as shown in Fig. 1(b) Мғap is at very small slide distance (Оҙ1 вҲ’ Оҙ2) with respect to bp and ap+1 coincides with Мғbp. From the point of view of first principle calculations this is a small alteration in the position of one of the sub-lattice sites (in one of the 3 stacking we slide the lower chain (towards left for) for slid distance Оҙ1. Bulk band structures for (c) AA stacking, (d) AB stacking. As explained in the section I B, there are two edge modes. The izable for the coupled Polyyne chain because that will require bringing the chain too close, as explained below. The closing and opening up of the band gap clearly signals a topological phase transition in this model. chains). We obtain the band structure for inter-chain distance d = 3.55 МҠA to compare with the same obtained for AA stacking and system is insulating as shown in Fig. 1(d). According to the energy spectrum obtained from (6), the system is in an insulating phase for Оі2 < (t1 + t2) and Оі2 > (t1 + t2) where transition happens for Оі2 = (t1 + t2). The band gap closes at the center of the first Brillioun zone exhibiting semi-metallic behaviour. As in the AA stacking case, we assume the inter-chain hopping parameter Оі2 to have the same gaussian dependence as described in (4). However for large Оі2, such that Оі2 > (eV) t1 t2 Оі1 Оі2 Оі3 0 0 AB 0 Tight binding parameters, used for the determi- nation of topological invariants and edge modes. t0 (the values are comparable to that calculated for the previous model), inter-chain distance obtained in such case is not real; since d2 = вҲ’Оәd0 2 ln | Оі2 t0 |. Therefore semi- metallic and insulating phases observed for Оі вүҘ (t1 + t2) are not physically achievable with the same Gaussian model. Computational Details We obtain the tight-binding parameters for AB stack- ing by density functional theory (DFT) technique based on the PBE implemented in Quantum espresso package . We fix the inter-chain distance as 3.55 МҠA. The Brillouin zone is sampled with k-point grids 12 Г— 1 Г— 1 and the basis set is plane waves with a maximum ki- netic energy of 250 eV. We plot two energy bands in the proximity of the Fermi level and match with that of obtained from tight binding calculations and we get t1 = 3.78 eV and t2 = 3.92 eV. The above mentioned first principle DFT calculations predict the existence of the kinks/ nodal points away from the Fermi level as in the Fig. 1 (d). The existence of the kinks necessitates Оі2 = Оі3. Matching for the Fermi velocity and the loca- tion of the kinks, from the bands obtained from the tight binding kernel, then gives Оі2 = Оі3 = 0.27 eV. 4 II. TOPOLOGICAL INVARIANTS Here we calculate the Zak phase for the system in two distinct stacking as described in the earlier section. We sum over Zak phases obtained for occupied bands: ОҰ = i пҝҪ ПҖ A вҲ’ПҖ A пҝҪ iвҲҲoccupied вҹЁXi| d dk |Xiвҹ©dk. (8) Here |Xвҹ© are the k dependent eigenvectors of the Hamil- tonian kernel. A. AA Stacking The ortho-normal eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian ker- nel HAA in (2) describing AA stacking are |XAA 1,2 вҹ© = 1 2 пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ ВұeвҲ’iОёk Вұ1 eвҲ’iОёk 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , |XAA 3,4 вҹ© = 1 2 пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ вҲ“eвҲ’iОёk Вұ1 вҲ’eвҲ’iОёk 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , (9) where Оёk = tanвҲ’1 пҝҪ t2 sin(kA) t1 + t2 cos(kA) пҝҪ . (10) The Zak phase calculated as sum of the contributions from the occupied bands labelled as 3,4 is quantized as 2ПҖ. Interestingly, the Zak phase is not affected by Оі1. To understand this, we can view the Hamiltonian ker- nel (3) as the Hamiltonian of a couple of spin 1/2 parti- cles, the first one being subject to a constant magnetic field B1 вҲј (Оі1, 0, 0) and the second one in a varying (here the crystal momentum k plays the role of time) one B2 вҲј (Re(f), Im(f), 0). The second spin acquires a Berry (Zak) phase in adiabatic completion of one cycle 0 < k вүӨ 2ПҖ/A, while the second one doesnвҖҷt, it being affected by a constant magnetic field. Hence whatever Zak phase the system acquires through a full traversal of the Brilloiun comes from the contribution of the second spin and is not impacted by Оі1. Therefore the Zak phase is same as that of a single SSH chain with the particular dimerization of t2 > t1. As Оі1 increases, starting from the insulating phase, with the the chains being brought closer, at certain point the gap closes and any further increase of Оі1 doesnвҖҷt open up the gap. This is also a reconfirmation of the fact that the point Оі1 = |t1 вҲ’ t2| is not a topological phase transition point. B. AB stacking As we slide the chain for a small slid distance (< Оҙ1) band gap opens and the particle hole symmetry breaks (a) There are four edge modes with energies ВұОі1 isolated from the bulk for Оі1 < |t1вҲ’t2| 2 , isolated from the bulk of the spectrum; (b) edge modes merge with the bulk for Оі1 вүҘ |t1вҲ’t2| 2 . and this system no longer falls under BDI topological class. However the particle hole symmetry is restored for the AB model described in the previous section. Hence we expect quantized values for the Zak phase. In order to proceed, we use the eigenvectors of the AB stacking kernel corresponding to the occupied bands, as written in the Appendix. Numerical integration yields the Zak phase coming from the sum of the contributions of the occupied bands as: ОҰAB = пҝҪ 3ПҖ, Оі2 < (t1 + t2) 2ПҖ, Оі2 > (t1 + t2). It can be seen that depending on the value of Оі2, topo- logical invariant can be 2ПҖ or 3ПҖ representing different topological phases. III. EDGE MODES Unlike in the previous case, where we used periodic boundary conditions (PBC), we will work with open boundary conditions (OBC) to capture the physics of edge modes of the coupled Polyyne chains. A. Finite edge modes in AA stacking To start-off with, we consider a finite chain and using the parameters found by DFT calculations, we found fi- nite energy isolated modes, which we first describe below. For the AA stacked case, letвҖҷs first focus on the situ- ation, where Оі1 = 0, ie. two decoupled Polyyne chains with OBC. It is well known that a single SSH chain has a couple of zero energy edge modes. Hence it is expected that the decoupled system will have four of them. After turning on finite Оі1, but still keeping the system insulat- ing, i.e. Оі1 < |t1 вҲ’ t2|, we find modes of energy exactly equal to Вұ|Оі1|, two are +|Оі1| and other two are вҲ’|Оі1| iso- lated from the bulk. Increase in Оі1 makes their energies move away from the Fermi level and merge with the bulk spectrum for Оі1 = |t1вҲ’t2| 2 . This is displayed in the Fig. 3. 5 As we have seen for the PBC, since the Zak phase does not change with the inter chain hopping parameter, we expect that the existence of the edge modes shouldnвҖҷt be affected by the value of Оі1. In order to understand this phenomena analytically and to see that these finite energy modes are indeed localized at the edges, we write the basis which di- agonalizes the Hamiltonian kernel in (2) as ПҲвҖ  k = (ОұвҖ  k ОІвҖ  k МғОұвҖ  k МғОІвҖ  k), where ОұвҖ  k = 1 2(eвҲ’iОёkcвҖ  k вҲ’ dвҖ  k вҲ’ eвҲ’iОёk МғcвҖ  k + МғdвҖ  k). Consider a finite chain for P unit cells, such that the spatial modes b0, Мғb0, aP +1, and МғaP +1 are not accessible states to the system. Using cвҖ  k = 1 вҲҡ P пҝҪ p eikApaвҖ  p etc. we have ОұвҖ  k = 1 2 вҲҡ P пҝҪ p (ei(kApвҲ’Оёk)aвҖ  p вҲ’ e(ikAp)bвҖ  pвҲ’ ei(kApвҲ’Оёk) МғaвҖ  p + e(ikAp) МғbвҖ  p). (11) We can invert the above equation and express the real space oscillators in terms of ОұkвҖҷs. However, in order to achieve the boundary conditions of having no finite ex- citation arising from the b0 etc. modes, it is better to choose a different basis consisting of only real sinusoidal coefficients rather than the complex phases. This can be done by choosing a linear combination of ОұвҖ  k and ОұвҖ  вҲ’k leading to the new basis of modes as ОөвҖ  k = 1 вҲҡ 2(ОұвҖ  k вҲ’ОұвҖ  вҲ’k). Now (11) becomes ОөвҖ  k = i вҲҡ 2P пҝҪ p [sin (kAp вҲ’ Оёk)aвҖ  p вҲ’ sin (kAp)bвҖ  pвҲ’ sin (kAp вҲ’ Оёk) МғaвҖ  p + sin (kAp) МғbвҖ  p]. (12) If the modes whose energies are isolated from the bulk spectrum have to qualify as edge modes, their corre- sponding labelling in Fourier space must be given by com- plex wave-number k = k0 + iО». Finite О» results in a new scale О¶ = 1/О», which in turn is the localization depth of the isolated modes in the bulk of the chain. This phe- nomenon is similar to the attenuation of the electromag- netic wave at the surface of the conductor. Substituting k = k0 + iО» in (12), we get: ОөвҖ  k = i вҲҡ 2P пҝҪ p (ОҪkaвҖ  p вҲ’ sin [(k0 + iО»)Ap]bвҖ  p вҲ’ ОҪk МғaвҖ  p+ sin [(k0 + iО»)Ap] МғbвҖ  p), (13) where , (14) and |f( Мғk)| = Вұt2 пҝҪпҝҪt1 t2 пҝҪ2 + 1 + 2 пҝҪt1 t2 пҝҪ cos (k0 + iО»)A. (15) We demand the coefficients of b0, Мғb0, aP +1, and МғaP +1 in (13) to vanish. It follows therefore that t1 t2 = вҲ’ sin [A(k0 + iО»)P] sin [A(k0 + iО»)(P + 1)]. (16) Since t1 t2 and |f(k)| are real, we have k0 = ПҖ A, and (16) gives t1 t2 = sinh [О»P A] sinh [О»(P +1)A]. This gives the energy of the edge localized mode as: Оө = вҲ’Оі1 вҲ’ |f(k0 + iО»)| = вҲ’Оі1 вҲ’ t2 sinh [О»A] sinh [О»(P + 1)A]. Existence of Мғk hence proves existence of an edge mode. When О¶ вүӘ PA, |f| = 0 and therefore edge states are exactly -|Оі1| as expected by fi- nite numerical analysis earlier. Similarly we find another edge mode with energy -Оі1 and two more with energy +Оі1 by choosing appropriate basis in ОІвҖ  k, МғОұвҖ  k and МғОІвҖ  k, as we showed for ОұвҖ  k in (11). Therefore there are four finite edge modes as shown in Fig. 3. From the dispersion rela- tions coming from (2), we see that the valance band max- imum and conduction band minimum are respectively вҲ“Оі1 Вұ |t1 вҲ’ t2|. A curious take home message from this analysis is that although the edge modes cease to appear as isolated ones in the whole spectrum as Оі1 вҶ’ |t1вҲ’t2|+ 2 , they still are edge modes. B. Zero energy modes in AB stacking Consider the chains with open boundary conditions, with P unit cells in each chain. To obtain the perfect dimerization, we discard sites with no inter-chain hop- ping, appearing at the edges due to sliding and we keep only even number of sites in each chain we again discard two sites from one of the edges. For example in Fig. 1 (b), we discard a1, Мғb3, b3 and Мғa3. This results into 2(P вҲ’ 1) sites in each chain. In this stacking arrangement, one of the chains is in dimerization as (t1 < t2) which favours the existence of zero edge modes while other chain is in opposite dimer- ization where no such modes exist. Therefore unlike AA stacking, here we get exactly two zero energy modes. For a finite number of sites, we numerically diagonalize the Hamiltonian kernel (5) to find a couple of eigenvalues isolated from the bulk spectrum, for the parameters in the table I. These approach zero energy with increasing number of sites as shown in Fig. 2(a). For more generic aspects and the fates of these zero modes as one tunes Оі2 we carry out the following analysis. For large P (P вҶ’ вҲһ), we consider that there exists a zero energy mode of the Hamiltonian kernel as shown in (21) in the appendix, with the corresponding eigenvector being(Оұ1 Оұ2 Оұ3 . . . Оұ4(NвҲ’1)). The zero-eigenvalue condition gives us the two following recurrence relations t2Оұ2n+1 + Оі2Оұ2n+3 + t1Оұ2n+5 = 0 for n = 0, 1 . . . (17) t1Оұ2n + Оі2Оұ2n+2 + t2Оұ2n+4 = 0 for n = 1, 2 . . . (18) 6 For the sake of simplicity, we label the odd components as Оұ2n+1 вүЎ Bn and the even components as Оұ2n вүЎ Dn. We obtain solutions for (17) and (18), Bn = C1 пҝҪвҲ’Оі2 + Оә 2t1 пҝҪn + C2 пҝҪвҲ’Оі2 вҲ’ Оә 2t1 пҝҪn , (19a) Dn = C3 пҝҪвҲ’Оі2 + Оә 2t2 пҝҪn + C4 пҝҪвҲ’Оі2 вҲ’ Оә 2t2 пҝҪn , (19b) where Оә = пҝҪ Оі22 вҲ’ 4t1t2 and C1, C2, C3 and C4 are un- determined coefficients, out of which, two can be fixed i.e. C1 = C3 = 1, with C2 and C4 remaining un- determined. Since the eigenvector should be normaliz- able for the zero-mode to exist, we must have the sum пҝҪP off with we focus on the range Оі22 < 4t1t2. As shown in the appendix 3, the series converges. On the other hand, if we focus on the case Оі22 > 4t1t2, convergence is only achieved for Оі2 < t1 +t2. Hence this condition makes the eigenvector normalizable, substantiating the existence of a zero mode for this condition. Since there are two un- determined constants C2, C4, the vector subspace of zero modes in 2-dimensional and we get exactly a couple of zero modes, as expected. From the perspective of parti- cle hole symmetry also, the existence of the second zero mode is understandable. The existence of zero energy modes isolated from the bulk necessitates that they are edge modes. We note that the system is insulating for Оі2 < t1 + t2, with the gap closing for Оі2 = t1 + t2 and again opening for higher values of Оі2. This being a topological phase transition, is therefore is reconfirmed by vanishing of the couple of zero edge modes across the transition point. CONCLUSIONS We characterize topological phases of the two coupled Polyyne chains. In AA stacking, the symmetries enjoyed by the system dictates it to be in the BDI topological class and the topological invariant is captured by the quantized Zak phase. The Zak phase is robust under transverse strain and is unaffected as the electronic struc- ture passes from insulating to metallic phase. This be- haviour is reconfirmed by the analysis of edge modes. We model the AA stacking coupled chain system out of two single SSH chains in the dimerization having a couple of edge modes. Hence the coupled system possesses four edge modes, which curiously are away from the Fermi level. When the chains are brought close to each other, with the inter-chain van der Waals coupling increasing, the energies of edge modes merge with the bulk spectrum; however the edge localization is still retained. The other stacking, ie. the AB one, also falls in the BDI class and hence is expected to have quantized Zak phase. Working with the tight binding model of a sys- tem of coupled SSH chains in altered dimerization con- figuration, we uncovered a couple of different topological phases, both of which are insulating, with the gap closing at the transition point in the space of tight binding pa- rameters. To make sure that this tight binding model is a reliable one for describing AB stacked polyyne chains, we did a match of parameters against the electronic struc- ture given by a first principle calculation. However we note that closing of the gap in AB stacking is practically unfeasible for the polyyne system as this would require high amount of transverse strain. This model, being built up from two differently dimerized SSH chains, has only two edge modes of zero energy in one of the topological phase. These modes disappear after as the gap closes and reopens due to increase of inter-chain van der Waals coupling. In the present study we did not focus on the interme- diate stacking arrangements, which may be arrived by starting from either AA or AB and sliding another chain by a distance which in not an integer multiple of the half- unit cell length. The electronic structure of the model in those asymmetric stacking, as discussed in suffers from the absence of particle-hole symmetry and does not fall in any of the topological classes for 1-d systems. As Polyyne chains have been experimentally synthe- sised , these topological phases may be directly measured Secondly, simulating the model by ultra- cold atoms , Zak phases for the 3 different topologi- cal phases of the system can be experimentally demon- strated. Apart from experimental realization, with the advent of quantum information (QI) theoretic techniques, probes likedisconnected entanglement entropy should be studied in a system like ours, because of the inherent richness of topological phases of it. This is tantaliz- ing from QI perspective itself, in order to pin-point the exact entanglement measure which may classify quan- tum/topological dynamical phase transitions in periodic systems. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Research of RB is supported by the following grants from the SERB, India: Discussions with Indrakshi Ray- chowdhury and Raka Dasgupta are gratefully acknowl- edged. APPENDIX 1. AB stacking eigenvectors The occupied eigen vectors for the AB stacking ar- rangement required for the calculation of the Zak phase 7 are |XAB 3 вҹ© = 1 2 пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ вҲ’ eвҲ’iAkпҝҪ 2 ) Оі2вҲҡ вҲ’ вҲҡ 2(1+cos Ak) 1+eiAk (1+eвҲ’iAk) пҝҪ (|f|2+Оі22вҲ’2Оі2(t1+t2) cos Ak 2 ) Оі2вҲҡ 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , |XAB 4 вҹ© = 1 2 пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ вҲ’ eвҲ’iAk пҝҪ 2(1+cos Ak) Оі2вҲҡ (t1+t2) ) вҲҡ 2(1+cos Ak) 1+eiAk вҲ’ (1+eвҲ’iAk) пҝҪ (|f|2+Оі22+Оі2(t1+t2)вҲҡ 2(1+cos Ak)) Оі2вҲҡ (t1+t2) ) 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (20) 2. AB stacking Hamiltonian kernel matrix We write the Hamiltonian kernel in (5) in the real basis ОЁвҖ  = (bвҖ  1 МғaвҖ  1 МғbвҖ  p aвҖ  p+1 . . . МғbвҖ  P вҲ’1 aвҖ  P ) Hab = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 Оі2 0 t2 0 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 Оі2 0 t1 0 0 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 0 t1 0 Оі2 0 t2 0 0 . . . 0 0 t2 0 Оі2 0 t1 0 0 0 . . . 0 0 0 0 0 t1 0 Оі2 0 t2 . . . 0 0 0 0 t2 0 Оі2 0 t1 0 . . . 0 0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 . . . 0 Оі2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 . . . Оі2 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (21) 3. Convergence of the norm of the zero eigenvector From (19b), we have the square of the norm of the zero mode eigenvector to be пҝҪN n=1(|Bn|2 + |Dn|2), where: |Bn|2 = пҝҪОі2 2 вҲ’ 2t1t2 2t12 пҝҪn пҝҪ C2 1 + C2 2 + 2C1C2 cos (2ОІn) пҝҪ , (22) |Dn|2 = пҝҪОі2 2 вҲ’ 2t1t2 2t22 пҝҪn пҝҪ C2 3 + C2 4 + 2C3C4 cos (2ОІn) пҝҪ . (23) where ОІ = tanвҲ’1( вҲҡ |Оі22вҲ’4t1t2| Оі2 ). Clearly, the necessary condi- tion for the above sum to converge as N вҶ’ вҲһ is ( Оі22вҲ’2t1t2 2t12 ) < 1 and ( Оі22вҲ’2t1t2 2t22 ) < 1. Both of these conditions are satisfied only if Оі2 < t1 +t2. But, the equations (22) and (23) are valid for Оі2 2 < 4t1t2 and Оі2 < t1 + t2 already satisfies this. On the other hand, if we consider Оі2 2 > 4t1t2, the we have |Bn|2 = пҝҪ C1 пҝҪОі2 + Оә 2t1 пҝҪn + C2 пҝҪОі2 вҲ’ Оә 2t1 пҝҪnпҝҪ2 , (24) |Dn|2 = пҝҪ C3 пҝҪОі2 + Оә 2t2 пҝҪn + C4 пҝҪОі2 вҲ’ Оә 2t2 пҝҪnпҝҪ2 . (25) The necessary condition for the sum пҝҪN n=1(|Bn|2 + |Dn|2) to converge as N вҶ’ вҲһ is Оі2 < (t1 + t2). W. Su, J. Schrieffer, and A. J. Heeger, Physical review letters 42, 1698 (1979). W.-P. Su, J. Schrieffer, and A. Heeger, Physical Review A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. Schrieffer, and W.-P. Su, Reviews of Modern Physics 60, 781 (1988). T. Kitagawa, M. A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, M. S. Rud- ner, E. Berg, I. Kassal, A. Aspuru-Guzik, E. Demler, and A. G. White, Nature communications 3, 1 (2012). M. Atala, M. Aidelsburger, J. T. Barreiro, D. Abanin, T. Kitagawa, E. Demler, and I. Bloch, Nature Physics 9, S. Nakajima, T. Tomita, S. Taie, T. Ichinose, H. Ozawa, L. Wang, M. Troyer, and Y. Takahashi, Nature Physics M. Lohse, C. Schweizer, O. Zilberberg, M. Aidelsburger, and I. Bloch, Nature Physics 12, 350 (2016). B.-Y. Xie, H.-F. Wang, H.-X. Wang, X.-Y. Zhu, J.-H. Jiang, M.-H. Lu, and Y.-F. Chen, Physical Review B 98, J. K. Asb МҒoth, L. Oroszl МҒany, and A. P МҒalyi, Lecture notes in physics 919, 166 (2016). L. Li, Z. Xu, and S. Chen, Physical Review B 89, 085111 P. Delplace, D. Ullmo, and G. Montambaux, Physical Review B 84, 195452 (2011). M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Reviews of modern physics 8 X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Reviews of Modern Physics R. Basu and S. Bhattacharyya, Carbon Trends 7, 100163 J.-C. Charlier, J.-P. Michenaud, and X. Gonze, Physical Review B 46, 4531 (1992). A. Kitaev (American Institute of Physics, 2009) pp. 22вҖ“ 30. C.-K. Chiu, H. Yao, and S. Ryu, Physical Review B 88, J. Zak, Physical review letters 62, 2747 (1989). S. Ryu and Y. Hatsugai, Physical review letters 89, L.-J. Lang, X. Cai, and S. Chen, Physical review letters A. Rusznyak, V. Z МҒolyomi, J. K МҲurti, S. Yang, and M. Kertesz, Physical Review B 72, 155420 (2005). K. Lambropoulos and C. Simserides, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 19, 26890 (2017). A. Al-Backri, V. Z МҒolyomi, and C. J. Lambert, The Jour- nal of chemical physics 140, 104306 (2014). D. Kartoon, U. Argaman, and G. Makov, Physical Re- view B 98, 165429 (2018). K. Padavi МҒc, S. S. Hegde, W. DeGottardi, and S. Vishveshwara, Physical Review B 98, 024205 (2018). M. Kurzyna and T. Kwapi МҒnski, Physical Review B 102, M. Jangjan and M. V. Hosseini, Scientific Reports 10, 1 T. Kariyado and A. Vishwanath, Physical Review Re- search 1, 033076 (2019). T. Luo, X. Guan, J. Fan, G. Chen, and S.-T. Jia, Chinese Physics B 31, 014208 (2022). C. Li, S. Lin, G. Zhang, and Z. Song, Physical Review B P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ- cioni, I. Dabo, et al., Journal of physics: Condensed mat- B. Midya and L. Feng, Physical Review A 98, 043838 C.-S. Lee, I.-F. Io, and H.-c. Kao, Chinese Journal of Physics (2022). F. Cataldo, Carbon 42, 129 (2004). S. Kutrovskaya, A. Osipov, S. Baryshev, A. Zasedatelev, V. Samyshkin, S. Demirchyan, O. Pulci, D. Grassano, L. Gontrani, R. R. Hartmann, et al., Nano letters 20, M. Parto, S. Wittek, H. Hodaei, G. Harari, M. A. Bandres, J. Ren, M. C. Rechtsman, M. Segev, D. N. Christodoulides, and M. Khajavikhan, Physical review letters 120, 113901 (2018). B. Zeng, X. Chen, D.-L. Zhou, X.-G. Wen, et al., Quan- tum information meets quantum matter (Springer, 2019). T. Micallo, V. Vitale, M. Dalmonte, and P. Fromholz, SciPost Physics Core 3, 012 (2020).