1 Interlayer Exciton–Phonon Bound State in Bi2Se3/monolayer WS2 van der Waals Heterostructures Zachariah Hennighausen1,*, Jisoo Moon1, Kathleen M. McCreary2, Connie H. Li,2 Olaf M.J. van ’t Erve2, and Berend T. Jonker2,* 1 NRC Postdoc at the Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA 2 Materials Science and Technology Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, D.C. 20375, USA Abstract The ability to assemble layers of two-dimensional (2D) materials to form permutations of van der Waals heterostructures provides significant opportunities in materials design and synthesis. Interlayer interactions provide a path to new properties and functionality, and understanding such interactions is essential to that end. Here we report formation of interlayer exciton-phonon bound states in Bi2Se3/WS2 heterostructures, where the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon, a mode particularly susceptible to electron- phonon coupling, is imprinted onto the excitonic emission of the WS2. The exciton-phonon bound state (or exciton-phonon quasiparticle) presents itself as evenly separated peaks superposed on the WS2 excitonic photoluminescence spectrum, whose periodic spacing corresponds to the A1(3) surface phonon energy. Low-temperature polarized Raman spectroscopy of Bi2Se3 reveals intense surface phonons and local symmetry breaking that allows the A1(3) surface phonon to manifest in otherwise forbidden scattering geometries. Our work advances knowledge of the complex interlayer van der Waals interactions, and facilitates technologies that combine the distinctive transport and optical properties from separate materials into one device for possible spintronics, valleytronics, and quantum computing applications. * Authors for correspondence, E-mail: hennigha@mit.edu; berry.jonker@nrl.navy.mil; Keywords: exciton-phonon bound state, exciton-phonon quasiparticle, exciton-phonon coupling, interlayer quasiparticle, monolayer WS2, Bi2Se3 2 Introduction Van der Waals heterostructures are formed by stacking monolayers of 2D materials in any sequence of one’s choosing, enabled by the lack of bonds between layer planes.1 Such stacking often results in new properties, tuned by either material selection or twist angle.2 Understanding the interaction between the layers in such heterostructures is essential to discovering new properties, engineering functionality, and advancing their application into technologies. Previous work showed the interlayer interaction between stacked two dimensional (2D) materials can facilitate a host of new properties, including long-lived interlayer excitons,3 magnetic phase switching,4 forbidden Raman modes,5 superconductivity,6 orbital ferromagnetism,7 and emergent ferromagnetism.8 In this work, we grew few-layer Bi2Se3 on monolayer WS2, and observe interlayer exciton-phonon coupling and formation of an exciton-phonon bound state between localized excitons in monolayer WS2 and the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon, a mode particularly susceptible to electron-phonon coupling.9,10 The bound state is manifested as a series of evenly spaced peaks superposed on the WS2 excitonic photoluminescence (PL) spectrum, whose periodic spacing corresponds to the A1(3) surface phonon energy. Oscillating features that match a phonon energy and correspond to a luminescence are indicative of electron-phonon or exciton-phonon bound states.11–15 In addition, polarized Raman spectroscopy of the Bi2Se3 reveals multiple pronounced surface phonon modes and crystalline symmetry breaking. Notably, the presence of surface phonons in a forbidden scattering geometry suggests local symmetry breaking at the surface,9 consistent with a strong WS2-Bi2Se3 interlayer coupling. Previous work found significant interlayer hybridization in Bi2Se3/WS2 heterostructures, facilitating electron transfer and modifying the bonding,16–18 conditions which encourage the formation of interlayer quasiparticles.19 Understanding the interlayer interaction is central to elucidating how their combined properties evolve, enabling the discovery of advanced capabilities for spintronics,18,20 valleytronics,21 and quantum computing21,22 applications. Several publications have reported exciton-phonon or electron-phonon coupling across the interlayer region, where a free exciton in a monolayer transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) facilitates the emergence of otherwise forbidden Raman modes in the adjacent material.5,23–26 Additionally, interlayer vibronic exciton-phonon states have been reported in a TMD/TMD diode using photocurrent measurements.27 Our work is distinct in that we report the formation of an interlayer exciton-phonon 3 bound state.13,14 Exciton-phonon bound states are uncommon quasiparticles that are formed from particles whose number is not conserved (i.e., phonons).13,14 This means the exciton-phonon bound states are only stable if their real decay is forbidden by the exciton laws of conservation of energy and momentum, during phonon disappearance.14 While intralayer exciton-phonon bound states have been reported in low- dimensional materials,12 to our knowledge, such a state has never been observed to form across an interlayer region in a vdW heterostructure. Both bismuth selenide (Bi2Se3) and monolayer tungsten disulfide (1L WS2) have independently demonstrated promise for a variety of advanced technologies, including spintronics18,20 and quantum computing.21,22 Bi2Se3 is a topological insulator (TI) with gapped bulk states and gapless surface conducting states that are spin-momentum locked, enabling advanced field effect transistors (FETs),28 magneto-electric devices,29 topological qubits,22 and spin-orbit torque (SOT) devices.20,30 Monolayer WS2 is a direct band gap semiconductor with independently optically addressable valleys, a strong light-matter interaction, and high sensitivity to surrounding fields, enabling FETs,31 sensors,32 valleytronics devices,21 ferroelectric modulation of exciton populations,33 and various photonic devices (e.g., LEDs, modulators, lasers).34 Bi2Se3/monolayer WS2 heterostructures offer the possibility to combine strong light-matter interaction and spin-locked current into one device. Results line in 1a. Blue spot marks a location with continuous film (Section S1) and a representative location studied. (c) TEM SAED image 4 showing Bi2Se3 grows crystalline on WS2 across a 0-2 twist angle range. (d) Linearly polarized Raman response at 4 K with modes identified. Porto notation is used (see methods). vdW heterostructure, synthesized using chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Figure 1a-b shows an atomic force microscope (AFM) scan and corresponding line profile, respectively, of a representative sample. For reference, each QL of Bi2Se3 is ~ 1nm thick, and a monolayer of WS2 is 0.7 nm thick. Based on the AFM data and diminished PL intensity, we conclude that Bi2Se3 grew as a uniform QL over 1L WS2, with taller islands (~3.7nm) on top that merge together to form a continuous multilayer film. Section S1 shows additional AFM data and fluorescence measurements showing that the Bi2Se3 is initially continuous, followed by growth of multilayer islands characteristic of Bi2Se3 growth. Transmission electron microscope selected area electron diffraction (TEM-SAED) measurements demonstrate both the WS2 and Bi2Se3 grow crystalline, and that the Bi2Se3 grows within a narrow range of twist angles (0-2) around 0 aligned with the WS2. Our TEM results are in agreement with previous work,35 indicating the interlayer interaction is sufficiently strong to induce epitaxial growth. Figure 1d shows linearly polarized Raman measurements taken at 4 K where the well-formed modes correspond closely to the respective materials,9,36 suggesting good crystalline and stoichiometric sample quality. the free exciton and localized state. Evenly spaced “steps” are observed, whose energy spacing (19.3meV) corresponds well to the 160cm-1 A1(3) surface phonon. Previous work identified the A1(3) mode as particularly susceptible to electron-phonon coupling.9,10 (b) 1L WS2 PL at 4 K, where a comparatively smooth localized state is observed. 5 a red shift compared to the as-grown monolayer WS2 reference sample (Figure 2b). A similar red shift was reported in graphene/WS2 heterostructures, and is attributed to charge transfer.37 Both spectra are dominated by a broad asymmetric feature approximately 130 meV below the free exciton with a long tail at low energy, generally attributed to contributions from multiple defect-bound exciton complexes.38–40 Power-dependent (Section S2) and temperature-dependent (Section S3) measurements validate our assignment of exciton species, where the lower energy peak is a localized exciton (or bound exciton), and the higher energy peak is a neutral free exciton. In addition, the heterostructure PL exhibits regularly spaced peaks not observed in the reference monolayer. The peaks on the high energy side are more prominent, while peaks on the low energy side are likely obscured by the low energy tail of the bound excitons. We use visual inspection to identify these peak positions to determine their energy separation. Efforts to quantitatively extract these positions by analyzing the double derivative extrema yielded comparable results (Section S4). Our analysis found the peaks to be approximately evenly spaced, with an energy spacing of 19.3meV (156cm-1), which corresponds to the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon mode (160cm-1). Of note, previous work found the A1(3) mode produces a Fano shape under resonant conditions, indicative of electron-phonon coupling at the Bi2Se3 surface.9,10 Electron-phonon and exciton-phonon bound states (or quasiparticles) have been shown to produce a series of equally spaced features, often overlayed on a larger PL or optical reflection curve, where the period of the emerged features approximately matches the phonon’s energy.11–15,41 As such, the presence of such quasiparticles can be inferred when evenly spaced peaks are observed that correspond to a Raman phonon mode.13 The number of peaks and consistency of their spacing is material and environment specific, as well as the strength of the exciton-phonon coupling.12,13 The task is further complicated by the fact that the evenly spaced features are frequently overlayed on a larger peak, which obscures their precise peak position.11–15 Exciton-phonon bound states are frequently strongest when the exciton is localized (or bound) to an impurity center,13,14 consistent with our observations where the quasiparticle corresponds to the localized state. We note the formation of an exciton-phonon quasiparticle is distinct from exciton-phonon scattering, in part because the momenta of the exciton and phonon are coupled.14 As such, exciton-phonon quasiparticle interactions can result in uncommon observations, such as the emission of distinct features above the exciton energy.12–14 6 The energy spacing was independently observed and measured in several samples (see Section S4 for data from additional samples). We therefore attribute these multiple peaks as arising from exciton-phonon coupling to the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon, a mode with an energy of ~19.8 meV that is particularly susceptible to electron-phonon coupling,9,10 which together form am exciton-phonon quasiparticle. The PL spectrum of as-grown monolayer WS2 shown in Fig 2b does not show such additional peaks, demonstrating that coupling to the Bi2Se3 is responsible for these dramatic features in the PL. form a bound exciton-phonon quasiparticle, where the phonon interaction modifies the exciton recombination energy. (b) The phonon interaction can induce quantized energy levels corresponding to the phonon mode energy, which leads to multiple recombination pathways that manifest as equally spaced features in experiment. Note, configurational coordinates represent the relative real-space displacement of the initial (electron) and final (hole) states. Inset is data from Figure 2. mechanism for generating evenly spaced peaks in exciton-phonon systems.42 The exciton-phonon bound state quasiparticle is only understood by combining several concepts from quantum physics. The quasiparticle is composed of an exciton and a phonon, which are coupled together through virtual transitions that are related to the Fröhlich interaction.14,42 Virtual transitions are short-lived, unobservable quantum effects that can facilitate a different measurement (or effect), which is physically detectable. For example, Raman spectroscopy is detectable, but often requires virtual states and virtual transitions to manifest, which themselves cannot be observed.43 The Fröhlich interaction describes the coupling of electrons and phonons through the movement and ionization of a lattice.44 We provide two frameworks to qualitatively understand the exciton-phonon mechanism for producing the evenly spaced peaks. First, when the exciton’s and phonon’s center-of-mass are coupled together, the exciton recoil term and phonon creation-annihilation operators become coupled, thereby modulating 7 exciton recombination energies at quantized phonon intervals.14 The second framework is shown in Figure 3b, where it assumes the electron and hole are positioned at different locations within the heterostructure, but still bound to form an exciton. As the locations vibrate along a phonon mode, they change atomic coordinates (e.g., configurational coordinates), which alters the overlap of the electron and hole wavefunctions. We assume the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, where the recombination and photon emission is instantaneous compared to the much slower atomic movements. As the electron and hole positions oscillate, the conduction and valence bands change relative coordinates, thereby changing the recombination pathways to different initial and final states, but only at quantized intervals that correspond to the phonon energy.13,14 Note, configurational coordinate diagrams are plotted in real-space, which displays the valence band as a parabola pointed down. Previous work found notable interlayer hybridization between Bi2Se3 and monolayer WS2 that greatly impacts the WS2 excitonic activity,17,18 strains atoms at the interface,16 and induces the formation of a pure electronic moiré lattice at the interface.16 Such interlayer hybridization facilitates the exchange of electrons between the materials and modifies interlayer bonding, thereby setting conditions that encourage the formation of interlayer quasiparticles.19 We note, the adjacent Bi2Se3 dramatically reduces the PL intensity of the WS2, due in part to the emergence of non-radiative recombination pathways and charge transfer from the monolayer WS2 into Bi2Se3.17,18 We also observe a strong reduction (>2x) in PL intensity. But in addition, our work clearly reveals the presence of these exciton-phonon bound state interactions. Section S3 show Bi2Se3-WS2 temperature-dependent measurements, which reveal the localized exciton state (LS) exhibits an unusual negative thermal quenching, where the LS intensity increases and peaks at ~75 K, before decreasing.45 Previous theory work proposed that as the temperature increases, electrons are thermally excited from nearby bound states into a primary state that allows for radiative recombination. The LS and free exciton peak positions shift lower in energy as the temperature increases, in agreement with the Varshni equation, demonstrating temperature dependent recombination energy.46 Together, the PL results demonstrate complex behavior, consistent with notable interlayer hybridization between Bi2Se3 and monolayer WS2.16,18 We believe it is unlikely that a WS2 phonon is forming the bound state. First, we observe no indications of an exciton-phonon bound state in 60+ pristine monolayer WS2 samples probed, and we could not find any 8 literature reporting such an effect, suggesting Bi2Se3 grown on top is required to facilitate the quasiparticle. Second, the WS2 phonon modes detected using Raman spectroscopy are likely too high energy. For example, the nearest WS2 Raman mode, LA(M) at ~180cm-1 (or 22.3meV), is 15.5% above the measured energy spacing of 19.3meV. Third, WS2 LA(M) is an acoustic mode, which are less likely to form bound states with excitons compared to optical modes.13 In contrast, the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon is only 2.6% above the measured energy spacing, it is an optical mode, and it is particularly susceptible to electron- phonon coupling.9,10 It is unlikely that potential defects in WS2 resulting from the Bi2Se3 growth could alone – without the presence of the Bi2Se3 on top – produce the evenly spaced peaks. Limited growth temperature (210°C) and low growth time (27 min.) constrain potential selenium or bismuth doping. Further, selenization (i.e., forming WS2xSe2(1-x) alloy) could not be detected in either PL or Raman spectra, suggesting potential selenium doping has a minimal effect on the phonon or exciton modes.47 Exciton-phonon coupling and scattering plays a prominent role in monolayer TMDs, where it influences a variety of properties, including valley polarization,48,49 spectral broadening,49,50 and mobility.51 Despite this, phonon scattering alone is unlikely to produce periodic features (or vibronic transitions), and a more complex mechanism is required. For example, the Franck-Condon Principle (FCP) enables multiple quantized radiative recombination pathways.52 However, it is primarily applied to small molecules, whose excited states shift the atomic coordinates.53 Conversely, the exciton-phonon quasiparticle is a theoretical framework designed for crystals,13,14 where phonon transitions are central, leading us to conclude an interlayer exciton-phonon quasiparticle is the most appropriate assignment. It should be noted that the FCP can be applied to crystalline solids when excitons self-localize and a strong electron-phonon coupling is present.54,55 Evidence is emerging that conditions in TMD-based van der Waals heterostructures may be conducive to self-localized excitons,56,57 raising the prospect that the free-excitons in WS2 are self-trapping when forming the exciton-phonon bound state. Further research is required to determine the model that best describes the system. 9 from CVD-grown Bi2Se3-WS2 heterostructure and MBE-grown Bi2Se3-Al2O3 (reference sample). Black arrow identifies the A1(3) surface phonon, which is associated with the interlayer exciton-phonon bound state. Phonon modes forbidden in a specific scattering geometry (i.e., XX, XY, RR, or RL) are labeled with a boxed-outline.9 The presence of A1(2) and A1(3) surface phonons in a forbidden scattering geometry (i.e., RL), suggests the local symmetry breaking at the surface,9 consistent with a strong WS2 interlayer coupling. Porto notation is used (see methods). To elucidate the interlayer exciton-phonon coupling, Figure 4 shows linear and circular polarization Raman measurements at 4 K for CVD-grown Bi2Se3-WS2, and a Bi2Se3 reference sample, grown using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on Al2O3. Previous work demonstrated the high quality of the MBE-grown Bi2Se3 in our setup.58 Polarized Raman spectroscopy is a reliable method to identify and distinguish different phonon modes with greater confidence because the Raman response can be separated from each symmetry channel.9,59,60 More specifically, each crystallographic point group contains symmetries that can be used to calculate the reduced Raman tensors, which describe scattering of phonon modes.60 Applying polarization tensors to Raman tensors reveals the scattering efficiency of phonon modes exposed to polarized light. contains expanded information on the Raman measurements, including each phonon mode’s attributes and a literature comparison. Crystal symmetry forbids certain Raman scattering in Bi2Se3.60 If the symmetry is disrupted, these modes can become allowed.9,60 The presence of A1(2) and A1(3) surface phonons in a forbidden scattering geometry (i.e., RL), suggests the local symmetry breaking at the surface,9 consistent 10 with a strong WS2 interlayer coupling. Additionally, the A1(2) and A1(3) surface phonon modes are markedly more intense, consistent with an increased phonon population. Compared to the 5QL reference sample, as well as bulk Bi2Se3 from literature,9 we observe forbidden modes at greater intensity in Bi2Se3-WS2 heterostructures, suggesting the crystal symmetry is being disrupted to a greater degree. For example, the A1g(2) mode is forbidden in the XY configuration. While the reference sample shows no detectable peak, we observe it prominently in the Bi2Se3-WS2 heterostructure. Of note, although all the peaks observed correspond well to either Bi2Se3 or monolayer WS2 Raman modes,9,36 we cannot exclude the possibility that combination61 or moiré Raman modes62 emerge at overlapping wavenumbers. Numerous effects influence local crystalline symmetry, including defects, strain, and substrate effects. Previous work found evidence of strain at the Bi2Se3-WS2 interface and a purely electronic 2D lattice between the materials that alters the surrounding electronic environment.16 Such effects impact the breakdown of translational symmetry at the interface, which subsequently affects surface phonon modes.63 Our Raman measurements are consistent with a strong interlayer coupling that encourages strain and charge redistribution at the interface. Together, notable interlayer hybridization16,18 and a strong interlayer coupling form an interfacial environment that facilitates interlayer interactions of different particles, thereby encouraging the formation of exciton-phonon quasiparticles.19 Additionally, our measurements demonstrate a rich landscape of phonons, including comparatively intense surface phonons, which are consistent with an increased phonon population. Conclusions We have demonstrated formation of an interlayer exciton-phonon quasiparticle (or exciton-phonon bound state) between localized excitons in monolayer WS2 and the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon, a mode particularly susceptible to electron-phonon coupling.9,10 We detect evenly spaced features in the PL spectrum with an energy separation that matches the Bi2Se3 A1(3) surface phonon, overlayed on the WS2 localized exciton emission peak. Polarized Raman spectroscopy detects forbidden Bi2Se3 surface phonon modes, suggesting broken crystalline symmetry at the surface. While several publications have reported exciton/electron- 11 phonon coupling across the interlayer region,5,23–26 our work is distinct in that we report the formation of an interlayer exciton-phonon bound state, an uncommon quasiparticle composed of phonons, whose particle number is not conserved.13,14 Bi2Se3/monolayer WS2 heterostructures offer the possibility to combine strong light-matter interaction and spin-locked current into one material. Understanding the interlayer coupling is central to elucidating how their combined properties evolve, enabling devices for spintronics,18,20 valleytronics,21 and quantum computing21,22 applications. Methods Material Growth – Few-layer Bi2Se3: The Bi2Se3 films were grown on 10 × 10 mm2 c-plane (0001) sapphire (Al2O3) substrates using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) with base pressure below 5 × 10−10 Torr. The substrates were initially annealed ex-situ at 1,000 °C under the atmospheric pressure, and ozone cleaned in-situ under 200 Torr of oxygen pressure. It is then annealed at 600 °C for 20 min in the ultra-high vacuum MBE chamber. Individual sources of high-purity (99.999%) Bi and Se were evaporated from standard effusion cells during the film growth. Se flux was maintained at least ten times higher than Bi’s to minimize Se vacancies. To obtain an atomically sharp interface between the Bi2Se3 layer and the substrate, we adopted the two-step growth scheme.64 First, the initial 3 QL Bi2Se3 is grown at 170 °C. It is slowly annealed to 300 °C, and followed by deposition of the remaining 2QL Bi2Se3 layers. 5QL Bi2Se3 was grown. Material Growth – Bi2Se3-WS2 2D Heterostructure: Monolayer WS2 is synthesized at ambient pressure in 2-inch diameter quartz tube furnaces on SiO2/Si substrates (275 nm thickness of SiO2). Prior to use, all SiO2/Si substrates are cleaned in acetone, IPA, and Piranha etch (H2SO4+H2O2) then thoroughly rinsed in DI water. At the center of the furnace is positioned a quartz boat containing ~1g of WO3 powder. Two SiO2/Si wafers are positioned face-down, directly above the oxide precursor. A separate quartz boat containing sulfur powder is placed upstream, outside the furnace-heating zone. The upstream SiO2/Si wafer contains perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid tetrapotassium salt (PTAS) seeding molecules, while the downstream substrate is untreated. The hexagonal PTAS molecules are carried downstream to the untreated substrate and promote lateral growth of monolayer WS2. Pure argon (65 sccm) is used as the furnace heats to the target temperature. Upon reaching the target temperature in the range of 825 to 875 °C, 10 sccm H2 is added to the Ar flow and maintained throughout the 10-minute soak and subsequent cooling to room temperature. 4-6QL Bi2Se3 was grown on top of monolayer WS2 using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) in a two-zone furnace with a 2” quartz tube. High-purity Bi2Se3 flakes are ground using a mortar and pestle into a fine dust. The powdered Bi2Se3 is placed in a ceramic boat and inserted into the furnace’s quartz tube, and pushed into the center of the furnace’s first zone. The monolayer WS2, which is on an SiO2 substrate, is placed downstream of the Bi2Se3 into the center of the furnace’s second zone. The furnace is pumped down to ~20mTorr. An argon (Ar) carrier gas is flown into the furnace at 80sccm. The Bi2Se3 is heated to 520C, and the WS2 is heated to 210C. The ramp rate is ~55C/min, and the total growth is 27 min. Raman and photoluminescence measurements at low temperature: A Horiba LabRARM HR Evolution with both linear and circular polarization attachments, and a low-temperature Montana cryostat, was used for Raman and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy measurements. We use Porto Notation (i.e., z̅()z) 12 where () is the incident (scattered) polarization, and z̅(z) is the incoming (outgoing) direction. We define R = X + iY and L = X − iY. Previous work showed that laser exposure of monolayer materials at low temperature can anneal and laser-dope them.65,66 We attempted to mitigate this using very low powers (~320nW) and short exposure times (~30s) for most measurements. We verified that the laser exposure had a minimal effect on the material by collecting multiple successive spectra. A long-distance 50x objective was used with a laser spot diameter of ~1.9 μm at the lowest powers. Transmission Electron Microscopy: Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructures were transferred onto a holey amorphous SiNx TEM grid using the water-assisted-pick-up transfer method.67 Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) were performed with a JEOL JEM2200FS operating at 200 kV, equipped with a high- speed Gatan OneView camera. The SAED patterns were internally calibrated to the WS2, and an aperture of approximately 200nm was used. We suspect that the wet transfer of Bi2Se3-WS2 2D heterostructures partially disrupts the crystal order, possibly due to a combination of the force and liquids applied during the transfer process. Photoluminescence Spectra computational analysis and fitting: All code was written in Python using the Spyder integrated development environment (IDE). Spyder belongs to the MIT License and is distributed through the Anaconda environment. The curve_fit() function with a variety of initial values and boundary conditions were used to verify fit robustness. The fitting was corroborated using cross-validation, where we uniformly removed 20% of the data points from a spectrum and repeated fitting. No notable changes to the fitting were detected, suggesting noise is not skewing the fit. The energy location of each feature was extracted by taking the double derivative of the best fit, and finding the minimum values. The minimum values of the double derivative matched well with the peak locations of Lorentzian functions, reinforcing our method to quantitatively extract the features. Acknowledgments We thank Dr. Darshana Wickramaratne at the Naval Research Laboratory for their insight and fruitful discussions. Supporting Information Additional characterization of representative regions probed (Section S1); Power-Dependent Measurements (Section S2); Temperature-Dependent Measurements (Section S3); Expanded Analysis of the Interlayer Exciton-Phonon Bound State (Section S4); Expanded analysis of low-temperature (4 K) Bi2Se3 phonon modes (Section S5); 13