1 Rainbows in a bottle: Realizing microoptic effects by polymerizable multiple emulsion particle design Naresh Yandrapalliab*, Baris Kumrua, Tom Robinsonb*, Markus Antoniettia a Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Department of Colloid Chemistry, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14424 Potsdam, Germany b Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Department of Theory & Bio-Systems, Am Mühlenberg 1, 14424 Potsdam, Germany Introduction In nature, structural colour generation is based on discriminative light propagation associ- ated with physical structures in the range of the wavelengths of light1. These iridescent struc- tural colours are of immense significance2 but not easy to control experimentally and there- fore difficult to exploit for applications. In this work, we employ microfluidics to produce polymerizable double emulsions that can not only induce the already known lensing effect3 but also result in the spectral separation of white light. Here, liquids of varying refractive index that constitute the emulsions resulted in patterns of iridescent colours. After polymer- ization, the inner emulsion cores collapse and this results in curved concave surfaces on these polymeric microspheres. Interestingly, the light propagation along the curved surfaces undergo total internal reflection, followed by near-field interference along exit structures on the polymerized microspheres4. These structured polymeric particles that are able to gener- ate colour dispersions can be exploited for optical devices, displays and even sensing tech- nologies. Main From the formation of glories in the sky to the spectacular vibrant colours observable on various living organisms, humans have learned that light can be controlled by materials 2 structures/structured materials that exist and evolved in nature. We are continuously discov- ering that the majority of the everyday iridescent spectra, either colourful butterflies or the plumage of birds, is the result of micrometre scale material structures5,6. Simple physical phenomena such as absorption, reflection, and refraction, as well as diffraction and interfer- ence that result from light-matter interactions can combine into complex structural colour generations 5. An attempt to classify the physical interaction of light with microstructures resulted in identifying processes such as thin-film interference7, multi-film interference8, dif- fraction grating9, scattering (coherent & incoherent)10 and photonic crystal diffraction11 that leads to structural colouration observed in nature12. Recently, Goodling et al. have shown that light interaction with concave interfaces formed by materials with two different refractive indices (η) will result in structural colouration due to the interference of total internally re- flected rays4. This proves that two materials (with varying refractive indices) forming a simple interface with a degree of curvature can produce iridescent colours. Our results show that water-in-oil-in-water (W/O/W) double emulsions produced with a highly refractive oil layer (styrene (η-1.516) interfaced with water (η-1.333) on either side can generate iridescent colours with spectral separation similar to that observed in glories13 but with more complexity and can still be exploited for their light focusing effect14. The double emulsions produced here contain an aqueous inner core surrounded by a layer of styrene in a continuous aqueous phase (shown in figure 1) stabilized with 0.5 wt% F108 surfactant. Because the two liquids have different refractive indices, light undergos both refraction and reflection based on the layering of the two liquids. The spectral dispersions or rainbows observed in nature are an effect of light interacting with water drops in the air, however, in the case of double emulsions (here, W/O/W), having layers of aqueous-oil-aqueous-oil- aqueous phase result in a similar dispersion but are followed by merging of the spectral wavelengths to produce structural colouring (figure 1(b)). A z-stack of the diffused structural 3 ing inner cores (scale bar – 200 μm) and the iridescent nature of the dispersed light at the equatorial plane, off-focus plane (30 μm below the equatorial plane) of the emulsions and the intense light spots observed along emulsion with each slice separated by 10 μm (top left to bottom right). (c) 2D ray-tracing of a 1-in-1 emulsion with varying inner droplet sizes (diameters 5, 10, 30, 40 and 50 μm) showing the effect on the focal length and TIR. (d) schematic representation of a 1-in-1 emulsion showing refraction, TIR and the effect of inner to outer droplet density on the TIR (black arrows represent the direction of light with a single wavelength). S – corre- sponds to styrene phase and W – corresponds to aqueous phase. colouring produce from a 1-in-1 W/O/W double emulsion is presented in supplementary video 1,and a clear spectral separation is modelled by ray tracing (see supplementary video 2). As depicted schematically in figure 1d(4), the light rays from the source passing through the double emulsion initially undergo refraction at the first convex interface formed by the 4 outer aqueous solution and the oil layer as well as through the second convex interface across the aqueous inner core present inside the oil drop. Thanks to the spherical configu- ration of the emulsion, a single light ray can undergo a minimum of two or a maximum of four refraction events as it passes out of the emulsion (1d). This results in more complex colour formations than observed from single emulsions. Our observations suggest that the focusing effect from these double emulsions is also prom- inent (see figure 1c), which was not observed in previous works on diverging light rays pass- ing through low refractive index inner core surrounded by a high refractive index liquid3. Moreover, a point source of light passing through the emulsions such as the present case resulted in dual focusing – one right below the double emulsion (resulting from the rays passing through the inner aqueous core) and the other farther away (resulting from the rays passing through the rest of the emulsion) (see supplementary figure S2). In agreement with that, z-stack images of the double emulsion indeed show a bright spot right below the emul- sion due to the said focusing of the dispersed light beyond the emulsion (see supplementary video 1 as well as z-project from figure 1(a)). The second focus vanishes for the double emulsions whose inner aqueous core diameter is equal to or above the radius of the diam- eter of the W/O/W emulsion (see figure 1c). This is because the rays that are otherwise contributing to the second focus are then refracted through the bigger inner aqueous core converge into the primary focusing area. This is observed by the increase in the intensity of the primary focusing area as the inner aqueous droplet size increases (figure 1c). Previous studies have shown that refraction through equidistant alternating layers of liquid or transparent material is associated with multi-layer interference8. This phenomenon is not observable in the case of the double emulsions described here. The inner aqueous droplet being heavier (ρ = 0.9982 g/mL at 20 oC) than the oil phase (ρ = 0.909 g/mL at 20 oC) sinks to the bottom of the oil drop (figure 1d(1)), resulting in non-equidistant layers and a decrease in peak reflectivity8. As the light is passing through a high refractive index medium to a lower 5 refractive index medium, followed by the curved nature of the interface4, a total internal re- flection (TIR) of light is possible at particular angular incidences, observable from the 2D ray-tracing result (figure 1c) and presented in the scheme (figure 1d(2)). Only refracted rays whose angle of incidence (α) is ~145° can undergo TIR when they pass through the inner aqueous core and encounter the concave interface across styrene (high refractive index) and the aqueous outer solution (low refractive index) (figure 1d(3)). The schematic produced with the ray tracing data figure 1d(6) shows the density-dependent TIR with ρstyrene/ρwater less than 1, while values greater than 1 result in no TIR. This suggests that a double emulsion with a high refractive index outer layer and a low refractive index inner layer should require inversed density values to take advantage of TIR as shown previously.4 Similarl to double emulsions, the emulsions with multiple inner droplets inside one W/O/W double emulsion generated by the same single inlet microfluidic device (see Methods) in- deed showed light scattering and iridescent colours (figure 1a). Producing such multi-core emulsions using a single inlet microfluidic design was made possible in this work by taking advantage of the swelling property of PDMS in the presence of specific solvents like sty- rene.15,16 The swelling of PDMS upon the uptake of styrene resulted in narrowed channels width, especially at first cross junction where water-in-oil (W/O) droplets are formed. Through carefull manipulation of flow rates, when can achieve W/O/W emulsions wih mul- tiple inner cores, all with the same device design (see figure 1a and Supplementary Video 3). In the absence of such a reliable system, multiple device designs with varied channel widths would have to be fabricated. The light scattering observed in all these multi-core emulsions, 2-in-1, 3-in-1, 4-in-1, and 5-in-1, are presented in the supplementary figure S1 as arrays of z-stack slices and in supplementary video 4, 5, and 6. At any given z-slice, the light scattering observed is similar for each different type of multi-core emulsion. There is no observable influence of the light scattering produced by one inner droplet on the other inner droplet within such multi-core emulsions. Moreover, the iridescence within and around each 6 inner droplet is preserved. This is only possible if the inner droplets are in the same plane (at the bottom) and are not stacked one above the other (see ray tracing data in supplemen- tary figure S2). Although the formation of emulsions with multiple inner droplets has been presented previously, their light scattering and high iridescence properties have never been explored before17,18. emulsion, inset showing the close-up of the curved surfaces on the microsphere (scale bar – 10 μm). (b) Bright- field images of the polymerized emulsions with a varying number of inner cores (scale bar – 50 μm). (c) Con- focal 3D reconstruction of the reflected light from the curved surfaces of two polymerized 1-in-1 emulsions facing the light source. The curved dashed lines represent the surface boundary of the concave surface on the microparticle . (d) Color images of the polymerized multi-core emulsions showing spectral dispersion of the reflected light from the curved surfaces (scale bar – 10 μm). (e) Spectral separation of dispersed reflected light 7 from the curved surfaces of polymerized 1-in-1 emulsion aligned 0° (parallel) and 90° (perpendicular) angle to the light source (scale bar – 10 μm). We then further explored the possibility to polymerize the styrene within the double and multi-core emulsions, with the aim of preserving some of these effects into a more stable, polymer structure. We have demonstrated that microfluidics can be used to generate uni- form sized hollow microspheres 19. However, it is not possible to produce structural colour- ation/iridescent colours with individual microspheres or hollow microspheres unless they are transparent or with surface patterning20 or regularily packed to form so-called photonic balls21. In this work, the above produced double emulsions and multi-core emulsions with styrene as the oil-phase are polymerized to generate microspheres with lensing curved surfaces. Unlike for the formation of hollow polymer microspheres where the inner aqueous cores have to be stabilized, microspheres with concaved dimples as shown in figure 2 are made from inner aqueous cores devoid of any surfactant. The surfactant F108 used in this study is a tri-block copolymer with two polypropylene hydrophobic blocks separated by a central hydrophilic polyethene oxide block, which is known to form rather stable block copolymer bilayers along two aqueous droplets, similar to that of lipids in a cell membrane22. However, in the absence of surfactant in the inner aqueous core, there will only be a monolayer of the surfactant stabilizing the emulsion interface. We hypothesize that during polymerization, de- stabilization of the monlayer could result in the formation of a concaved dimple on the spher- ical polystyrene microsphere as the inner aqueous core fuses with the outer aqueous solu- tion (as shown schematically in supplementary figure S3). The scanning electron micro- graphs of these polymeric spheres show the resulting concave surfaces (see figure 2(a)). Similarly, polymerization of 2-in-1, 3-in-1, and multi-in-1 emulsions resulted in an equivalent 8 number of surface lenses on the respective polystyrene microspheres formed (see bright- field images in figure 2(b)). Unlike the averaged light scattering observed in liquid phase emulsions, single polystyrene microspheres can be described via the rules of the reflection of light23 and thereby show optical near field effects. Like concave mirrors, the dimples on the polymeric microsphere reflect and focus the light. True to this assumption, the 3D reconstruction of the confocal z- stack images suggests both reflection and focused light from the structured surface of the surface facing towards the source of light. Similar to the liquid emulsions, our observations of their polymerized versions using a colour camera have revealed the iridescence nature of these focused surface emissions. Initial observations of these particles have shown their surface dimples/curves and iridescent col- ouring around the particles as well as bright spots from the lensing regions (figure 2(b)). A closer look reveals more spectacular details of iridescence from the lensing regions of the particles (figure 2(d)). Concaved structures that are facing the light source reflect the light and appear as intense bright white spots – a combination of all the spectral colours, as seen in figure 2(b) and 1-in-1 polymerized emulsions of figure 2(d). Interestingly, particles with concaved structures which are not facing but at an angle to the light source show a dramatic tions of the polymerized emulsions. In the case of multi-in-1 particles, with multiple curved surfaces facing the light source at different angles (figure 2(d)), one can observe that ap- proximately 20 micron “rainbows” show no apparent angular dependency, within the ob- served upper hemisphere of the particle . Light reflected from the concave interface of pol- ymeric microspheres creates optical interference and the dispersion of light4. In our experi- ments with the results shown in figure 2, this is clearly visible that the longer wavelengths of 9 the reflected light are closer to the surface of the microsphere while rays of shorter wave- lengths are farther away from the surface (see figure 2(e)). The line profile data taken from the centre of the images plotted to suggest the mixing and separation of the three main wavelengths - red, green and blue. A similar patterning of light reflection and dispersion is gests that not only the liquid emulsions but also their polymerized versions can be exploited for light scattering properties. This study highlights some interesting optical phenoma that are enabled by manufacturing controlled double and multi-core emulsions with a high refractive index differences using microfluidics. We have shown that simple emulsions like W/O/W can induce spectral sepa- ration of white light under very local light focusing. The observed light enhancements are mainly due to refraction and to a lesser extent from total internal reflection. More dramatic colour patterns can be achieved by simple alteration of the double emulsions to complex multi-core emulsions, also involving morphological transitions occurring under polymeriza- tion. While structural colouring in ordered 2D-arrays is a clear use case as a multilens array, because of the focusing nature, the applications and use of the local, close-to particle light fields with their colour gradients are yet to be discovered. The possibility to embed catalysts within the polymerizable liquid emulsions was demonstrated earlier19 and opens applications towards focused photocatalysis and photocatalytic gradients. Well ahead of applicability and exploitation in multiple fields however, we want to underline that the particles presented above are simple and rather effective to make, and that the observed effects are also just stunningly beautiful and unexpected: little rainbows in a bottle. 10