Supercurrent diode effect in thin film Nb tracks N Satchell,1 PM Shepley,1 MC Rosamond,2 and G Burnell1, a) 1)School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom 2)School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom (Dated: 3 May 2023) We demonstrate nonreciprocal critical current in 65 nm thick polycrystalline and epitaxial Nb thin films patterned into tracks. The nonreciprocal behavior gives a supercurrent diode effect, where the current passed in one direction is a supercurrent and the other direction is a normal state (resistive) current. We attribute fabrication artefacts to creating the supercurrent diode effect in our tracks. We study the varia- tion of the diode effect with temperature and magnetic field, and find a dependence with the width of the Nb tracks from 2-10 μm. For both polycrystalline and epitaxial samples, we find that tracks of width 4 μm provides the largest supercurrent diode ef- ficiency of up to ≈ 30%, with the effect reducing or disappearing in the widest tracks of 10 μm. We propose a model based on the limiting contributions to the critical current density to explain the track width dependence of the induced supercurrent diode effect. It is anticipated that the supercurrent diode will become a ubiquitous component of the superconducting computer. a)Electronic mail: g.burnell@leeds.ac.uk 1 arXiv:2301.02706v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 1 May 2023 I. INTRODUCTION The supercurrent diode is an analogue to rectification in semiconductor pn junctions, where current is allowed to flow only in one direction. In the supercurrent diode, the critical current of the device (Ic) is nonreciprocal (I+ c ̸= I− c ), leading to the situation where a dissipationless supercurrent can pass in one direction, but upon reversing the current direction, the device becomes resistive. It has been suggested that a supercurrent diode may become a useful component for digital processing in a superconducting computer. Nonreciprocal Ic behavior has been predicted and observed prior to the common use of the term supercurrent diode effect. Some notable early experimental works include super- conducting foils under external magnetic fields1 and reports in superconductor-ferromagnet hybrid systems2–5. Theoretically, a nonreciprocal Ic can manifest in Josephson devices with anomalous φ0 phase differences6,7 or when the barrier materials have symmetry breaking8,9. A common requirement of such predictions are that the barriers contain exotic materials such as ferro- magnetic multilayers10–16, topological insulators17–19, Weyl semimetals20–23, materials with large spin-orbit coupling24–26, or that the electrodes are unconventional superconductors27–29. Several recent experiments have reported Josephson diode effect in devices with exotic bar- rier materials30–35. In addition to the Josephson diode effect are reports and predictions for an intrinsic supercurrent diode effect. Theoretically, an intrinsic effect can occur in superconducting material systems with symmetry breaking, such as broken inversion symmetry36–40 or bro- ken time-reversal symmetry37,41,42. Therefore, much attention has been paid to observations of supercurrent diode effect in exotic materials systems such as multilayers with noncen- trosymmetric structure43–46, and systems with time-reversal symmetry breaking47. In order to fully understand the interesting and novel new physics of such systems, it is important to be able to distinguish between supercurrent diode effect which is intrinsic to the material, and which is induced as a result of device fabrication. Induced supercurrent diode effect can occur in tracks of s-wave superconductors without intrinsic inversion or time-reversal symmetry breaking, such as Nb48–51. The induced super- current diode effect is attributed to non-perfect device fabrication leading to imperfections in the edges of the tracks. Therefore, the edges of the tracks are unlikely to be identical, which 2 can lead to the unequal generation, penetration and expulsion of vortices on the opposite edges of the tracks, resulting in rectification48,52. The ability to induce a supercurrent diode effect without requirements for exotic materials is useful from a practical point of view, since established industrial processes tend to be based on s-wave superconductors such as Nb. In this work, we report measurements on Nb thin films patterned into tracks of varying widths. From our field and temperature dependent measurements of induced supercurrent diode effect, we report three key experimental observations. Firstly, our Nb tracks are 65 nm thick, refining the thickness in which supercurrent diode effect manifests. Secondly, by varying the width of the tracks, we observe a dependence of the diode effect with track width. Thirdly, we establish that single crystal epitaxy is not a condition for diode effect by measuring both polycrystalline and epitaxial samples. We report our observed diode effect as an efficiency parameter η = I+ c −I− c I+ c +I− c . Finally, we propose a model to explain our observed track width dependence in terms of the critical current densities in our devices and conclude that induced supercurrent diode effect is a particularly important consideration in track widths where vortex penetration contributes significantly to the overall critical current density. II. METHODS Nb films are deposited by dc magnetron sputtering in the Royce Deposition System53. The magnetrons are mounted below, and confocal to, the substrate with source-substrate distances of 134 mm. The base pressure of the vacuum chamber is 3×10−9 mBar with the substrate at room temperature and 1×10−8 mBar with the substrate at 1000◦C. Nb is grown at a rate of 0.06 nm/s at an Ar (6N purity) gas pressure of 3.6×10−3 mBar to a nominal thickness of 65 nm. The growth rate and film thicknesses are checked by x-ray reflectivity. The first Nb sample was deposited at room temperature on Si/SiOx substrate and the second Nb sample was deposited at elevated temperature of 1000◦C onto a single crystal a-plane Al2O3 substrate to promote epitaxial growth. Samples are fabricated into tracks using a direct laser writer to define resist masks in S1813 photoresist, and reactive ion etching at 130 W in a 1:2 Ar:SF6 plasma to etch the Nb films. After fabrication, devices are measured in a continuous flow 4He cryostat with 3 T horizontal superconducting Helmholtz coils. Traditional 4-point-probe transport geometry 3 is used to measure the current-voltage characteristic of the tracks with combined Keithley 6221-2182A current source and nano-voltmeter in pulse mode with 1 ms pulses and a 1% duty cycle to avoid a reduced retracking Ic due to heating. Varying the duty cycle from 1-50% resulted in no changes to the reported Ic. The schematic of the fabricated devices and measurement geometry is shown in Figure 1 (a). The sample grown at room temperature has a superconducting Tc of 8.75 K and a residual- resistivity ratio (RRR) of 2.8, giving an estimate for the mean free path (l) of 6 nm – indicating a polycrystalline microsctructure. The second sample has a higher Tc of 9.05 K and a RRR of 30, giving an estimate for l of 96 nm, consistent with an epitaxial microstructure. The increased l is expected for the epitaxial Nb due to the decrease in crystallographic defects such as grain boundaries. The properties of our polycrystalline Nb thin films are reported elsewhere54. III. RESULTS track. Figure 1 (b) shows the current-voltage (I − V ) characteristic of our track at applied fields where the diode effect is found to be maximum. I+ c and I− c are extracted from the I − V when the voltage reaches a small threshold value. Large nonreciprocal I+ c and I− c can be seen in the I −V characteristic. When the field polarity is reversed, the nonreciprocal I+ c and I− c are also reversed. In the normal state of the device, the I − V curve shows a slight non-linear dependence, which we attribute to Joule heating as a result of the large current densities. Our measurements at lower current densities (e.g. in wider tracks or at warmer temperatures) show I − V curves following the expected linear metallic behavior. c and I− c . Due to the diode effect, unexpectedly, the maximum values of Ic do not occur at zero applied field. We attribute this to the vortex penetration field, which is discussed later. The presented field sweep is acquired by sweeping from negative to positive field. A similar curve with the same features is obtained by sweeping from positive to negative field. The sign of the I+ c /I− c maximum with positive/negative field does not change with temperature or field sweep direction and appears to favor having the I+ c (I− c ) maximum in positive (negative) field. Across the 11 samples in our study showing the diode effect, when keeping the device 4 mounting and wiring geometry the same, I+ c (I− c ) maximum appears in positive (negative) field with a ratio of 8:3. The I+ c /I− c maximum with positive/negative field can be reversed by swapping the current wiring direction (Figure 1 (a)). Figure 1 (d) shows the extracted diode efficiency η, where peak efficiency is achieved around the fields corresponding to I+ c /I− c maximum. The maximum in η corresponding to the maximum in I+ c is a common feature of our data, however we believe that this is a consequence of how η is defined rather than being a fundamental feature of the induced supercurrent diode. We note a sight asymmetry and digitization in the high field η values in this device, Figure 1 (d). The asymmetry in η at high fields is present in some of our devices and may indicate that the diode effect persists to high fields in some devices. The digitization of η at high fields is a result of determining Ic from the finite current step size in the I–V measurements. Our interpretation of the origin of the supercurrent diode effect relies upon our samples being in the limit where the critical current is determined by the vorticies in the system, as opposed to being the depairing current. From the Ic(B) dependence, it is possible to extract the maximum super-heating field of the Meissner state48, Bs. The inset to Figure 1 (c) shows the low field Ic with linear fits (dashed lines). Bs corresponds to the interpolated intercept of the fits to the low field data, when the B offset is taken into account. From the four linear fits shown in Figure 1 (c) inset, we obtain Bs = 10±1 mT. The expression48, Bs = φ0/( √ 3πξw), provides an order of magnitude estimate for Bs, where φ0 is the flux quantum and ξ is the Ginzburg–Landau coherence length (ξ = 11.6 nm for polycrystalline thin film Nb54). For w = 4 μm, Bs = 8.2 mT, in approximate agreement with our experimental findings. This indicates strongly that in the region where the diode effect is observed the critical current is determined by the vorticies. sample patterned into 4 μm wide track. To avoid charging during imaging, a thin Au layer is deposited over the whole sample. Imaging of multiple tracks reveals the following: firstly, some hardened resist residue remains on the devices at the sidewalls. We do not believe that the resist residue contributes to the observed diode effect; secondly, all our devices have a low line-edge roughness in the range of 10 − 40 nm with no significant differences between opposite edges. This implies that the fabrication artefacts believed to be responsible for the induced diode effect are subtle. 5 patterned into 4 μm wide track at 5 K. From the comparison with the polycrystalline device presented in Figure 1 of the same track width and measurement temperature, the epitaxial device shares many of the same features with the following differences. From the I-V characteristic, Figure 2 (b), the residual resistance of the epitaxial sample is lower than the polycrystalline sample. This sample also displays slightly non-linear dependence, consistent with Joule heating. The tracks patterned from the epitaxial sample has an Ic about twice that of the polycrystalline track, shown in Figure 2 (b) and (c). The increased Ic in the epitaxial sample is most likely due to the combination of increased gap (higher Tc), decreased grain boundaries, and increased mean free path compared to the polycrystalline sample. As shown in Figure 2 (d), the measured maximum η in this condition is smaller than the polycrystalline sample. We next study the track width dependence of the supercurrent diode effect in the poly- crystalline and epitaxial Nb samples. For polycrystalline Nb, the London penetration depth λL = 96 nm54, providing an estimate of the Pearl penetration depth λP = 2λ2 L/t ≈ 300 nm. For comparable epitaxial Nb, λL tends towards bulk55 providing an estimate λP ≈ 50 nm. Other works have considered tracks in the limit w/λP = 1/2549 and w/λP = 248, however here we explore a new limit where the width of the tracks are far greater than the Pearl penetration depth, w >> λP, covering between 10 < w/λP < 200. In this new limit, we observe a significant superconducting diode effect and report a width dependence in our samples. diode effect in the epitaxial and polycrystalline Nb samples. Considering first the epitaxial sample, Figure 3 (a), two samples of at w = 7 and 10 μm did not show finite η. In these two tracks, Ic at low temperatures exceeded the maximum output of our current source (100 mA), limiting the range of temperatures we could measure. For the narrower samples which showed η, the temperature dependence show similar trends for all samples, with the largest η at 1.8 K, and η decreasing with warming. 1.8 K, a clear peak in η is found for the 4 μm track, with η decreasing linearly for narrower or wider tracks. At 5 K, the peak in η is broader, with w = 4 and 5 μm showing similar η. Again, for narrower or wider tracks η decreases linearly with width. Linear fits to the decay of η for tracks of 4, 5, 6 and 7 μm are presented as dashed lines. 6 In the polycrystalline Nb samples, Figure 3 (d), tracks in the width regime 3 ≤ w ≤ 5 μm follow a similar temperature trend where η is largest for temperatures of 4 or 5 K, and decreases from the maximum value as the temperature is cooled or warmed. Tracks with w ≥ 7 μm show the largest η at the lowest temperature, with η decreasing as the temperature is warmed. Considering the track width dependence of η at fixed temperature, Figure 3 (e) and (f), η shows the largest value for tracks of w = 3 or 4 μm. Upon increasing w, η decreases linearly between 7 ≤ w ≤ 10 μm at 1.8 K and between 5 ≤ w ≤ 10 μm at 1.8 K. The 5 μm track at 1.8 K is a outlier to this trend. Linear fits to the decay of η for tracks of 7, 8 and 10 μm are presented as dashed lines. In an attempt to further understand the origin of the diode effect and the role of vorticies, we perform initialization experiments on one of our tracks. Figure 4 shows the epitaxial 65 nm thick Nb sample with 5 μm wide track at 6 K. (a-f) shows the initial state of the device after zero applied field cool and the conditions necessary to initialize the supercurrent diode effect in the device. At the zero field cooled condition in Figure 4 (a), the device already shows a small diode effect of η = 6%, presumably due to the small trapped flux in the superconducting magnet. Figure 4 (a-f) present the results of performing sequentially larger field sweeps. Starting from zero applied field, we observe a crossover in I+ c /I− c at approximately 1 mT. The crossover at 1 mT, where η = 0, likely corresponds to the true zero field condition. Trapped magnetic flux is a common feature of superconducting coils. Here, we choose not to perform background subtraction of this effect and we present the dataset ‘as measured’. Due to the larger field step size used to acquire the data presented in of the trapped flux is that our devices will have been cooled through the superconducting transition in a small magnetic field, which will contribute flux vorticies in the as cooled state. The dependence of the diode effect on field cooling was not investigated in this study. The maximum in I+ c is at about 4 mT. As in Figures 1 and 2, the maximum diode effect, η, corresponds to the maximum in I+ c . At larger fields the effect reduces, and I+ c = I− c at about 20 mT. In Figure 4, comparing the out and return field sweep directions, there is a hysteretic behavior in Ic, and hence η. Considering Figure 4 (e), the hysteresis is particularly observable in I+ c between 10 and 20 mT, but is present over the whole field range where η ̸= 0. The hysteretic behavior with field history suggests that the diode effect is sensitive to the field 7 history of the track. We expect that the preceding field history establishes different vortex states in the track, which therefore influences the magnitude of η. The largest hysteresis between 10 and 20 mT is reproduced in subsequent larger field sweeps (Figure 4 (f)). IV. DISCUSSION From the presented experimental data, we can report three key experimental observations. Firstly, at 65 nm thick, our films are in a distinct mid-range thickness with respect to other works in the field43,48. In this mid-range thickness we have shown that a diode effect is possible. Secondly, by varying the width of the tracks, we observe an unexpected dependence of the diode effect with track width. Thirdly, we extend previous work48, which considered only epitaxial Nb and demonstrate that the supercurrent diode effect is present in both polycrystalline and epitaxial Nb. In our polycrystalline Nb, the coherence length is 11.6 nm54, which is much less than the thickness of the 65 nm film studied here. Our results therefore suggest that the supercurrent diode effect reported here does not rely upon subtle interfacial effects, which may play an increasing role when film thickness is comparable to the coherence length. An added benefit of using thicker films is that at 65 nm the Nb has a near bulk Tc, which makes our devices useful for integrating with Nb based computing schemes operating at 4.2 K. Our data shows that the induced supercurrent diode effect depends upon the width of the track. From our data, we can estimate the upper limit of track width for the supercurrent diode effect. For the polycrystalline film, extrapolating the linear fit shown in Figures 3 (e) and (f) η = 0 for w between about 12 and 13 μm. In the epitaxial film, η = 0 is observed at 5 K for w = 7μm. Extrapolating the data at 1.8 K suggests that η = 0 for w ≈ 8 μm. In the epitaxial sample, η also reduces in narrowest tracks, but this trend is not reproduced in the polycrystalline sample. We propose that the induced diode effect does result from asymmetric properties in the two edges of our tracks. This asymmetry causes unequal generation, penetration and expul- sion of vortices on the two edges of the tracks, resulting in the observed rectification. Each edge has a different critical current density required for penetration of magnetic vortices, jpen. This could be induced by the asymmetric edge roughness mechanism of Hou et al.48, or more generally by any local changes in the superconducting gap such as, most probably, 8 edge profile. The diode effect in our tracks therefore relies on being in a regime where the critical current density (jc) of the tracks is limited by flux vortice entry. We know this to be the case from our analysis of the Ic(B) dependence of Figure 1 (c), inset. The require- ment for track to go normal is therefore flux penetrating the track from the edge barriers continuously and flux vortices moving freely across the track without being pinned. There are three possible mechanisms to limit the critical current desnity jc of our su- perconducting tracks. The ultimate limit is the depairing current, jpair. Where the critical current of the track is limited by flux vortices, the critical current density is limited by the greater of the current density required for penetration of magnetic vortices, jpen, and the current density required to depin the vortices, jpin. For our Nb tracks, we can reasonably assume that jpair is an intrinsic material property and jpin is a property of the film, both of which do not depend on track width. On the other hand, it has been shown that jpen depends on the track width (w) according to56 jpen = 2πBpen μ0 √ dw , (1) where d is the film thickness, Bpen is the minimum field for vortex penetration and μ0 is the magnetic permeability of free space. maximum nominal jc at 5 K for both the epitaxial and polycrystalline Nb tracks. jpen is fitted to the polycrystalline dataset with Bpen a free fitting parameter, returning a best fit value of 11 ± 1 mT. Note that Bpen is likely a combination of the applied and self magnetic fields in our system. Also plotted are the experimentally determined jpair from Il’in et al. for narrow polycrystalline Nb tracks56 and jpin from Zhu et al. for a 110 nm polycrystalline Nb film57. Considering the fit to the polycrystalline Nb tracks, it is possible to divide Figure 5 into three width regions. For narrow tracks occupying region I (w < w1), the critical current density in the track is limited by jpair. Since vortices do not contribute to jc, our conjecture is that it is not possible for fabrication to induce a supercurrent diode effect in this region. For intermediate region II (w1 < w < w2), the critical current is limited by jpen. In this region, the track goes normal when the transport current equals jpen, and a diode effect can be induced by device fabrication if jpen is asymmetric on each edges. For wide tracks in region III (w > w2), the critical current is no longer limited by jpen. Here, upon applying a transport current, first vortices enter the track at the edges at transport current exceeding 9 jpen. However, these vortices become pinned, preventing the track from going normal. It is only when the transport current exceeds jpin that vortices can move and the track goes normal. In region III, the induced diode effect should be suppressed as jpin is an intrinsic material property and therefore likely to be uniform across the width of the track. Comparing the width dependence of jc in Figure 5 to our experimental data on the width dependence of the supercurrent diode effect in Figures 3 we can make the following observations and predictions. We expect that the induced diode effect will be suppressed in region III, which for the polycrystalline dataset is at w ≈ 13 μm. This width corresponds well with our extrapolation to η = 0 in Figures 3 (e) and (f). We can also use the model to predict that w = 600 nm is the upper boundary of region I for polycrystalline Nb. Therefore tracks narrower than about 600 nm should not show induced supercurrent diode effect, however fabrication of tracks that narrow would require a change in fabrication methodology. Finally, applying similar analysis to the epitaxial Nb tracks, we conclude that both jpen and jpin must be higher in the epitaxial Nb. Interestingly, a higher jpen would suggest that that region I extends to wider epitaxial tracks tracks compared to polycrystalline tracks, which would be consistent with our observation of reduced η in the narrowest epitaxial tracks in Figures 3 (b) and (c). V. CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, we report on induced supercurrent diode effect in 65 nm thick polycrys- talline and epitaxial Nb films patterned into tracks. Consistent with previous works, the superconductor itself does not require any intrinsic inversion symmetry breaking and the layer can be significantly thicker than the coherence length. Our experimental results and model suggests that in order to distinguish between intrinsic and induced supercurrent diode effect in a materials system, the critical current density in the fabricated devices should be limited by jpair and not by flux vortices. Therefore, claims of intrinisic diode effect should only be made for devices limited by jpair (occupying region I of Figure 5). This is particularly relevant for the study of exotic materials to isolate the proposed intrinsic effect from the fabrication induced effect we report here. For technological applications, it would be possible to manipulate the devices edges to create local differences in jpen, for example by engineering edge roughness or by changing the 10 superconducting properties of one edge by ion implantation, and therefore control induced diode effects. Our largest reported diode efficency is η ≈ 30% in a 4 μm wide track at 5 K. We report that the supercurrent diode effect can be observed in Nb tracks over a range of track widths, applied out-of-plane applied fields and temperatures. Our results show a track width dependence, where for the widest tracks in this study, we report that the diode effect reduces or disappears altogether. We present a model of the critical currents in the track to account for our observed width dependence. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The work was supported financially through the following EPSRC grant: EP/V028138/1. We acknowledge support from the Henry Royce Institute. We would like to thank N.O. Birge for helpful discussions. AUTHOR DECLARATIONS Conflict of Interest The authors have no conflicts to disclose. Author Contributions N Satchell: Investigation (lead); methodology (lead); conceptualization (equal); writing - original draft (lead); visualization (lead); formal analysis (lead); writing - review and edit- ing (equal); funding acquisition (supporting). PM Shepley: Investigation (supporting); methodology (supporting); writing - review and editing (equal). MC Rosamond: In- vestigation (supporting); methodology (supporting); writing - review and editing (equal). G Burnell: Project administration (lead); funding acquisition (lead); conceptualization (equal); methodology (supporting); investigation (supporting); writing - review and editing (equal). 11 DATA AVAILABILITY The datasets generated during the current study are available in the University of Leeds repository, DOI: 10.5518/1293.