Pressure-induced nontrivial Z2 band topology and superconductivity in transition metal chalcogenide Ta2Ni3Te5 Haiyang Yang,1,2 Yonghui Zhou,1,* Shuyang Wang,1,2 Jing Wang,1,2 Xuliang Chen,1,2 Lili Zhang,3 Chenchao Xu,4,* and Zhaorong Yang1,2,5,6,* 1 Anhui Key Laboratory of Condensed Matter Physics at Extreme Conditions, High Magnetic Field Laboratory, HFIPS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, China 2 Science Island Branch of Graduate School, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China 3 Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201204, China 4 Center for Green Research on Energy and Environmental Materials (GREEN) and International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics (MANA), National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS), Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan 5 Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China 6 Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China *Corresponding authors. yhzhou@hmfl.ac.cn; chenchaoxu.xcc@gmail.com; zryang@issp.ac.cn Abstract The unique electronic and crystal structures driven by external pressure in transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) can host emergent quantum states. Here we report pressure-induced metallization, nontrivial Z2 band topology and superconductivity in TMC Ta2Ni3Te5. Our electrical transport measurements show that the metallization emerges at 3.3 GPa, followed by appearance of the superconductivity at Pc = 21.3 GPa with Tc ~ 0.4 K. Room-temperature synchrotron x-ray diffraction experiments demonstrate the stability of the pristine orthorhombic structure upon compression. Our first-principles calculations further reveal a topological phase transition (from Z2 = 0 to Z2 = 1), which occurs after Ta2Ni3Te5 is turned into an electron-hole compensated semimetal by pressure. The pressure-induced superconductivity at Pc could be attributed to the abruptly enhanced density of states at the Fermi level. These findings demonstrate that Ta2Ni3Te5 is a new platform for realizing exotic quantum phenomena in TMCs, as well as exploring the interplay between topological property and superconductivity. Transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been intensively investigated in past decades, which not only have potential applications in electronics and optoelectronics, but also provide a platform for investigating novel quantum states, such as quantum spin Hall (QSH), high-order topology and topological superconductivity . Recently, a new class of TMCs Ta2M3Te5 (M = Ni, Pd) has been attracting more and more attention. Theoretical calculation suggested that the monolayer Ta2Pd3Te5 is a QSH insulator, while the monolayer Ta2Ni3Te5 is a trivial insulator but can be tuned into the QSH state by uniaxial strain . Due to the presence of double-band inversion, it was further proposed that the monolayer Ta2M3Te5 (M = Ni, Pd) can host a two- dimension second-order topology . Consistent with the theoretical predictions, scanning tunneling microscopy measurements confirmed the existence of topological edge states in monolayer Ta2Pd3Te5 . In addition, superconductivity was induced by Ti- or W-doping in bulk Ta2Pd3Te5, although the parent compound shows semiconducting behavior . Without introducing impurities, pressure can directly modify the lattice and effectively change the physical properties of materials . In this work, we find multiple pressure-induced quantum phase transitions in Ta2Ni3Te5 by combining experimental measurements and theoretical calculations. At ambient pressure, the Ta2Ni3Te5 is a semiconductor with trivial Z2 band topology. Upon compression, although the pristine structure is stable up to 50.1 GPa, electrical transport measurements show that Ta2Ni3Te5 displays a semiconductor-to-metal transition at 3.3 GPa, followed by the emergence of superconductivity at Pc = 21.3 GPa. First-principles calculations suggest Ta2Ni3Te5 is tuned to an electron-hole compensated semimetal at 2.1 GPa and undergoes a topological phase transition from Z2 = 0 to Z2 = 1 around 4 GPa. The nontrivial topological property is preserved at least up to 41.1 GPa, suggesting that the pressurized Ta2Ni3Te5 possesses coexistence of nontrivial topological band structure and superconductivity. The experimental and computational methods used in this study and supporting data under pressure are described in the Supplemental Material . Ta2Ni3Te5 crystallizes in a layered orthorhombic structure with space group Pnma (No. 62) , as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The unit cell contains two Ta2Ni3Te5 monolayers stacked along the a axis, coupled to each other by weak van der Waals interactions. Each monolayer comprises three atomic layers: tellurium atoms form the top and bottom layers, and the middle layer contains tantalum and nickel atoms. Figure 1(b) shows the XRD pattern of the single crystal Ta2Ni3Te5. It is clear that only (l00) diffraction peaks can be detected, demonstrating that the bc plane is a natural cleavage facet. The inset of Fig. 1(b) exhibits a picture of as-grown Ta2Ni3Te5 single crystals whose preferred orientation is along the b-axis. The crystals are as large as 2 mm and have shiny surfaces. As shown in Fig. 1(c), the energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy gives the ratio of Ta : Ni : Te ~ 1.97 : 2.99 : 5.04, which is close to the ideal stoichiometry of Ta : Ni : Te = 2 : 3 : 5. The above characterizations demonstrate the high quality of the samples used here. Figure 1(d) presents the temperature-dependent resistivity ρ(T) and dc magnetization M(T) curves of Ta2Ni3Te5 single crystals from 2 to 300 K. For the high- temperature ρ(T) curve from 300 to 180 K, it can be fitted well by the Arrhenius model ρ(T) = ρ0exp(Eg/kBT), where kB and Eg are the Boltzmann constant and thermal activation energy, respectively. The extracted activation energy Eg is ~29.8 meV. In the low temperature region, the resistivity can be better described by the Mott’s variable- range hopping (VRH) model. Because Ta2Ni3Te5 displays a paramagnetic behavior as indicated by the monotonic increase of magnetization upon cooling from 300 K, the small polaron hopping model for a magnetic semiconductor like Mn3Si2Te6 is not applicable here. At 0.8 GPa, Ta2Ni3Te5 displays a semiconducting behavior, and the overall resistivity decreases by two orders of magnitude compared to the case of ambient pressure. Upon compression to 3.3 GPa, the pressure-induced metallic conductivity can be recognized. With further increasing pressure, Ta2Ni3Te5 remains metallic, while a tiny resistivity drop is observed around 0.5 K at 21.3 GPa. Such a drop becomes more and more pronounced at higher pressures, and the zero resistance is finally achieved at 34.2 GPa, indicating the appearance of superconductivity in Ta2Ni3Te5, as shown in Fig. 2(b-c). Moreover, the superconductivity is robust up to 50.5 GPa, the highest pressure conducted in this study. In order to confirm the superconducting state, we further performed resistance measurements under various magnetic fields along the a-axis at 34.2 GPa, as shown in Fig. 2(d). By defining Tc with the resistivity criterion of ρcri = 90%ρn (ρn is the normal state resistivity), we plotted the temperature-magnetic field phase diagram in Fig. 2(e). By fitting the data to the Werthamer-Helfand-Hohenberg (WHH) model , the estimated upper critical field μ0Hc2(0) ~ 0.61 T is much lower than the Pauli limit field of μ0HP(0) = 1.84Tc (~ 1.4 T), which suggests the absence of Pauli paramagnetic pair-breaking effect. According to the relationship μ0Hc2(0) = Φ0/(2πξ2), where Φ0 = 2.07 × 10–15 Wb is the flux quantum, the coherence length ξ of 232.4 Å is obtained. To examine the structural stability of pristine Ta2Ni3Te5 under pressure, we performed high-pressure powder XRD measurements at room temperature. As shown in Fig. 3(a), all the XRD peaks continuously shift towards higher angles without appearance of extra peaks up to 50.1 GPa. Using the Le Bail method, all XRD patterns can be indexed by the space group Pnma. A typical analysis of the XRD pattern at 0.7 GPa is shown at the bottom of Fig. 3(a). We extract the lattice parameters as a function of pressure, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Upon compression from 0.7 to 50.1 GPa, the parameters a, b, and c decreased by ~11.6%, 5.5%, and 8.4%, respectively, indicating it is much more compressible for interlayer than intralayer. As shown in Fig. 3(c), the pressure-dependent volume can be fitted by the third-order Birch-Murnaghan equation of state . The fitting yields ambient pressure volume V0 = 907.7 ± 3.2 Å3, bulk modulus B0 = 52.4 ± 4.8 GPa, and its first pressure derivative B0’ = 9.6 ± 0.8, respectively. To further understand the pressure evolution of electronic transport properties in Ta2Ni3Te5, electronic band structures under pressure were calculated by using the Vienna Abinit Simulation Package (VASP) with Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange functional . At ambient pressure, the band structure is fully gapped in the presence of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) (Fig. 4(a)), indicating a semiconductor ground state. The Z2 index defined with the parity at the time-reversal invariant momenta (TRIM) is [0;000], exhibiting trivial topological property that is consistent with the previous study . The semiconducting behavior and trivial Z2 topological property were also confirmed by the calculations with modified Becke-Johnson (mBJ) exchange potential . The detailed evolution of band structures under low pressure is illustrated in Fig. S2. The conduction and valence bands cross the Fermi level around 2.1 GPa, with the formation of tiny electron and hole pockets, leading to an electron-hole compensated semimetallic state. Further increasing pressure, the direct band gap along Y-Γ gradually closes and reopens at a slightly higher pressure. Interestingly, such a gap closing-reopening transition is concomitant with the band inversion. In order to verify the topological property of Ta2Ni3Te5, we calculated the Z2 index (Table S1). Before 3.6 GPa, Z2 index keeps to be [0:000]. However, after the band inversion taking place around Γ point, the Z2 index becomes [1:111] at 5.3 GPa, suggesting a topological phase transition from Z2 trivial to nontrivial. After extrapolating the direct band gap along Y-Γ below 10.4 GPa, the critical pressure for topological phase transition is estimated to be 4.0 GPa (Fig. S3). We further illustrate the surface state obtained from surface Green functions calculation at 5.3 GPa, as shown in Fig. 5(a). In contrast to the fully gaped bulk band structure (Fig. 4(b)) at Γ point, the Dirac-type surface states appear in the spectra, demonstrating the nontrivial topological property. It is noted that the pressure-induced nontrivial topological property has also been reported in other systems, such as BiTeI, Sb2Se3, SnSe, LaSb, and γ-InSe . For Ta2Ni3Te5, the electron and hole pockets become larger under higher pressure (Fig. 4(c,d)), while the highest valence band and lowest conducting band remain separated. The nontrivial band topology is preserved to 41.1 GPa, which is confirmed by the Z2 calculation (Table S1). In Fig. 5(b), we show the evolution of the density of states (DOS) upon compression. A pressure-induced red shift of DOS peak around the Fermi level is observed. Around Pc ~ 20 GPa, at which the superconductivity emerges, the DOS peak shifts to the Fermi level. Simultaneously, the bands along T-Y-S (Fig. 4(c,d)) with weak dispersion cross the Fermi level, forming rather flat electron-type Fermi surfaces around Y point (Fig. 5(c,d)). This implies that the pressure-induced superconducting transition is probably due to the enhanced DOS at the Fermi level (Fig. S4) with large contribution from the new emerged flat electron-type surfaces around Y point. In summary, the pressure effect on the structural and electronic properties in Ta2Ni3Te5 is systematically investigated by combining experimental measurements and theoretical calculations, from which the pressure-temperature phase diagram of Ta2Ni3Te5 is constructed in Fig. 6. High-pressure synchrotron XRD reveals no structural phase transition up to 50.1 GPa. Our electrical transport experiments show that the metallization of Ta2Ni3Te5 emerges at 3.3 GPa, followed by the appearance of superconductivity at Pc = 21.3 GPa. The metallization can be ascribed to the formation of electron and hole pockets around the Fermi level, whereas the superconductivity originates from the abruptly enhanced density of states at the Fermi level. More interestingly, we find a topological phase transition occurs at ~4.0 GPa, featured by the band inversion around Γ point, the change of the Z2 index as well as the appearance of the Dirac-like topological surface states. The nontrivial topological property maintains up to 41.1 GPa, suggesting that the superconductor Ta2Ni3Te5 displays nontrivial band topology. These findings provide an exciting opportunity to investigate the correlation between superconductivity and topological states in transition metal chalcogenides. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors are grateful to Siqi Wu and Chao Cao for helpful discussion. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant Nos. and 2018YFA0305704), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. U1932152, 12174395, 12004004, and U19A2093), the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province (Grant Nos. 2008085QA40 and 1908085QA18), the Users with Excellence Project of Hefei Center CAS (Grant Nos. 2021HSC-UE008 and 2020HSC- UE015), the Collaborative Innovation Program of Hefei Science Center CAS (Grant No. 2020HSC-CIP014). A portion of this work was supported by the High Magnetic Field Laboratory of Anhui Province under Contract No. AHHM-FX-2020-02. Yonghui Zhou was supported by the Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS (Grant No. 2020443). A portion of this work was supported by the High Magnetic Field Laboratory of Anhui Province. The high-pressure synchrotron X-ray diffraction experiments were performed at the beamline BL15U1, Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility. The DFT calculations were performed on the supercomputers at NIMS (Numerical Materials Simulator), Institute for Solid State Physics, the University of Tokyo in Japan and the HPC center at Hangzhou Normal University in China.