1 Evidence for excitonic insulator ground state in triangulene Kagome lattice Aidan Delgado1,†, Carolin Dusold1,†, Jingwei Jiang2,3,†, Adam Cronin1, Steven G. Louie2,3,* & Felix R. Fischer1,3,4,5,* 1Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 2Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 3Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 4Kavli Energy NanoScience Institute at the University of California Berkeley and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 5Bakar Institute of Digital Materials for the Planet, Division of Computing, Data Science, and Society, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. † These authors contributed equally to this work. * Corresponding authors 2 Electron-hole pair excitations in semiconductors have been predicted to be able to give rise to a highly correlated many-body ground state, the excitonic insulator (EI)1,2. Under appropriate conditions below a critical temperature (Tc), strongly bound electron-hole pairs spontaneously form and undergo a phase transition from a normal band insulator into an exciton condensate, transforming the parent material into a novel correlated insulator. Despite recent advances in spectroscopic tools, clear direct experimental evidence for the EI state has been elusive and is often obfuscated by accompanying electronic effects3-13. Here we present the reticular bottom-up synthesis of a Kagome lattice of triangulene14, a two-dimensional (2D) covalent organic framework (COF) imbued with a deliberate excitonic instability15 — excitons with binding energies larger than the bandgap — arising from a pair of flat bands (FBs). Theoretical analyses based on first-principles calculations and scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) reveal quasiparticle spectral signatures mixing valence (VB) and conduction (CB) characteristics of the FBs along with a non-trivial semiconducting gap that can only be explained by invoking many-body theory16,17. Our findings spectroscopically corroborate the nature of a FB induced exciton insulator ground state and provide a robust yet highly tuneable platform for the exploration of correlated quasi boson physics in quantum materials. 3 A distinguishing characteristic of strongly correlated phases of matter is that the behavior of their constituent electronic excitations can no longer be described as a non-interacting renormalized Fermi gas. It is these correlated phases that have given rise to some of the most exciting quantum phenomena in materials. Excitonic insulators (a condensed phase of electron-hole pairs) is a correlated many-body ground state predicted in the 1960’s that can arise in appropriate semimetals or narrow-gap semiconductors below a critical temperature (Tc)1,2,15,18. Whereas the high charge carrier density associated with the overlapping conduction and valence band (i.e., a negative band gap (Eg)) in semimetals effectively screens the electron- hole (e–-h+) interaction depressing Tc, an intrinsic instability in the single-particle (quasiparticle) band structure of a semiconductor can induce the spontaneous condensation of excitons –– the electron-hole pairs –– provided the exciton binding energy (Eb) exceeds the magnitude of the gap in the conventional band insulator phase16,18-20. While the underlying principle has been understood for more than 50 years1,2, exercising a deterministic control over subtle many-body interactions represents a veritable challenge and could imbue otherwise ordinary materials with truly exotic electronic phases3-12,16,17,21-26. The realization of an EI could expand the boundaries of tailor-made quantum materials, providing deeper insight into strongly correlated phenomena, e.g. the crossover between Bardeen Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) and BEC theory5,27,28. Favourable conditions for the realization of an EI ground state (Eb > Eg) not only call for small gap semiconductors, but for an increase in the quasiparticle masses and a reduction in the screening of the Coulomb potential binding the e–-h+ pairs — thus maximizing Eb. Layer materials herein represent privileged scaffolds as the 2D confinement intrinsically lowers the screening of charge carriers when compared to a 3D crystal lattice. The correlation between e– and h+ can further be augmented by applying the tools of zero-mode engineering29 to give rise to topological flat bands featuring charge carriers with huge effective masses and a greatly enhanced localization of the exciton wavefunction30-32. Our strategy for engineering a robust EI ground state follows the design of a diatomic Kagome lattice of triangulenes –– nanoscale equilateral triangles of graphene cut along the a1 and a2 lattice vectors –– proposed by Sethi et al.15,18. Fig. 1a shows a valence bond model for the open-shell S = 3/2 ground state of an isolated triangulene arising from a sublattice imbalance DN = NA – NB = 3, where NA and NB are the number of 4 A and B sublattice sites of graphene, respectively. Nearest-neighbour analyses reveal three states (zero- modes) at the Fermi level. These three zero-modes unique to triangulene are reminiscent of the orbital coordination number of a site in a diatomic Kagome lattice and when fused along the three vertices give rise to an orbital valence bond solid depicted in Fig. 1b (b1 and b2 are the lattice vectors of the diatomic Kagome lattice unit cell containing a pair of triangulene superatoms). The corresponding tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonian can be expressed as H" = t! ∑ c"# $ 〈"&〉# c&# + t( ∑ c"# $ 〈〈"&〉〉# c&# + t) ∑ c"# $ 〈〈〈"&〉〉〉# c&# (1) where t1, t2, and t3 are the hopping amplitudes defined in Fig. 1b (t2 is expected to be small due to sublattice polarization of the zero-modes). cia† and cja are the creation and annihilation operators of the zero-mode at site i and j with spin a. The first term in Eq. 1 describes the hopping across a junction formed by fusing two triangulenes along their corners while the second and third terms correspond to the hopping within a single triangulene and the second nearest neighbour interaction between orbitals on two adjacent triangulenes, respectively. The TB Hamiltonian gives rise to six bands, a pair of valence (VB) and conduction (CB) FBs (blue and red bands in Fig. 1c, respectively) flanked on either side by pairs of comparatively dispersive bands. The large effective masses of and the overlap between e– and h+ wavefunctions associated with the FBs in 2D increases the Eb while a large exchange interaction raises the singlet-triplet splitting energy (DEST) favouring the formation of a robust triplet EI ground state30-35, which are confirmed by our ab initio GW-BSE calculations33 and in agreement with Sethi et al.15. Guided by this idea we designed two competent molecular precursors for the reticular growth of a triangulene COF (TCOF), the benzo[c]naptho[2,1-p]chrysenes 1a and 1b. The synthesis is depicted in Fig. 2a. Suzuki-Miyaura cross-coupling of benzene-1,3,5-triyltriboronic ester36 2 with an excess of 4- bromo-1-iodo(prop-1-en-1-yl)benzene 3 yields the tribromide 4 in 86% yield. Photocyclization of 4 in the presence of a stochiometric oxidant yields the tribrominated benzo[c]naptho[2,1-p]chrysene core 1a in 84%37. An aromatic Finkelstein reaction gives access to the corresponding triiodinated precursor for TCOF 1b in 86% yield38. Analytically pure samples of 1a and 1b suitable for ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) 5 deposition were isolated as racemic mixtures of slowly interconverting helical diastereoisomers (PPP/MMM and PPM/MMP). TCOFs were grown on Au(111)/mica films by sublimation of 1a,b in UHV onto a clean Au(111) surface held at 297 K. Extended Data Fig. ED1 shows constant-current scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) topographic images of a sub-monolayer coverage of 1a and 1b on Au(111) at T = 4 K. Slow annealing of surfaces decorated with the tribrominated precursor 1a to 473 K gave rise to highly irregular networks that hint at a competition between the desired Ullmann-type coupling of aryl halides along the vertices and the surface catalysed cyclodehydrogenation of methyl groups that establishes the extended zigzag edges in the triangulene core (Extended Data Fig. ED2). In an effort to kinetically decouple these two reaction steps, the Ullmann-type C–C coupling and the thermal cyclodehydrogenation, we resorted to the more reactive triiodinated precursor 1b39,40. Molecule-decorated surfaces, >0.9 monolayer (ML) 1b on Au(111), were first annealed at 333 K for 12 h before slowly raising the surface temperature to 473 K. Fig. 2b shows a representative constant-current scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) image of a two-dimensional (2D) covalent network of triangulenes on Au(111) revealing a respectively (N = 3512, Extended Data Fig. ED3). Long range order of bottom-up synthesized TCOFs resulting from 1b remains low and crystallinity is confined to small isolated domains (Fig. 2c). Bond- resolved STM (BRSTM) reveals that the 2D covalent network is formed by fully fused equilateral triangles featuring atomically smooth zigzag edges with apparent base length, and z-height of 0.85 nm ± 0.01 nm and 0.14 nm ± 0.02 nm, respectively, consistent with the formation of the fully cyclodehydrogenated triangulene core (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. ED4). Large area STM images reveal that the cross-linking in 2D COFs prepared from the triiodinated molecular precursor 1b almost exclusively (>99%) feature the desired C–C bonding between triangulene vertices (Fig. 2c) rather than unselective fusions involving the highly reactive zigzag edges commonly observed for 1a (Extended Data Fig. ED2). The local electronic structure of isolated crystalline domains of TCOF was characterized by differential tunnelling (dI/dV) spectroscopy. A typical dI/dV point spectrum recorded at a position corresponding to the centre and the zigzag edge (see BRSTM image in Fig. 3c) of a triangulene subunit 6 are depicted in Fig. 3a,b. While dI/dV point spectra recorded near the centre of a triangulene are featureless, besides a characteristic signature assigned to the Au(111) surface state, dI/dV spectra recorded along the zigzag edges show eight prominent features in the range between –2.0 V < Vs < +2.0 V. Two broad peaks centred at Vs = –1.55 ± 0.02 V (Peak 1) and Vs = +1.05 ± 0.02 V (Peak 8) bracket EF and can be assigned to deep-lying (i.e. energetically remote from EF) states in the bulk VB and CB, respectively (Fig. 3d). Fig. 3b shows a magnification of the dI/dV point spectra taken over a narrower bias range of –0.6 V < Vs < +0.6 V. Spectra recorded along the zigzag edge show a distinctive pattern of five peaks (Peaks 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7) flanking a sharp dip in the differential tunnelling current centred at Vs = 0.00 ± 0.05 V (Feature 5). dI/dV maps collected at an imaging bias close to Vs = 0.00 V (Fig. 3g) reveal the structure of a featureless network with contrasts rising barely above the Au(111) background, punctuated only by a bright zero-mode state emanating from a local defect in the TCOF lattice. Above and below the semiconducting gap (Eexp ~ 0.20 eV) the dI/dV signal rises sharply towards two steps centred at Vs = +0.10 ± 0.05 V (Peak 6) and Vs = –0.10 ± 0.05 V (Peak 4). dI/dV imaging of the spatial distribution of the LDOS at energies close to Peak 6 (Vs = +0.15 V in Fig. 3f) reveals a highly diffuse state at the centre of the triangulene superimposed by dark shaded lobes along the zigzag edges. The unusually diffuse nature of the state around Vs = +0.15 V coincides with a characteristic peak in the Au(111) spectrum suggesting the observed LDOS is a superposition of TCOF and Au states dominated by the background. dI/dV imaging at the corresponding negative bias Vs = –0.15 V (Peak 4, Fig 3h) instead reveals a pattern of four bright lobes lining the zigzag edges of each triangulene subunit. The last lobe on either side is shared between zigzag edges and, together with the last lobe of its neighbour triangulene, forms the junction between adjacent building blocks. Beyond these two steps the dI/dV signal continues to rise steeply and peaks at Vs = +0.30 ± 0.02 V (Peak 7), and Vs = –0.30 ± 0.02 V (Peak 3) respectively. The unusually narrow peak shape and the large signal intensity at Vs = ±0.30 V suggest the features represent the signature of van Hove singularities in the quasiparticle density of states. Differential conductance maps recorded at the corresponding biases show clearly distinctive patterns. At Vs = +0.30 V (Peak 7) the LDOS is most intense at the lobes coinciding with the junction between covalently linked triangulenes while the signal along the zigzag edges is only 7 slightly weaker. At Vs = –0.30 V (Peak 3) the signal intensity almost uniformly distributed along the four lobes lining the zigzag edge. The last notable feature is a peak at Vs = –0.52 V (Peak 2). The corresponding differential conductance maps are reminiscent of the spatial LDOS distribution associated with Peak 3 and are likely associated with the same band. dI/dV point spectra recorded directly above the C–C bond linking two adjacent triangulene subunits qualitatively mirror the number and position of peaks recorded along the zigzag edges. STS experiments performed using a variety of CO functionalized STM tips on a set of structurally unique TCOF domains faithfully reproduce the position and intensity of all four key spectral features (Peaks 3,4,6,7) straddling a semiconducting gap (Feature 5) (Extended Data Fig. ED5,6). To explore theoretically the electronic ground state of TCOFs we evaluated two distinct models. First, we attempt to describe the electronic structure of a TCOF using conventional ab initio density functional theory (DFT) in the local density approximation (LDA). In a second approach we consider a correlated ground state of e–-h+ pairs within a BCS-like framework, thus allowing for a mixing of VB and CB wavefunction characters in the quasiparticle states of an EI. The DFT-LDA quasiparticle band structure for the six bands closest to the band gap along with the calculated density of states (DOS) of the TCOF are depicted in Fig. 4a and 4b, respectively. Two narrow bands (denoted CFB and VFB) bracket EF, enclosing a conventional semiconducting gap of Eg ~ 200 mV. Both bands are virtually dispersionless. The two FBs and the two band complexes can be fit by a TB model (Eq. 1) with t1 = –0.132 eV, t2 = –0.013 eV t3 = – 0.016 eV (Fig. 4a, dashed lines). Above and below the conduction and valence FBs, the two pairs of dispersive bands complete the TB picture of a ying-yang Kagome superlattice. On either side of EF, the DFT-LDA DOS shows the onset of two sharp features centred at E – EF = ±0.10 eV that extend into a series of smaller peaks at higher and lower energy for the CB and VB complex, respectively. Figs. 4c,d show the square of the theoretical wavefunction amplitude maps at a distance of 4 Å above the plane of a freestanding TCOF at energies corresponding to the valence and the conduction FB edges. Both LDOS maps show distinctive nodal patterns, two bright spots lining the zigzag edges for the CB (Fig. 4c) and two bright spots at the position of the junction between two triangulenes for the VB (Fig. 4d). The corresponding experimental dI/dV maps (Fig. 4e,f, Extended Data Fig. ED5,6) recorded on pristine TCOF domains at 8 Vs = ±0.10 V instead both show a uniform distribution of the wavefunction amplitude shared along the zigzag edges and the junction interface. The obvious mismatch between DFT-LDA LDOS predictions for CB and VB edge states (Fig. 4c,d) and the experimental STS mapping (Fig. 4e,f) suggests that a conventional band insulating ground state given by DFT-LDA is insufficient to describe the electronic structure of TCOF. In formal analogy to the BCS theory of superconductivity, following Kohn1, we derive a second model that describes the transition from a band insulator to an EI for the TCOF ground state and arrive at a theory for the quasiparticle spectrum that is measured in STS (see Methods). Given a semiconducting gap Eexp ~ 0.20 eV (derived from STS) and a triplet exciton eigenenergy Eex = –0.17 eV (derived from GW- BSE)15, a resulting finite order parameter |D| ~ 0.1 eV gives rise to a EI ground state at finite temperatures T < Tc. The corresponding quasiparticle excitations yield in a nearly equal contribution in orbital character from both the conventional VB and CB states. Fig. 4g shows the calculated LDOS map arising from a 1:1 (VB:CB) mixing. The characteristic nodal pattern — four bright lobes lining the zigzag edges, the first and last lobe are shared between adjacent triangulenes — is consistent with the experimental differential conductance maps recorded at Vs = ±0.10 V (Figs. 4e,f), corroborating the emergence of an EI ground state. Even for minor changes in the BCS order parameter |D|, i.e. a slightly reduced contribution to the mixing of VB and CB in Fig. 4h (2:3) and 4i (3:2), the quasiparticle LDOS continue to return a better correspondence to the experimental dI/dV maps of TCOF (Fig 4e and 4f, respectively) than the band insulator results that do not account for strong e–-h+ correlations. Our experimental and theoretical results thus provide strong evidence for the emergence of a flat-band induced EI ground state in a TCOF Kagome lattice at T = 4 K and are based on a detailed investigation of the quasiparticle spectral features in both energy and space. Reticular bottom-up approaches not only provide a general strategy for accessing and exploring other strongly correlated phenomena, but give rise to an expanding class of engineered quantum materials that can deliver further and deeper insights into the crossover between BCS and BEC theory. 9