1 How Segmental Dynamics and Mesh Confinement Determine the Selective Diffusivity of Molecules in Crosslinked Dense Polymer Networks Baicheng Mei a,d, Tsai-Wei Lin c,d, Grant S. Sheridan a,d, Christopher M. Evans *a,c,d, Charles E. Sing *a,c,d and Kenneth S. Schweizer *a,b,c,d a. Department of Materials Science, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA b. Department of Chemistry, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801, USA c. Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, University of Illinois, 61801, USA d.Materials Research Laboratory, University of Illinois, 61801, USA * kschweiz@illinois.edu * cesing@illinois.edu * cme365@illinois.edu 2 Abstract The diffusion of molecules (“penetrants”) of variable size, shape, and chemistry through dense crosslinked polymer networks is a fundamental scientific problem that is broadly relevant in materials, polymer, physical and biological chemistry. Relevant applications include molecular separations in membranes, barrier materials for coatings, drug delivery, and nanofiltration. A major open question is the relationship between molecular transport, thermodynamic state, and chemical structure of the penetrant and polymeric media. Here we address this question by combining experiment, simulation, and theory to unravel the competing effects of penetrant chemistry on its transport in rubbery and supercooled polymer permanent networks over a wide range of crosslink densities, size ratios, and temperatures. The crucial importance of the coupling of local penetrant hopping to the polymer structural relaxation process, and the secondary importance of geometric mesh confinement effects, are established. Network crosslinks induce a large slowing down of nm-scale polymer relaxation which greatly retards the rate of penetrant activated relaxation. The demonstrated good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory provides strong support for the size ratio variable (effective penetrant diameter to the Kuhn length which quantifies the stiffness of the polymer backbone) as a key variable, and the usefulness of coarse-grained simulation and theoretical models that average over Angstrom scale chemical details. The developed microscopic theory provides a fundamental understanding of the physical processes underlying the behaviors observed in experiment and simulation. Specifically, both local steric caging of penetrants by polymer segments in the first solvation shell, and the causally coupled effect of the longer-range collective elasticity of the crosslinked network, resist penetrant hopping in distinctive manners. Penetrant transport is theoretically predicted to become even more size sensitive in a more deeply supercooled regime not probed in our present experiments or simulations, which suggests new strategies for enhancing selective polymer membrane design. 3 Introduction The permeation of atoms, molecules and nanoparticles of variable size, shape, and chemistry (referred to here as “penetrants”) through a dense polymeric media (liquid, glass, crosslinked permanent or dynamic rubber network, thermoset) is a rich fundamental scientific problem that is broadly relevant in materials, polymer, physical and biological chemistry . Understanding how the many physiochemical factors and thermodynamic state control penetrant activated mass transport is critical in many applications including gas, water, and organic molecule separations in membranes , self-healing based on microcapsules , ion and solvent transport in biological and polymeric materials , barrier materials for coatings , drug delivery , and nanofiltration . In particular, it underlies a massive chemical separations industry traditionally based on costly and often inefficient distillation methods estimated to constitute 10-15% of the world’s energy consumption . This has motivated an intensive search for alternative membranes that filter molecules based on their size, shape and/or interactions with the matrix. A common paradigm is to control the size of membrane pores based on materials such as metal organic frameworks, covalent organic frameworks, and zeolites. Yet, these materials are typically mechanically brittle and difficult to process and deploy at scale. Glassy amorphous polymers are more viable for gas separations , but less size-selective, and ineffective for separations of larger molecules such as polyaromatics which are excluded in such low “free volume” solid materials. Rubbery membranes exploit equilibrium solubility as a selectivity strategy , but transport is relatively fast and differences in solvation are generally not as sensitive to molecular structure as in materials designed to exploit the activated nature of penetrant diffusion (e.g., polymer glasses). Overall, a major conceptual bottleneck remains due to 4 our still-nascent understanding of the relationship between molecular transport, thermodynamic state, and the chemical structure of the separating species and the polymeric membrane. Here, we consider non-gaseous molecular penetrant diffusion in solvent-free, crosslinked polymer networks. Even in the dilute limit, understanding how molecular aspects of the polymer control the absolute and relative rates of penetrant diffusivity remains open since activated processes in condensed media can be exceptionally sensitive to a multitude of local physical and chemical factors that characterize the penetrant and polymer species. Recent theoretical work for polymer melts has predicted that in the supercooled regime and approaching the glass transition temperature (Tg), the sensitivity of penetrant hopping to polymer structural relaxation is strongly amplified. Exploitation of this behavior can be an effective means for developing new selective membranes, which we hypothesize can be even further improved if polymer melts are covalently crosslinked. Our main goal is to study and understand molecular penetrant diffusion in the dilute limit in supercooled crosslinked polymer networks down to Tg. Chemical crosslinks induce additional dynamical constraints on penetrant diffusivity via two qualitatively distinct processes: (i) slowing down of nm-scale polymer segmental relaxation in a highly temperature-dependent manner, and (ii) entropic (virtually temperature-independent) geometric mesh obstruction of penetrant diffusion, effects which are both enhanced with increasing crosslink density. Here we clarify, for the first time, the competition and inter-relationship between these two effects on penetrant transport over a wide range of temperatures, network mesh sizes, and penetrant sizes. This is a major challenge that classic phenomenological models cannot address. Moreover, most prior discussions of mesh obstruction effects are based on rigid frameworks or theoretical models for larger nanoparticles in a high temperature rubber . 5 Our results are of broad relevance towards addressing the physicochemical principles underlying points (i) and (ii) above and are based on a coordinated experimental, simulation, and theoretical effort. By experimentally selecting penetrant molecules of variable size and shape within a class of aromatics with similar dispersive (weak) attractions with the polymer matrix, we address how chemical crosslinks and activated segmental relaxation simultaneously conspire to determine the penetrant mass transport rate. The simulation and theory-based modeling purposefully ignores chemically specific penetrant-polymer attractions and adopts coarse-grained spherical penetrant and polymer network models that average over Angstrom scale details. This simplification is motivated not only by practical computational and theoretical considerations, but our desire to understand if such fine chemical details are strongly self-averaged in the determination of long-time penetrant diffusion constants. Encouraging support for this concept has been recently established based on a combined theory-experiment analysis of a large set of atomic and molecular penetrant diffusion data in chemically diverse molecular and polymer liquids over a broad range of temperatures down to the glass transition. Confrontation of the new experimental data in crosslinked networks presented here with our theoretical and simulation results shows favorable agreement. This allows us to draw multiple important conclusions that illustrate the generality of the competing physical mechanisms, which will be of major value for the experimental design of selective membranes and the usefulness of simulation and theory for the penetrant transport problem. Materials and Methods All technical details of the experiment, simulation, and theory can be found in the Supporting Information (SI) and our prior papers . Here we sketch the essential elements. 6 Using fluorescence methods we experimentally measured at 23 oC the diffusion constant of four penetrant dye molecules perylenedicarboximide (BTBP), tert-butylated rubrene (TBRb), rubrene (RUB), and hydroxy functionalized nitrobenzoxadiazole (NBD-OH) of differing shape and size (Figure 1a) under dilute conditions in previously well-characterized dense poly(n-butyl-acrylate) (PnBA) polymer networks (schematic of synthesis in Figure 1b; crosslink fraction fcross). The penetrant van der Waals volumes were calculated using an atomic group contribution method (see TBRb (more rounded and plate-like) were selected since they have nearly identical space filling volumes. To consider the penetrant volume effect at roughly similar shape, we studied TBRb and RUB. The NBD-OH molecule was examined since it is more spherical than the other penetrants studied, has a significantly smaller volume, and contains a positive and negative charge distribution on the nitro group that is absent in the nonpolar TBRb, RUB and BTBP penetrants. Characterization data are given in the SI (Figures S1-S3). Standard Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations were performed using our previously validated coarse-grained model for PnBA networks (semiflexible chains where each bead represents a single nBA monomer of size σ∗) with explicit crosslinks as the polymer matrix in which dilute spherical penetrants (diameter d) are dissolved (Figure 1b) . The network mesh size is computed as the average distance between crosslink points, and the penetrant diffusion constant extracted from the long-time limit of its mean square displacement; see, e.g., Here we generalize to crosslinked networks the self-consistent cooperative hopping (SCCH) statistical mechanical theory of the activated spherical penetrant (diameter d) relaxation 7 time previously developed for polymer melts . The approach self-consistently predicts the variable degree that smaller scale polymer segmental motions are coupled with the penetrant activated hopping event. Figure 1c presents a schematic of the physical ideas which are based on coupled dynamic free energies for the penetrant and polymer matrix that define the forces on a moving penetrant and Kuhn segment (length lK), respectively, a priori constructed from knowledge of the microscopic structure. The penetrant activated barrier hopping time and the Kuhn segment correlated motion are self-consistently determined . Figure 1c also indicates how the polymers are coarse-grained to a tangent semiflexible chain of hard-core beads (diameter σ) with parameters that model PnBA, with network crosslinks (fraction fn) modeled as regular pinning of immobilized beads along a chain . All intermolecular interactions are hard-core repulsions, and the structural correlations required to quantify dynamical constraints are computed using the polymer reference interaction site model integral equation theory . The hard-core model is related to thermal networks at 1 atm by a mapping procedure using PnBA experimental equation-of-state data . The mean network mesh diameter is calculated as ax = σ/Afcross 1/2 where A is calibrated for the PnBA networks and a linear connection between fn and fcross applies (see SI and Ref. ). The penetrant alpha process involves hopping over a local cage barrier (FB,p) which is coupled with longer-range collective displacements of all Kuhn segments outside the cage characterized by an elastic barrier (Fel,p). The total activation barrier is the sum of these two barriers reflecting the coupled local-nonlocal nature of the penetrant relaxation process. The theory predicts the penetrant alpha time as a function of crosslink density, penetrant-to-matrix size ratio (d/σ), and temperature. SCCH theory does not explicitly account for mesh confinement effects on penetrant diffusivity. 8 Prior quantitative comparisons of the segmental alpha time results for the PnBA networks from theory, simulation, and experiment show excellent agreement. Quantitatively different coarse-graining methods are used corresponding to bare bead sizes of σ∗ = 0.573 nm in simulation and σ = 1.03 nm in the theory, per Table 1. Both models adopt the experimental PnBA Kuhn length lK = 1.72 nm ]. The temperature mapping in the theory quantitatively differs from how scaled temperature is converted to absolute temperature in simulations . the experimental PnBA networks and the corresponding coarse-grained simulation model where the crosslink (normal) segment is colored blue (orange). (c) Schematic (from left to right) of the polymer network model employed in the theory which based on the introduction of crosslinks via the regular pinning of beads along the chain , how polymers are coarse-grained to the Kuhn segment scale , and the physical ideas of SCCH theory based on coupled dynamic free energies for the penetrant and Kuhn segment displacements with a trajectory coupling parameter defined as γ = Δrp(γ)/ΔrK,c(γ) and relevant length and energy scales indicated. Note that although the normal and cross-linked beads are colored the same as those in (b), the beads or interaction sites of the semiflexible chain model is not identical to the meaning of a bead in the simulation model . 9 corresponding diameter d if treated as a sphere of equivalent volume . Penetrant-to-matrix size ratio computed based on σ = 1.03 nm evaluated using lK = 2lp − σ, where the Kuhn length of PnBA melts lK = 1.72 nm and the ratio of the persistence length to bare bead size in the theory is lp/σ = 4/3. BTBP TBRb RUB NBD-OH V/Å3 d/Å 11.2 11.4 9.81 7.05 d/σ 1.09 1.11 0.95 0.69 Conceptual Background and Overview of Core Results A. Background Activated penetrant diffusivity in crosslinked networks is influenced by both polymer segmental dynamics and entropic geometric mesh confinement. In the qualitative, but distinct (see below), spirit of prior work , these two factors for a spherical penetrant of diameter d enter its diffusion constant in a multiplicative manner as: Dp~ d2 τα,p C−1 exp(−bC2) ≡ d2 τα,p X, (1) Eq (1) relates penetrant diffusivity to a product of the rate of its crosslink fraction (mesh size), size ratio, and temperature-dependent elementary hopping time, τα,p (the focus of SCCH theory), and a temperature-independent factor, X, associated with an entropic barrier for penetrant traversal through a polymer mesh. The latter depends on the degree of crosslinking quantified by a confinement parameter, C = d/ax, where b is a chemistry specific numerical factor originally suggested to equal unity corresponding to X ≡ exp (−C2)/C. Prior theoretical analysis addressed nanoparticle diffusion in rubbery crosslinked networks at a fixed high temperature in a regime with C >1, very different from the present work. For such systems it is not the penetrant 10 activated alpha time that enters as in Eq(1), but rather the penetrant-independent Rouse relaxation time of a polymer network strand which depends differently on temperature than the penetrant relaxation time predicted by SCCH theory. The expression CDp ∝ exp (−bC2) does capture well simulations for dilute spherical nanoparticles in semi-dilute high temperature rubbery polymer networks with a value of b greater than unity (indirectly suggesting the importance of τα,p), despite the fact that C greater than unity is not strictly obeyed for some of the simulated systems. In contrast, the experimental, simulation and theory work reported here for molecular penetrants in dry supercooled polymer networks indicate a different conclusion: crosslinking fraction dependent segmental relaxation is the most important process for activated penetrant diffusion. More generally, from a physical perspective using τα,p in eq (1) seems appropriate since mass transport is initiated by a penetrant local hopping event. For molecular transport the confinement parameter C often does not exceed unity. This motivates us to briefly consider in the SI an alternative model of the effect of network meshes perhaps germane to such a weak (C less than unity) confinement regime : Dp~ d2 τα,p exp (−b′C) (2) Here b′ is a system-specific constant, and we take τα,p to be the same as in eq (1). Our goal is to determine the relative and absolute importance of polymer segmental relaxation and confinement mesh obstruction on penetrant transport over a wide range of conditions. Unavoidably, directly separating the importance of the latter two factors from experimental or simulation measurements of Dp is problematic. This is addressed using SCCH theory since it lacks the mesh effect, but it also can be included post facto per eqs (1) and (2). Before presenting our detailed results, we provide a high-level summary of our primary new scientific findings. 11 B. Overview of Core New Findings The favorable confrontation of our experimental data with our theoretical and simulation results allows us to draw the following important conclusions. (1) The distinct physical effects of activated segmental relaxation and network mesh confinement affect activated penetrant diffusion to varying degrees, but our experimental and simulation results can be empirically described from either a locally activated penetrant hopping perspective where Tg/T is the key variable and an “effective” Arrhenius behavior applies, or where the entropic mesh confinement parameter C is the key variable. A theoretical understanding of this surprising “degeneracy of interpretation” is constructed. From a causality perspective, we find that the cooling and crosslinking induced slowing down of segmental relaxation is the dominant factor. (2) At fixed temperature, the penetrant diffusion constant decreases with its size as an inverse power law with a large exponent of non-hydrodynamic origin. (3) The good agreement of experiment with simulation and theory based on coarse-grained penetrant and polymer models indicates that local chemical detail even in tightly crosslinked networks is largely “self-averaged” in the determination of the long-time penetrant diffusion constant. (4) Our validated SCCH theory allows one to disentangle the relative importance the 3 different physical contributions to the activation barrier for molecular transport: (i) local caging by polymer segments in the first solvation shell of the penetrant, (ii) longer range small amplitude collective elastic displacements of polymer segments farther from a hopping penetrant, and (iii) network mesh confinement. Effects (i) and (ii) are intimately coupled in SCCH theory, but for small enough penetrants and/or hot enough polymer networks, the theory predicts the local caging effect (i) is dominant. (5) The theory makes new testable predictions that in a more deeply supercooled regime and/or for larger penetrants not probed in our present experiments or simulations, the rate of penetrant transport becomes even more size sensitive due to stronger 12 coupling of its motion with polymer collective elasticity, a mechanism which holds promise for enhancing the selectivity of polymer membranes. Results Below we present our experimental, simulation, and theoretical results for penetrant diffusivity in the context of four core issues: (a) role of temperature and crosslinking fraction dependent polymer segmental relaxation, (b) role of penetrant-to-matrix size ratio, (c) role of entropic mesh confinement, and (d) mechanistic theoretical understanding. A. Role of Segmental Relaxation 0.75 0.80 0.85 10-9 Dp (cm2/s) Tg(fcross)/T T = 296.15K BTBP TBRb RUB NBD-OH EXPT (a) 0.88 0.90 0.92 0.94 0.96 0.98 10-9 Dp (cm2/s) Tg(fcross)/T d/s* 1.00 1.23 1.50 1.71 2.00 SIM T = 300.15K (b) 0.6 0.8 1.0 4 8 12 16 20 24 kcross d /s TH T/K ta,K(Tg)/t0 296.15 1014, t0 /ta,p T/K 296.15 EXPT 300.15 SIM 339.15 SIM (d) network glass transition temperature at a fixed temperature. (a) Log-linear plot of the experimental (EXPT) diffusion constants as a function of Tg(fcross)/T over a wide range of crosslink fractions diameters at T = 300.15K. Note the SIM diffusion constant data is vertically shifted down by 5 decades for comparison with the EXPT results. (c) Same as in (a) but for the theory (TH) with penetrant size ratios that mimic the experimental systems per Table 1; the theoretical Dp (solid symbols with solid lines) is determined using Eq(1). Also shown is the predicted penetrant hopping rate, i.e., inverse alpha time, (open symbols with dash-dot lines, in units of τ0 corresponding to 1 13 ps per typical viscous liquids) with its y-axis indicated on the right-hand side colored in purple and over the same number of decades as that of the left y-axis. The Tg criteria for EXPT, SIM, and TH 1014 , respectively. (d) Effective Arrhenius activation energies deduced from EXPT, SIM and TH defined from the slope of the log (1/Dp) versus Tg(fn)/T plot, as a function of size ratio d/σ in a linear-log representation for different temperatures. The corresponding slopes for the log (τα,p/τ0) versus Tg(fn)/T theoretical results are also shown. We note that in the simulation (theory) the bead size σ∗ = 0.573 nm (σ = 1.03 nm, see Table 1), and thus for comparison purposes the x-axis of the simulation results in panel (d) is scaled by a factor of 0.573/1.0. Motivated by the hypothesis that the increase of the polymer segmental relaxation and Tg with crosslink density is the dominant factor that determines the penetrant diffusion constant, penetrants show an exponential dependence on Tg(fcross). The diffusion coefficient at fixed Tg(fcross) decreases with increasing probe volume from NBD-OH to RUB to TBRb. Note that BTBP exhibits slower diffusion by a factor of 2-3 compared to TBRb despite having almost the same volume, although their apparent activation energies are nearly identical. This indicates a modest effect of molecular shape on mass transport and the relationship between diffusivity and Tg(fcross)/T. Overall, the dominant factor is the penetrant size, as seen in Figure 2a where the RUB and NBD- OH which have different slopes. Figure 2d presents the slopes of the activation plot of the data in behavior between penetrant diffusion constant and penetrant-to-matrix size ratio. Both capture the basic experimental trends, which are robust to increasing temperature beyond that studied experimentally (see Figure S6). This level of agreement seems remarkable given penetrants are modeled as spheres and the polymers are coarse-grained. The agreement also provides support for the idea that the penetrant to segment size ratio is the most important variable, as recently demonstrated for a wide range of chemically diverse penetrants in molecular and 14 polymer melts . Of course, use of a spherical penetrant model does not account for the modest differences between the diffusivity of BTBP and TBRb observed experimentally. We note that based on other theoretical models that assume that entropic mesh confinement effects dominate the penetrant diffusivity with a crosslink fraction independent prefactor rate, the results in Figure S6 would be the same as that of Figures 2b and 2c since the confinement parameter is temperature independent. However, significant differences at different temperatures exist (especially the slopes per Figure 2d and absolute values), supporting the idea that activated segmental relaxation (via τα,p in eqs. (1) and (2)) is of major importance for penetrant diffusivity. A potentially important difference between simulations and the experiments and theory predictions is the disparity in time scales probed: the simulation Tg is defined when τα(Tg) ~ 100 ns, dramatically shorter than in experiment and theory. Nevertheless, the overall good agreement between simulation, theory, and experiment can be understood from our prior work on neat polymer networks where it was demonstrated that the vitrification criteria does not significantly change the normalized T-dependence of the network alpha time in the weak and moderately supercooled regimes. Moreover, the inset of Figure S6 confirms that the T-dependence of the penetrant diffusivity similarly remains unchanged by the vitrification criteria adopted. SCCH theory allows one to separate the effects of activated segmental relaxation and mesh confinement on penetrant mobility in networks. This is done in Figure 2c by plotting the theoretical Dp with and without the factor of X in Eq (1). Both sets of theoretical results are consistent with an exponential dependence on Tg/T, with the T-dependence of Dp computed including the factor X modestly stronger than computed if the mesh obstruction factor is ignored. This quantitative analysis suggests mesh effects are of minor importance for the penetrants and 15 polymer networks studied relative to the consequences of crosslinking induced slowing down of polymer segmental relaxation. A further consistency check between experiment, simulation, and theory is to examine the slope of log (1/Dp) versus Tg/T in Figure 2a, 2b, and 2c, defined as kcross. Figure 2d shows it increases with size ratio in an interesting logarithmic manner. Moreover, the experiments (green triangles) are consistent with theory and simulation for very different vitrification criteria. This is true even for the polar molecule NBD-OH that presumably interacts with the polymer in a more chemically specific manner. This further confirms that penetrant size is key in determining the activated diffusion of penetrant, and supports our hypothesis that Angstrom-scale chemical structural features are significantly self-averaged in the long-time diffusivity. At a finer quantitative level, simulation does underpredict the magnitude of kcross, presumably due to the specific coarse-grained model employed and/or the fact it does not probe the more deeply supercooled regime. Theoretical predictions for τ0/τα,p that neglect the mesh confinement contribution (no factor of X in Eq (1)) lead to modestly smaller values of kcross that deviate more from experiments. Interestingly, one observes that the various results from the kcross versus d/σ plot for τ0/τα,p are parallel to their analogue for 1/Dp. This indicates the mesh confinement contribution X = exp (−C2)/C to kcross is effectively independent of d/σ to leading order. This can be understood as a consequence of the barrier from entropic confinement, i.e., the slope of the −log(X)~C2 versus Tg(fn)/T plot, changes only weakly (by a factor of ~3.5-4.7) since we find C2 ∝ Tg(fn) (see Figure S5 and relevant discussion in the SI). Although changing temperature is not our primary focus, the magnitude of kcross at elevated temperatures has been examined using simulation and theory in Figure 2d. In both cases, heating leads to smaller values of kcross due to the reduced barrier for local penetrant hopping. 16 This finding relates to the recent work in polymer melts which established that the dependencies of the penetrant diffusion constant on size ratio and temperature are nearly independent (barrier factorization), and the temperature dependence is determined by properties of the pure polymer matrix. Thus, at different temperatures the dependence of kcross on penetrant size is not expected change, as confirmed in Figure 2d by the parallel behavior of the data at different temperatures. B. Role of Penetrant to Polymer Segment Size Ratio 0.6 0.8 1 10-7 10-5 10-3 10-1 Dp d /s TH T/K = 296.15 fn 0.04 0.01 0.02 0.1 (a) 0.6 0.8 1 10-9 Dp (cm2/s) d /s* fcross 0.11 0.25 0.36 0.50 T/K = 300.15 SIM (b) matrix size ratio d/σ plotted in a log-log manner. EXPT data in (a) is the filled symbols vertically shifted up by a factor of 6 decades for comparison. TH results (a) are shown at T = 296.15K (open symbols), and (b) SIM results at T = 300.15K. A summary of the slopes from EXPT, SIM, and TH is given in Figure S8. As in Figure 2d, for the x-axes the SIM value of the size ratio variable is multiplied by the factor 0.573/1.03. ratio over a wide range of crosslinking fractions at a fixed temperature. This aspect is relevant to the problem of isothermal selectivity of penetrant transport based on size. Given our findings above that log (1/Dp) ∝ Tg(fcross) and the proportionality constant is a logarithmic function of size ratio d/σ, we conclude that (i) probe diffusivity decreases as a power law with d/σ, and (ii) activated segmental relaxation dominates the penetrant size dependence. Interestingly, the finding (i) is qualitatively the same as found in prior SCCH theory analysis for dilute spherical penetrants in semiflexible polymer chain melts which revealed a power law relation applies well over a 17 wide range of d/σ (including the large size ratio regime), and which remains robust even for systems containing weak attractions between the penetrant and matrix . Here we find that when crosslinking is introduced the predicted power law relation between 1/Dp and d/σ still works very well for fixed crosslink density, although slight quantitative deviations are noticeable in Figure 3a. Moreover, we find that the exponent of the power law (i.e., the slope ksize of the log (1/Dp) versus d/σ plots) varies linearly with crosslink fraction fn (see Figure S8) to within slight uncertainties. This interesting result can be understood by combining our above findings that log (1/Dp) ∝ Tg(fcross) and C2 ∝ Tg(fn) with the definition of confinement parameter (C~fcross 1/2 ), as shown in the SI. Overall, the SCCH theory calculations performed at the experimental measurement temperature agree well with the corresponding experimental and simulation results in Figures 3a and 3b, respectively. Moreover, the predicted trends remain robust at elevated temperatures (see (an exponential, not power law, dependence) is found to be valid only over a more limited lower d/σ range (see Figure S9), as expected . C. Confinement Mesh Perspective 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10-9 CDp (cm2/s) C2 C = d/ax T = 296.15K BTBP TBRb RUB NBD-OH EXPT (a) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 10-9 CDp (cm2/s) C2 C = d/ax T = 300.15K d/s* 1.00 1.23 1.50 1.71 2.00 SIM (b) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 10-6 10-3 CDp C2 BTBP TBRb RUB NBD-OH C = (A/s)df 1/2 cross T = 296.15K TH (c) various penetrants are plotted as log (CDp) versus C2 for: (a) EXPT, (b) SIM, and (c) TH over a wide range of crosslink fractions at a fixed temperature (T = 296.15K for EXPT and TH, and T = 300.15 K for SIM). The confinement parameter C = d/ax in EXPT and SIM, and C = 18 comparison to EXPT and TH. Our analysis in the prior two sub-sections was motivated by the idea that the key factor in the determination of the penetrant diffusion constant is the crosslink-induced enhancement of its local activated hopping time. We now explore in detail the very different limiting perspective [per eqs(1) and (2)] that the entropic mesh confinement effect can empirically “explain” our results. We first consider the theoretical results from an analytic perspective. Surprisingly, a “mesh confinement like” form can be obtained from an activated segmental dynamics analysis. This follows by combining the results log(τα,p/τ0) ∝ Tg(fn) and C2 ∝ Tg(fn) discussed above and in the SI, which implies the theory predicts log(τα,p/τ0) ∝ C2. Hence, a non-causal “degeneracy of interpretation” at fixed temperature is predicted (not assumed) by the theory. Its origin is that crosslinking modifies the local penetrant hopping activation barrier in a manner that depends on the confinement parameter C in the same manner as does the entropic mesh mechanism. In reality, an additional contribution to the penetrant barrier from a true entropic mesh confinement effect is potentially important, i.e., X = exp(−C2) /C in Dp = Xτ0/τα,p of Eq (1), thereby yielding CDp~ exp(−BC2) , where B is a C −independent numerical factor. penetrant diffusivity and further test our new theoretical insights using experimental and simulation data. Linearity between log(CDp) and C2 is observed for all cases. However, the apparent slope in Figure 4 decreases with penetrant size, which is the opposite trend found by varying penetrant size for the slopes in Figures 2a-2c which were constructed based on the very different crosslink fraction dependent activated segmental dynamics perspective. Our finding in 19 Tg(fn) ∝ C2/d2 . Applying this proportionality to above analysis yields log(1/ CDp) ~ kcrossTg ~ (kcross/d2)C2.Figure 2d shows that kcross varies very weakly (logarithmically) with penetrant size compared to the quadratic dependence in this expression, thereby providing an explanation for why the apparent slopes in Figures 2a-2c (kcross) increase, but those in Figure 4 (B~kcross/d2) decrease, with penetrant size. The theory results in Figure 4c also establish the operational robustness of the relation CDp~ exp(−BC2) in the large C regime, which is not due to entropic mesh confinement, but rather to crosslink dependent penetrant local activated hopping. We have also tested whether the relation Dp~exp (−EC) with E an adjustable constant [per Eq(2)] can empirically model our data. We find in the “weak confinement” range 0.15 < C < 0.9 it works well for experiment, simulation, and theory (see Figure S11). This can be theoretically understood from an activated segmental relaxation perspective since only the local cage barrier is important in this regime and SCCH theory predicts its scales linearly with C. Hence, the success of the form Dp~exp (−EC) signals another non-casual “degeneracy of interpretation” of what controls penetrant diffusivity. More generally, by revisiting previous simulation data , we find that in a practical sense both relations motivated by an entropic mesh confinement dominated perspective (eqs(1) and (2)) work rather well in the limited range of C analyzed (see Figure S12). However, in a large enough C regime we predict based on SCCH theory such an empirical entropic mesh perspective fails (Figure S11c) due to the growing importance of longer-range collective elasticity of the polymer matrix in determining the penetrant hopping rate. Detailed discussion of these issues are presented in the SI, including the robustness of our new insights at elevated temperatures (see Figure S13). D. Mechanistic Theoretical Understanding 20 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 0 5 10 15 bFB(el) Tg(fn)/T ta,K(Tg) /t0 = 1014 T/K = 296.15 FB Fel | BTBP | TBRb | RUB | NBD-OH (a) 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 5 10 15 bFtotal C2 BTBP TBRb RUB NBD-OH T/K = 296.15 (b) 0.0 0.4 0.8 1.2 5 10 15 20 25 C2 bFtotal NBD-OH T/K TBRb T/K and collective elastic barriers as a function of Tg(fn)/T over a wide range of crosslink fractions at a fixed T = 296.15K. The small differences between the elastic barriers of BTBP and TBRb reflect the fact their sizes are not exactly the same (see Table 1). (b) Main: Same as in (a) but for the total barriers as a function of C2. Inset: Total barriers for TBRb and NBD-OH as a function of C2 at a lower (T = 273.15K) and higher (T = 348.15K) temperatures. The overall good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory, despite being performed in non-identical supercooled regimes, suggests an intriguing simplicity is at play. In this sub-section, the physical mechanism is elucidated based on SCCH theory and our understanding of the penetrant local cage and longer-range collective elastic activation barriers as a function of temperature, size ratio, and crosslinking fraction. far smaller than their local cage analogs. Regardless of the precise Tg(fn) vitrification criteria adopted, both the local cage and elastic barriers vary linearly with Tg(fn)/T over the entire Tg/T range studied for all the penetrants. This provides a theoretical explanation of the exponential relationship between alpha relaxation time or diffusion constant and Tg(fn)/T in Figure 2c. Furthermore, although Figure 5a shows that the local cage and elastic barriers both increase with penetrant size, the rate of growth of the local cage barriers remain nearly independent of penetrant size while that for the elastic barrier strongly increases. Thus, the slope change in Figure 2c of 21 log (τ0/τα,p) versus Tg(fn)/T plots with penetrant size is mainly a consequence of the increasing relevance of the longer-range collective elastic barrier relative to its local cage analog. Combining the above results with C2 ∝ Tg(fn) discussed above and in the SI, we predict that the penetrant local cage and elastic barriers vary linearly with C2 (see Figure S14). This provides an understanding of our numerical finding of a linear relationship between the penetrant total barrier and C2 seen in Figure 5b and its inset, for various penetrant sizes and temperatures. This insight thus establishes the underlying physical reason for the operational usefulness of the under deeply supercooled conditions where the penetrant total barrier is high. This prediction can be tested in future experiments and/or simulations that probe even slower mass transport characterized by higher total barriers than discussed in our present work. Finally, because penetrant barriers are predicted to grow linearly with C2, a literal linear relationship between them and C does not apply, as confirmed in Figure S14b. However, when C is not sufficiently large ( 0.15 < C < 0.9 ) corresponding to weak or non-existent mesh confinement, the penetrant local cage barrier does effectively grow linearly with C when the collective elastic barrier is negligible. This explains why our experimental and simulation data (and also other literature data ) can be empirically fit by the exponential relation Dp~ exp(−EC) over the limited range of C measured. If in future experiments and simulations the confinement parameter is further increased and/or the temperature lowered to a more deeply supercooled regime, we predict the exponential relation Dp~ exp(−EC) will eventually fail. Discussion and Conclusions 22 We have combined experiment, simulation, and theory to unravel the competing effects of penetrant size on its transport in crosslinked polymer networks over a range of crosslink densities, size ratios, and temperatures. The crucial importance of the temperature and chemistry specific degree to which penetrant hopping is coupled to the polymer structural relaxation process has been established, with the entropic barrier due to entropic mesh confinement of quantitative, but secondary, importance. The leading order effect of network crosslinks is to slow down polymer structural relaxation and greatly suppress the elementary penetrant hopping event. However, there are also non-causal “empirical correlations” between the behavior of penetrant transport largely controlled by crosslink-induced slowing down of segmental relaxation and what is expected based on a mesh confinement perspective. The reason for this “degeneracy of interpretation” is understood within the theory as a consequence of a common dependence of the dynamic activation barriers on the confinement parameter C and how the entropic obstruction barrier scales with C. The good agreement between experiment, simulation, and theory provides strong support for the size ratio (penetrant diameter to Kuhn length) as a key variable, and more generally the usefulness of coarse-grained models that average over Angstrom scale chemical details in crosslinked networks. The SCCH theory reveals the microscopic physics underlying the behaviors found in experiment and simulation in terms of local cage and longer-range collective elastic barriers to penetrant hopping, and how they depend differently on the degree of crosslinking and temperature. Testable predictions in a more deeply supercooled regime not probed in our present experiments or simulations were made, where penetrant transport is predicted to become even more size sensitive. We believe our work illustrates the generality of the physical mechanisms identified which are relevant for selective membrane design, and establish the usefulness of simulation even at temperatures well above those often probed in experiment. 23 Of course, the relative importance of the segmental relaxation and mesh confinement effects on penetrant diffusion will depend on temperature (e.g., rubbery vs supercooled regime) and the precise value of the mesh confinement parameter. Further work is needed in this direction, and our analysis provides a roadmap to anticipate and understand how the two primary consequences of chemical crosslinking impact penetrant mass transport. Other major future directions are to apply our combined experiment-theory-simulation approach to address the dynamical impact of penetrant-polymer specific attractive interactions, generalize the simulation and theory approaches to explicitly treat the role of molecular penetrant shape and flexibility on transport, and address penetrant diffusion in associating polymer liquids and vitrimers . Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under Award No. DE- SC0020858, through the Materials Research Laboratory at the University of Illinois at Urbana−Champaign.