1 Electrically Sign-Reversible Topological Hall Effect in a Top-Gated Topological Insulator (Bi,Sb)2Te3 on a Ferrimagnetic Insulator Europium Iron Garnet Jyun-Fong Wong,1○ Ko-Hsuan Mandy Chen,1○ Jui-Min Chia,1 Zih-Ping Huang,2 Sheng-Xin Wang,1 Pei-Tze Chen,1 Lawrence Boyu Young,2 Yen-Hsun Glen Lin,2 Shang-Fan Lee,3 Chung-Yu Mou,1,4 Minghwei Hong,2* and Jueinai Kwo1* 1Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan 2Graduate Institute of Applied Physics and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan 3Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan 4Center for Quantum Technology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan ○J.-F. W. and K.-H. M. C. contributed equally to this work. *Address correspondence to J. Kwo, raynien@phys.nthu.edu.tw; M. Hong, mhong@phys.ntu.edu.tw 2 ABSTRACT Topological Hall effect (THE), an electrical transport signature of systems with chiral spin textures like skyrmions, has been observed recently in topological insulator (TI)-based magnetic heterostructures. However, the intriguing interplay between the topological surface state and THE is yet to be fully understood. In this work, we report a large THE of ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm) at 2 K with an electrically reversible sign in a top-gated 4 nm TI (Bi0.3Sb0.7)2Te3 (BST) grown on a ferrimagnetic insulator (FI) europium iron garnet (EuIG). Temperature, external magnetic field angle, and top gate bias dependences of magnetotransport properties were investigated and consistent with a skyrmion-driven THE. Most importantly, a sign change in THE was discovered as the Fermi level was tuned from the upper to the lower parts of the gapped Dirac cone and vice versa. This discovery is anticipated to impact technological applications in ultralow power skyrmion-based spintronics. KEYWORDS topological insulator, ferrimagnetic insulator, topological Hall effect, skyrmion, electric field effect 3 Three-dimensional topological insulators (TIs), featured with their spin-momentum-locked topological surface states (TSSs),1,2 have generated enormous interest in spintronics over the past decade. The interplay between the spin-momentum-locked TSS and magnetism results in novel electrical transport phenomena.3 A well-known example is the observation of quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE) in a transition metal-doped TI (Bi,Sb)2Te3 (BST).4-6 Besides the magnetically doped TIs, much attention is also given to TI heterostructures interfaced with magnetic materials (MMs) to attain a long-range magnetic ordering via magnetic proximity effect (MPE).7-14 However, most studies were focused on the discussion of the phenomena arising from the non-trivial Berry curvature in reciprocal space. The investigation of the spin textures in real space and their related electrical transport in TI heterostructures remains largely unexplored. Topological Hall effect (THE), a Hall response that emerges from the deflection of charge carriers flowing through non-trivial chiral spin textures, is a transport signature commonly used to identify these chiral spin textures, such as magnetic skyrmions.15,16 Apart from the magnetic crystals lacking spatial inversion symmetry (SIS), such as B20-type chiral magnets,17-20 skyrmions have been observed in SIS-broken magnetic heterostructures consisting of materials exhibiting strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC), such as heavy metals (HMs) or TIs.21,22 The interfacial Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya interaction (DMI) plays a crucial role in stabilizing skyrmions in these SIS-broken magnetic heterostructures.23,24 In contrast to the high current density required for 4 magnetic domain wall motions (1011–1012 A/m2), the ultralow current density (105–106 A/m2) achieved in skyrmion motions brings great potential in energy-efficient devices for memory and computing technology.16,20,23,25 THE, being an electrical transport phenomenon, is a promising method of skyrmion detection in the field of skyrmion-electronics.24,26 Among many THE studies, there have been debates about the exact origin of the reported Hall responses.27-33 Because THE is commonly intertwined with anomalous Hall effect (AHE), an alternative cause is the superposition of multi-AHE contributions.27-29,31-33 In this scenario, one can conduct two- or three-AHE fits to decompose the signals, and ascertain if the THE responses could indeed result from the overlapping of multi-AHE components.14,30,34,35 Although several reports demonstrated pronounced THE in TI-based heterostructures,30,34,36-41 it is noteworthy that an in- depth discussion on the THE emerging from the carrier transport of spin-momentum-locked TSS is still lacking. A straightforward way to investigate the relationship between THE and charge carriers in TSS is by implementing an electrical gate bias on TI. So far, the gate-tunable THE has been reported in Mn-doped Bi2Te3 films and Cr-doped BST heterostructures;37,40,41 however, the gate devices were achieved by using SrTiO3 (STO) as a dielectric with a large gate bias of tens of volts,37,40,41 which are unfavorable in practical use. Finding a suitable gate dielectric with excellent carrier tunability and reliability remains an important issue and needs to be addressed for both fundamental scientific studies and technological applications. 5 In this work, we report the observation of THE in TI BST/ferrimagnetic insulator (FI) europium iron garnet (EuIG) bilayers. In particular, we successfully manipulated the amplitude and the sign of THE by altering the carrier density and carrier types using a top electrical gate within a few volts, which has yet to be reported. By adopting a heterostructure of gate oxide/TI/FI, the current flow path and the resulting Hall contribution can be limited to the TI layer, which is rather simple compared to other magnetic TI (MTI)/TI/MTI or TI/MM heterostructures. Judging from the temperature, magnetic field angle, and gate voltage dependences of Hall measurements, our findings were consistent with a skyrmion-driven THE instead of a superposition of AHE loops. The largest THE magnitude reached ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm) under an applied gate voltage (Vg) of -0.6 V at 2 K. Most importantly, the pronounced and repeated THE sign reversal occurs when the Fermi level (EF) is tuned across the gapped Dirac point (DP) of BST, suggesting a unique THE characteristic related to the TSS. Hence, the exploitation of THE in TI-based heterostructures opens a new route in high-density and ultralow-power skyrmion-based devices in spintronics. The material growth of BST/EuIG followed the previous work of our group,14,42 and physical characterizations on the sample are presented in Section S1 in Supporting Information. Briefly, FI EuIG(001) films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy were grown on GGG(001) by off-axis magnetron sputtering. BST was then deposited on EuIG using molecular beam epitaxy with Bi:Sb 6 = 3:7 to reach a bulk insulating TI. The gate oxides were made of e-beam evaporated Y2O3 and atomic layer deposition-grown Al2O3. The samples were patterned into Hall bars using photolithography. Electrical transport measurements were conducted on a 4 nm BST thin film grown on a 20 nm EuIG with simultaneously magnetized top and bottom TSSs in a Quantum Design physical property measurement system. subtraction of the linear background from the ordinary Hall effect (OHE). In addition to the MPE- induced AHE loop following the square-shaped magnetic hysteresis of EuIG,14,42 excessive Hall signals were clearly observed over a wide range of magnetic fields from -1.5 to 3 kOe as the magnetic field was swept from negative to positive. These excessive Hall signals reached the largest value near the coercive field (Hc) and behaved like THE. This THE-like feature has been repeatedly observed in many BST/EuIG samples previously.14 Notice that it is possible to have artificial THE-like responses from two overlapping AHE contributions.27-33 Here, we performed two additional experimental checks, the minor loop approach and AHE curve fittings, to resolve this issue. In the former method, the Hall traces coincided under successively increasing sweeping magnetic fields as the expected behavior of THE responses without other AHE loops.32 (see Section S2 in Supporting Information) In the latter method, although the Hall signals could be well fitted with two AHE contributions mathematically, it is rather difficult to reconcile their 7 dependences on temperatures as well as gate biases with a reasonable or existing physical picture. (see Section S3 in Supporting Information) Therefore, we infer that these excessive Hall signals in BST/EuIG result from a genuine THE. After excluding the Hall signals from the superposition of AHE loops, we proceeded to extract the THE resistance (RTHE) by subtracting the AHE resistance (RAHE). In view of the square magnetic hysteresis observed in the alternating gradient magnetometer measurement of BST/EuIG at 300 K, and square MPE-induced AHE loops at temperatures without the existence of THE, we here fit the AHE component using RAHE = RAHE−max tanh ( H ± Hc H0 ) , where RAHE-max and H0 are the maximum of the RAHE and fitting parameter, respectively.30,34 Note that how we determine the AHE contribution could affect the extracted THE components. The rationale for subtracting a single square AHE loop is given in Section S4 in Supporting Information. After the subtraction of the square AHE loop (black solid line in Figure 1a), the RTHE data is shown in Figure 1b; the maximum of the RTHE is denoted by RTHEMAX, and the H field corresponding to the RTHEMAX is denoted by HT. A giant RTHEMAX of ~8 Ω was observed without an applied Vg at 2 K. At the applied Vg of -0.6 V, the RTHEMAX reached the largest value of ~10 Ω (~4 μΩ‧cm). The THE magnitude in this work is the second largest among the reported TI-based bi-layer systems.30,34,36,38,39 (See Table S1 in Supporting Information) 8 Next, we discuss the temperature dependence of THE in BST/EuIG. As presented in Figures 1c, d and S5 in Supporting Information, the THE gradually diminished with increasing temperatures and disappeared at 75 K, which could be attributed to the thermal fluctuation or the reduced DMI strength, consistent with the previous studies in TI-based systems.14,30,34,36-38,40 Furthermore, shown in the color map of Figure 1c is the temperature dependence of HT that follows closely with that of Hc. This observation is in accord with reports on the THE driven by the magnetization reversal process in systems hosting magnetic skyrmions.34,43 It is noteworthy that our THE were also found at zero fields, suggesting a robust skyrmion phase without the support of an external magnetic field, similar to the observation in FeGe.44,45 The RTHE at zero fields (RTHE0) showed an akin temperature dependence to that of RTHEMAX and also vanished at 75 K, as demonstrated in Figure 1d. The critical temperature for observing the THE in this work is notably higher than those reported in Cr-doped BST/BST (18 K),36 Cr2Te3/Bi2Te3 (20 K),39 and BST/MnTe To deepen our understanding of the THE in BST/EuIG, we further investigated the angular dependence of the Hall effect data with the measurement geometry illustrated in Figure 2a. The angle θ is defined as the angle between the external magnetic field H and the surface normal 9 direction +z in the x-z plane. The Hall traces at 5 K after subtracting the linear OHE background from 10° to 80° are demonstrated in Figure 2b. The AHE loops expanded with increasing θ. The Hc enlarged and was proportional to 1/cosθ (white dashed line in Figure 2c), indicating that a larger external magnetic field was needed to flip the magnetization in BST to the opposite direction as the θ increased. Furthermore, significant THE responses coexisting with AHE were observed and sustained to 70°. The RTHE as a function of θ and H field is summarized in the color map of Figure 2c, as the H field was swept from negative to positive. Similar to the temperature dependence of HT and Hc discussed in the previous paragraph, the angular dependence of HT also followed closely with that of Hc before the disappearance of THE. To better elucidate the angle-dependent results, the magnitude of THE was discussed as a function of the in-plane component of the applied magnetic field. Because the HT closely followed the trend of Hc before the disappearance of THE, the HT was approximately proportional to 1/cosθ, indicating that the out-of-plane component of the applied field (H cosθ) was nearly the same when the RTHEMAX occurred. Therefore, we plotted the RTHEMAX as a function of the in-plane magnetic field HT sinθ, as shown in Figure 2d. To give a reasonable estimate of the critical field for the disappearance of THE, Hc sin80° was used for the data point of θ = 80°. Judging from Figure 2d, the RTHEMAX remained nearly the same with a moderate in-plane magnetic field (0.1–2.4 kOe), as attributed to the robustness of the topologically protected skyrmions and similar to the work of 10 Peng et al.30 The critical in-plane field for the disappearance of THE was between 2.4–5.3 kOe. The vanished THE above 5.3 kOe suggests the collapse of the skyrmionic state.46-49 Similar angular behavior of THE was reported in the Mn1-xFexSi, a well-known B20-type chiral magnet hosting magnetic skyrmions, with the disappearance of THE at 55°.46 (See Table S1 in Supporting Information for the comparisons with other materials) Hence, our observation of angle-dependent results in THE also supports the existence of skyrmions at the BST/EuIG interface. In the following paragraph, we demonstrate the manipulation of THE by implementing a top electrical gate bias on BST. Figure 3a shows the gate dependences of longitudinal resistance (Rxx) and ordinary Hall coefficient (RH). The EF was successfully tuned across the gapped DP of BST via the gate bias, as manifested by reaching a maximum in Rxx and the sign change of RH near the charge neutrality point (CNP) (the gray-shaded region in Figure 3a). The CNP here is expected to locate at the center of the MPE-induced gap of TSS in BST. Moreover, the small applied Vg for the CNP (VCNP) of ~0.6 V indicated that the EF of our un-gated BST was close to the center of the magnetic gap, providing an excellent starting point to alter the carrier type and the carrier density of BST, thus to explore the THE behavior under an external electric field. scattered points are the measured RAHE + RTHE data, and the solid lines are the fitted AHE 11 contributions. In the p-type region (Vg < VCNP), a hump was found near the Hc as the H field was swept from negative to positive. (dark red arrows in Figure 3b) In the n-type region (Vg > VCNP), a dip was observed instead near the Hc. (a green arrow in Figure 3b) With the applied Vg ~VCNP, the measured data became a square hysteresis loop, a typical feature of AHE without excessive Hall signals from THE. To extract the magnitude of THE, we subtracted the AHE contributions (black solid lines) and plotted RTHE in Figure 3c. Positive THE was identified in the p-type region of the up-sweep (red) curves, while negative THE was observed in the n-type region. More data of gate- dependent THE loops with finer voltage steps are presented in Figure S6 in Supporting Information. The gate bias dependence of RTHEMAX is further summarized in Figure 3d. To gain a better insight into the mechanism responsible for the sign reversal in THE, we examined RTHE and its relations to other physical quantities. When a charge carrier flows through magnetic skyrmions, it will experience an effective electromagnetic field Beff = nsk Φ0, where nsk is the skyrmion density and Φ0 is the magnetic flux quantum.15 The resulting Hall resistance is commonly approximated as: RTHE ≈ RH P nsk Φ0, (1) where P is the local spin polarization of the conduction carrier following the spin texture of the skyrmion.15,34 When the EF is tuned from the upper Dirac cone to the lower Dirac cone, the 12 majority charge carriers will be altered from electrons to holes, leading to a sign change in RH. In the meantime, the electron spin polarization is flipped to the opposite direction because of the spin- momentum locking of the gapped TSS. (see the Fermi surface in Figure 4) Since the propagation direction of holes is opposite with respect to that of electrons, the spin orientation for electrons and holes will thus be the same,50 giving rise to the unchanged sign of the exchange coupling between charge carrier spins and local spin texture of skyrmion, i.e., the same sign of P. Therefore, the sign of THE will be switched from negative to positive when the EF is varied from the upper to the lower parts of the Dirac cone, as illustrated in Figure 4. The EF modulation by the gate bias in meV (Vg = -1.5 V) below the gapped DP, as detailed in Section S8 in Supporting Information. In the vicinity of CNP, namely RH → 0, the vanishing RTHE could be attributed to the nearly equal numbers of n- and p-type charge carriers. The absence of the THE signals with the EF near the CNP was also observed in the Cr-doped BST sandwich heterostructures.40,41 However, in their reports, RTHE did not show a sign reversal with the applied gate voltages; the majority carrier type remained the same in both Vg < VCNP and Vg > VCNP regions, as suggested from the slopes of their Hall traces. In contrast, this work demonstrated an effective manipulation of charge carriers and THE via a top electrical gate. Moreover, our gate bias-dependent results lent strong support to a skyrmion-driven THE in the BST/EuIG heterostructure, which can be well described by Equation 13 1 for both positive and negative biases. The same behavior of THE manipulation via the top-gate bias was confirmed in another sample. (see Figure S7 in Supporting Information) In addition, the difference between the current work and the previous work of W.-J. Zou et al. was clarified and highlighted in Section S10 in Supporting Information;14 the results are consistent among these two samples. Given these findings, inspecting the sign change in THE by tuning the EF across the CNP could be another viable way to differentiate the genuine and artificial THE in TI-based heterostructures. The electrically sign-reversible THE in TI/FI heterostructures could be a unique feature directly associated with the gapped TSS. This phenomenon has not been observed and might well be absent in other non-TI skyrmion systems, such as chiral magnets or HM/FI heterostructures like Pt/TmIG. Finally, to further examine the reliability of the field-effect device and the reproducibility of the sign reversal in THE, we performed the THE measurements with a series of selected gate biases. As displayed in Figure 5a, the THE was reversibly switched. The RTHEMAX and HT values remained nearly identical to the starting ones, as demonstrated in Figures 5b, c. Although the repeated switching of this “THE” device is currently limited by the robustness of our gate oxides after applying excessive gate bias, the achievement of THE switching within only a few volts demonstrates tremendous progress in manipulating this phenomenon. The idea of an electrically 14 tunable THE field-effect device may open up a new avenue in skyrmion-based spintronic applications. In summary, we have demonstrated the electrically sign-reversible THE in a top-gated TI BST on a FI EuIG. The magnetotransport behaviors on temperature, external magnetic field angle, and gate bias were consistent with a skyrmion-driven THE, as opposed to the alternative mechanism of superimposed AHE loops. Moreover, the sign change in THE via an electrical gate could be a distinctive feature related to the gapped TSS in TI/FI compared to other non-TI skyrmion systems, such as chiral magnets and HM/FI heterostructures. Our findings are thus viable for an in-depth understanding of THE in a TI-based heterostructure. The BST/EuIG bilayer could serve as an excellent platform for studying the interplay among magnetism, chiral spin textures, and topological band structures. Especially, the reproducible electrical manipulation of THE within a few volts may be promising for ultralow-power skyrmion-related applications. Further investigations on direct imaging of skyrmion spin structures in real space will be essential, and experiments via scanning microscopy methods, such as spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy and scanning transmission x-ray microscopy, are now underway. 15 with an applied Vg of 0 V at 2 K. The scattered points are the Hall data after subtracting a linear OHE background, and the solid line is the fitted AHE contribution. (b) The THE at Vg = 0 V. (c) Temperature dependences of Hc and HT, and a color map of RTHE (color) as a function of temperature and magnetic field with an applied Vg of 0 V; the H field was swept from negative to positive. (d) The temperature dependences of RTHEMAX and RTHE0. 16 the angle-dependent Hall measurements. (b) Angular dependence of the AHE loops plus the THE. (c) Magnetic field angle dependences of Hc and HT, and a color map of RTHE (color) as a function of magnetic field angle and H field; the H field was swept from negative to positive. The white dashed line in (c) is the fitted curve of Hc as a function of 1/cosθ. (d) RTHEMAX as a function of in- plane magnetic field (HT sinθ). 17 voltage dependences of RH (left) and Rxx (right). Small RH and large Rxx occurred in the vicinity of CNP (the gray-shaded region). (b) Concurrence of AHE and THE with selected gate voltages. The dark red and green arrows in (b) indicate the hump and dip features near the Hc, respectively. (c) THE with selected gate voltages. (d) Top-gate voltage dependence of RTHEMAX at 2 K. THE disappeared in the vicinity of CNP (the gray-shaded region). 18 TSS, the Fermi surface with the application of current in +x direction, and the corresponding THE region, EF located at lower gapped TSS), respectively. 19 of 0 V, 1 V, 1.5 V, 1 V, and 0 V. The corresponding modulation of (b) RTHEMAX and (c) HT as a function of Vg. ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information. The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/XXX Material growth and physical characterization of BST/EuIG heterostructures, Hall measurements 20 using the minor loop method, discussion on the possibility of Hall effect data from two distinct AHE contributions and the rationale of subtracting a square hysteresis for the AHE loop to derive THE, table for the comparison of THE in various systems hosting magnetic skyrmions, temperature- and gate-dependent THE loops, estimate of EF manipulated by gate bias, gate- dependent results of one additional field-effect device, and clarification to accentuate the differences between this work and the previous gate-dependent THE results (PDF) AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Authors * Jueinai Kwo – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0002-5088-6677; E-mail: raynien@phys.nthu.edu.tw * Minghwei Hong – Graduate Institute of Applied Physics and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei Taiwan; E-mail: mhong@phys.ntu.edu.tw Authors Jyun-Fong Wong – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0001-5756-5801 21 Ko-Hsuan Mandy Chen – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0002-4402-3541 Jui-Min Chia – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; Zih-Ping Huang – Graduate Institute of Applied Physics and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0001-8585-8812 Sheng-Xin Wang – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0001-9725-2930 Pei-Tze Chen – Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; Lawrence Boyu Young – Graduate Institute of Applied Physics and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0003-2569-6094 Yen-Hsun Glen Lin – Graduate Institute of Applied Physics and Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0002-0757-4109 Shang-Fan Lee – Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000- Chung-Yu Mou – Center for Quantum Technology and Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan; orcid.org/0000-0003-2694-0992 22 Author Contributions ○J.-F.W. and K.-H.M.C. contributed equally to this work. J.-F.W. and J.-M.C. fabricated the Hall bar device, and collected and analyzed the transport data. Z.-P.H., S.-X.W., and P.-Z.C. produced the BST/EuIG samples. S.-X.W. conducted the magnetic measurements. L.B.Y. and Y.-H.G.L. deposited the in-situ top gate oxides. S.-F.L. and C.-Y.M. provided scientific inputs. J.K. and M.H. supervised the project. J.-F.W., K.-H.M.C., and J.K. composed and wrote the manuscript with the comments of all the authors. Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank Professor Hsiu-Hau Lin, Professor Tay-Rong Chang, Keng-Yung Lin, Wei-Nien Chen, Wei-Jhih Zou, and Hsuan-Ning Chen for helpful discussions. This work was financially supported by the National Science and Technology Council (NSTC), Taiwan (NSTC 23 and Department of Physics, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (NSTC 111- 2634-F-007-006-). The authors acknowledge resources and support from the Quantum Materials Shared Facilities of Institute of Physics, Academia Sinica. The authors also thank the technical support from Taiwan Semiconductor Research Institute (TSRI), Taiwan.