1 Photo-Rechargeable Li Ion Batteries using TiS2 Cathode Amar Kumar,1Raheel Hammad,1 Mansi Pahuja,2 Raul Arenal,3,4,5Kaushik Ghosh,2 Soumya Ghosh, 1* and Tharangattu N. Narayanan1* 1Tata Institute of Fundamental Research-Hyderabad, Sy No. 36/P Serilingampally Mandal, Hyderabad-500046, India. 2Institute of Nano Science & Technology, 140306 Mohali, Punjab, India. 3Instituto de Nanociencia y Materiales de Aragon (INMA), Universidad de Zaragoza, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain. 4Laboratorio de MicroscopiasAvanzadas (LMA), Universidad de Zaragoza, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain. 5Fundación ARAID, 50018 Zaragoza, Spain. (* Corresponding Authors: tnn@tifrh.res.in (T.N.N.) and soumya.ghosh@tifrh.res.in (S.G.) 2 Abstract Photo-rechargeable (solar) battery can be considered as an energy harvesting cum storage system, where it can charge the conventional metal-ion battery using light instead of electricity, without having other parasitic reactions. Here we demonstrate a two-electrode lithium ion solar battery with multifaceted TiS2-TiO2 hybrid sheets as cathode. Choice of TiS2-TiO2 electrode ensures the formation of a type II semiconductor heterostructure while the lateral heterostructure geometry ensures high mass/charge transfer and light interactions with the electrode. TiS2 has a higher lithium binding energy (1.6 eV) than TiO2 (1.03 eV), ensuring the possibilities of higher amount of Li ion insertion to TiS2 and hence the maximum recovery with the photocharging, as further confirmed by the experiments. Apart from the demonstration of solar solid-state batteries, the charging of lithium ion full cell with light indicates the formation of lithium intercalated graphite compounds, ensuring the charging of the battery without any other parasitic reactions at the electrolyte or electrode-electrolyte interfaces. Possible mechanisms proposed here for the charging and discharging processes of solar batteries, based on our experimental and theoretical results, indicate the potential of such systems in forthcoming era of renewable energies. Keywords: Solar Battery, TiS2 Cathode, Type II heterojunction, Solid-State Battery, Li Ion Full Cell, Density Functional Theory, In situ Raman Studies. 3 TOC: Development of a photo-rechargeable lithium ion battery full cell using multifaceted layered cathode and graphite anode, and demonstration of its charging and discharging processes both theoretically and experimentally. The cathode consists a lateral heterostructure of TiS2-TiO2 domains, ensuring the formation of type II heterostructure with high lithium binding energy for TiS2, indicating the possibilities of batteries with high energy efficiency. 4 Introduction: Exploring new ways of harvesting solar energy is receiving tremendous attention due to its potential in relation to tomorrow’s green energy economy.1 Storing solar energy directly inside an electrochemical system is one such viable method that has been recently explored.2 Along similar lines, directly photo-rechargeable battery or solar battery has recently been highlighted. In the past, two-electrode photo-batteries (solar batteries) were demonstrated mostly with metal- based electrodes. For example, lithium3–6 or zinc7,8 has been used as one of the electrodes. In these cells, excitons are generated in the ‘cathode’ upon exposure to light, and the ‘charging’ process of the battery/cell is triggered by increasing the lifetime of the holes in the cathode due to efficient electron-hole separation that relies on the band alignment of the different constituents in the electrode.9 Apart from the metal based ‘half cells’ where the metal, say lithium, is directly used as the anode, there is no report on photo-rechargeable Li ion ‘full cells’, where a metal-ion containing electrode is employed as the cathode and a layered electrode (say graphite) serves as the anode. Paolella et al. showed that a two-electrode system with a hybrid mixture of cathode material (lithium iron phosphate (LFP) and N719 dye) can function as a photo-rechargeable cathode, where dye-sensitization upon light illumination helps delithiation, presumably by the transfer of the generated holes to the Li intercalated LFP.3 One of the major issues of such organic dye based systems is its cyclability due to the instability of the dye while interacting with the conventional organic electrolytes used in a battery.3 This idea has been extended to perovskites4 as well as organic molecule based 5 solar batteries, but the cyclability of such cells and their full-charging to the maximum voltage were found to be limited. Electrodes based on inorganic frameworks can be alternatives to address the stability issue. In one such demonstration, the authors could show that the MoS2/MoOx based layered 5 type-II semiconductor is a viable option for cyclable, high photo-efficient solar (half cell) battery development.9More recently, Hu et al. extended the concept to a SnO2/TiO2 heterojunction nano arrays based electrode for battery applications. In this set-up, LixTiO2 is shown to transfer electron to SnO2 upon light adsorption, resulting in an increase in reversible Li+ intercalation in SnO2.1 Having demonstrated the potential of such inorganic structures, the key is to develop a layered cathode material, since most of the demonstrated photoelectrodes are battery ‘anode’ materials.1 A photoactive (in the visible range) cathode material based cell can have enhanced energy density with high energy efficiency (since it operates at higher potentials), which is highly required for the successful implementation of the light-chargeable two electrode batteries. . A type II semiconductor heterojunction-based electrode system can intercalate metal ions (e.g., Li ions) in both the materials simultaneously during discharge.9 In such a case, photo- rechargeable (recoverable) Li ions (hence charging capacity) is limited to one electrode and the rest of the Li ions from the other material need to be recovered by electrically charging the battery.9 Hence, the desired combination of materials for cathode should have (i) substantial difference in Li ion (or metal ion of concern) binding capabilities while (ii) their bands should be aligned in such a way that hole accumulation occurs in the material with higher Li ion binding capability. These attributes will ensure high Li ion recovery with light and hence similar charging and discharging behaviour. With these concepts in mind, we propose that the combination of TiS2/TiO2is a potential photocathode material for Li ion full cells. Furthermore, theoretical investigations demonstrate that TiS2 has a higher Li ion adsorption energy (1.6 eV, details in the later part) as compared to TiO2 (1.03 eV) along with higher valence band and conduction band edges when forming a 6 staggered band structure with TiO2, where that will ensure the hole accumulation in TiS2 uponvisible light illumination. TiS2 is known to be a cathode material for Li ion battery, as established byStanley Whittingham et al. during their early research.10 TiS2 possesses high electrical conductivity as well ashigh Li+diffusion rates10 – the two required properties of a battery cathode material. Moreover, it is the lightest and cheapest of all the group IVB and VB layered dichalcogenides.11 Hence, TiS2 based cathode electrode can be used in both liquid and solid-state batteries.12 Furthermore, TiS2-TiO2 heterostructure constitutes type II heterojunction band alignment which has not only a wide range of solar energy coverage (∼80%) with near-infrared absorption edge, but also possesses fast electron transfer rate.13Along with the ability to absorb a wide range of solar energies, TiS2-TiO2 type II heterostructure also possesses high specific capacity for metal ion battery.14 Herein, we prepared TiS2-TiO2 type II heterostructure nanosheets as the photocathode of a two electrode photo-rechargeable battery, developed via simple but scalable chemical method. The half cell and full cell (with graphite anode) solar batteries show better photo-efficiency and capacitance in comparison to the systems that have been previously reported in the literature (supporting information (SI), Table S1). Apart from the band structure and Li+ binding capabilities, the photoelectrode structure is also highly crucial in the performance of a solar battery. The electrode design demands high interactions with light along with an efficient mass transfer to the electrolyte being used in the battery. Two-dimensional (2D) sheets or nanosheets in general can offer high surface area, which is found to be helpful for metal ion batteries such as Li and sodium.14 Here the type II heterostructure consists of TiO2 nanosheets along with partially sulfurized regions of TiS2. This arrangement ensures an electrode structure with high light-matter as well as electrode-electrolyte 7 interactions. Moreover, TiO2 being a wide bandgap semiconductor (~3.47 eV),15 the exciton formation with solar radiation (1 sun, 100 mW/cm2 power density) can be mainly restricted in TiS2 (~1.10 eV,16 as proven in the later part) and hence an effective electron-hole separation in the heterostructure can be expected. Electrolyte degradation is a common issue in liquid electrolyte based Li ion batteries and it is particularly a concern when implemented in solar batteries. This issue can be addressed by solid-state electrolytes in conjunction with a good Li ion diffusing electrode. TiS2 has high Li ion diffusion coefficient (9.75 X 10-12 cm2s-1) 10,12 and hence, we further demonstrate the applicability of TiS2-TiO2 indirect light chargeable batteries in conjunction with solid-state electrolyte system. Results and discussion: Initially, multi-layeredTiO2 nanosheets (Ti0.87O2 NSs, Figure S1; stoichiometry was confirmed in the previous report14) were synthesized via a chemical exfoliation process.14 The Ti0.87O2 NSs were further annealed in air to obtain anatase phase of TiO2 NSs (named as annealed TiO2 NS, details in SI and later part). Partially and fully sulfurized regions containing TiO2 NSs were then developed (Figure 1(a)) by a chemical vapour transport deposition (CVD) technique (details in supporting information method section).14 Morphology of the nanosheets and the elemental constituents of the samples (annealed TiO2 NSs, TiS2-TiO2 NSs, and TiS2 NSs) were confirmed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) imaging and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) based mapping (Figure S2 and S3). All the samples possess nanosheet geometry (Figure S2). Furthermore, the EDS based elemental mapping shows uniform distribution of titanium and 8 oxygen in the annealed TiO2 NSs, titanium and sulphur in TiS2 NSs, and titanium, oxygen, and sulphur in TiS2-TiO2 NSs (Figure S3). Furthermore, Raman spectroscopy analysis indicates the formation of annealed TiO2 (Figure 1 (b)), TiS2-TiO2 and TiS2 (details discussion in section 1, Figure S4). Chemical states of all the atoms in each NSs are identified using X-Ray Photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. The XPS survey spectra (Figure 1 (c)) of the annealed TiO2 samples confirm the Ti (2p) and O (1s). A detailed discussion on the high resolution XPS spectra of samples is given in the SI (section 1, Figure S5). The XPS, Raman and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses (discussed in the following section) indicate the formation of TiO2 and TiS2-TiO2, along with the surface (fully) sulfurized TiS2 sheets.17 9 (regions containing TiS2 and TiO2) TiS2-TiO2 NSs, and TiS2 NSsvia the CVD set up. The characterisation of annealed TiO2 NSs and heterostructuredTiS2-TiO2 NSs using: (b) Raman spectroscopy, (c) XPS survey scan (inset shows the respective structures), and (d) XRD, indicating their characteristic features as explained in the main text. (e-g) HAADF-(HR) STEM images of TiS2-TiO2 NSs, ((f) area corresponding to TiO2 and (g) the region where TiS2 can be observed, respectively). (h) Another HAADF-STEM image recorded on another flake. An EDS spectrum image has been recorded in this TiS2-TiO2 NSs. (i-k) STEM-EDS elemental mapping maps of Ti, S, and O, respectively have been extracted from the analysis of the EDS spectrum 10 image recorded in (h). Those images (e-h) and chemical maps (i-k) show the crystallinity and the elemental distribution of the nanosheets. The XRD diffraction pattern (as seen in Figure 1(d)) of annealed TiO2 NS (Figure 1 (d), black) indicates the formation of a pure anatase phase of TiO2. The diffraction planes of annealed the crystallographic planes of 2H-TiS2 are also present, marked as (001), (011), and (102).18 This indicates the existence of crystalline phases of both TiS2 and TiO2 in TiS2-TiO2 NSs. To verify the atomic level structure of the nanosheets and also to check the elemental chemical distribution of TiS2 and TiO2 phases on TiS2-TiO2 NSs, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis have also been carried out on the heterostructured TiS2-TiO2 NSs. In the high-resolution scanning TEM (HRSTEM) images, TiS2 and TiO2 phase were observed on the surface of TiS2- TiO2 NSs (Figure 1 (e-g)). TiO2 is found to be in anatase phase,in tune with the XRD analysis. The HRSTEM images show an inter-planar distance of 0.61 nm,14that belongs to the crystalline TiS2. The 0.347 nm crystalline planes belong to the anatase TiO2.14Furthermore, STEM-EDS elemental mapping of TiS2-TiO2 NSs shows homogenous distribution of titanium, sulphur and oxygen on TiS2-TiO2 NSs(Figure 1 (h-k)). Hence, in the heterostructure TiS2-TiO2 NSs, TiS2 nano domains are distributed over the TiO2 NSs. The sheets (flakes) have a lateral width of ~ 600 nm. The work functions, valance band edges, and band gaps that are experimentally estimated for annealed TiO2 and TiS2 NSs are given in SI (section 2, Figure S6). UV-Visible spectroscopy analyses indicate that the absorption edges of TiO2 annealed and TiS2 NSs are at ~ 330 nm and 11 ~830 nm (Figure S6 (a-c)),19,20 indicating the large band gap of TiO2 (~3.36 eV) and full visible light absorption in TiS2 (~1.10 eV) and TiS2-TiO2 NSs. The ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) analyses were conducted to estimate the valence band edges and work functions. Based on these analyses, the valance band (VB) edge and conduction band (CB) edge of the annealed TiO2, and TiS2 NSs are found to be: VB (TiO2) 7.24 eV, CB (TiO2) 3.88 eV, and VB (TiS2) 4.64 eV, CB (TiS2) 3.54 eV,16,20 respectively and it indicates the possibilities of the formation of a type II heterostructure in TiS2-TiO2, as shown in the Figure S6 (f). This is further verified computationally using density functional theory (DFT) based calculations. The computed electronic band structures of TiS2 and TiO2 are provided in Figure S21 and Figure S23, respectively. The computed VB and CB edges of the TiO2 and TiS2 monolayers are found to be in line with the experimentally observed trend:VB (TiO2) 7.62 eV, CB (TiO2) 4.28 eV, and VB (TiS2) 4.60 eV, CB (TiS2) 3.86 eV, respectively, (Figure 2(a)).The computed work functions for monolayer TiS2 and TiO2 are found to be 5.758 eV and 6.025 eV, respectively (further computational details are provided in the SI). A high photo response from the TiS2-TiO2 NSs in comparison to others indicates effective charge separation happening in the hybrid nanosheet, as expected from the band structure analyses, both experimentally and theoretically. The results of the photo response (photoconductivity) of the different nanosheets are provided in SI (section 2, To check the efficacy of theTiS2-TiO2 system as Li insertion electrode, electrochemical Li ion insertion and de-insertion cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments were conducted using TiS2-TiO2 NS electrode (details of the cell construction is provided in the SI) and compared with that of annealed TiO2 and TiS2 NSs. The CV was recorded in the range of 1.0-2.9V vs Li/Li+at a scan rate of 0.1mV/s (Figure 2(b)). In the cathodic region of annealed TiO2 NS, the peak at 1.7 12 V is attributed to Li+ insertion in TiO2 NS(Figure 2(b), black).21 In TiS2 NS, Li+ insertion peak appears at 2.34 V (Figure 2(b), blue).22 In TiS2-TiO2NS, two different Li+ insertion peaks appear at 2.31 V and 1.71 V indicating that the insertion is happening in both TiO2 and TiS2 (Figure 2(b), red).21,22 This further confirms that both TiO2 and TiS2 regions are exposed on the surface of TiS2-TiO2 NS. Furthermore, annealed TiO2 NS,TiS2 NS, and TiS2-TiO2NS show peaks at 2.1V for TiO2 NS, broad peaks at 2.13 V for TiS2 NS and a sharp and a broad peakat 2.04 V for TiS2-TiO2 NS (Figure 2(b)).21,22 These potentials are related to the de-lithiation from LixTiO2, LixTiS2, and LixTiS2-TiO2 electrodes, respectively. The discharge curves of these cells (coin cells) are shown in Figures S8 and the specific capacities of the Li ion coin cells are found to be Moreover, the discharge plateaus of TiO2, TiS2, and TiS2-TiO2 based half cells at the current density of 21 mAg-1 are found to be at 1.67 V, 2.40 and 2.40 V, respectively, indicating the potential of TiS2-TiO2 electrodes as cathodes. Electrochemical cyclability of these cells were also tested (Figure S9) and it can be seen that a high capacity of 100 mAhg-1 is achievable with TiS2- TiO2 electrode even after 100 cycles. The voltage stabilisation of the cell during discharge will increase the open circuit voltage of the cell (as seen in Figure S10) due to the re-arrangement of metal ions within the electrode,24 but upon further discharge, a sudden drop in the voltage can be seen (Figure S10 inset). The photocharging capability of the TiS2-TiO2NS was measured by potentiostatic and galvanostatic charge−discharge measurements. Before the potentiostatic measurement, the TiS2- TiO2 NS cell with an optical window (details in SI) was first discharged in the dark (without light) to 1.0 V vs Li/Li+ to lithiate the TiS2-TiO2 NS. After the discharge process, a constant voltage of 2.5 V vs Li/Li+ was applied in the presence and absence of white light irradiation 13 (white light (70mWcm-2)), and the charging current was recorded.5As shown in Figure 2c, the current is found to be increased under white light irradiations compared to that in dark by 0.29 mAcm-2. The light response is further studied using repeated light on/off experiments.5 The increase in the charging current in the presence of light indicates the possibilities of photoelectron generation during the charging process, where the current density generated is shown to be sufficient for battery charging, as shown in the subsequent sections. band-offset for TiS2 and TiO2 . Black and Red colors represent experimental and computational valence bands respectively while lighter shades of black and red represent the corresponding conduction bands. (b) CV of (with lithium metal as counter electrode) annealed TiO2 NSs 14 measurement where the potential was held at 2.5 V vs Li/Li+ and the charging current were measured in the presence (green) and absence (grey) of white light (70mWcm-2), Before the measurement, the cell was discharged to 1.0Vvs Li/Li+ to lithiate the TiS2-TiO2 NSs.(d) and (e) Indicate the energy stabilised structures, as obtained from DFT calculations (details in supporting information), of Li ion intercalated TiO2 and TiS2 nanosheets. The solar battery discharge process is also tested with a discharge current density of 21 mAg-1 (coin cell (CR2032) having liquid (EC/EMC with LiPF6) electrolyte with a light entering window (quartz), The designand details of the set-up are provided in SI.9 The open circuit potentials of the constructed batteries (half cells) are found to be ~ 3.1 V vs Li/Li+. Upon discharge of the cell up to 1V,the potential of the cell was allowed to stabilise. After the voltage stabilisation, irradiation light (white light, 70mWcm-2) through the quartz window of the cell is found to increase the cell voltage, as shown in Figure S11, indicating the efficacy of the photoelectrons to charge the cell back to the original potential. To further confirm the effect of light on the Li-insertion and de-insertion in TiS2-TiO2 NS electrode, CV experiment was performed with Li ion half cells with and without the exposure of red (100 mWcm-2) and UV light (100 mWcm-2). The CV was recorded in the range of 1.0–2.9 V vs Li/Li+ at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 (Figures 3(a) and 3 (b)). In the cathodic region, the peaks around 1.55 V in dark are attributed to Li+ insertion in TiS2-TiO2 NSs. This peak in the 3rd cycle is different from the first cycle as shown in Figure 2a, because stable solid electrolyte interface formation can occur after the first discharge.22,25 Similar effects with light are observed in CVs under both red and UV light illuminations. The faradic current enhancement and the slight shift in the voltage to higher value in the presence of light are indications of the favourable Li insertion process augmented due to the efficient charge transfer mechanism, as recently 15 explained in SnO2/TiO2 heterostructure based solar battery.1 Also, in the anodic region, de- insertion peaks in the dark shifted are from 2.15 V to 2.06 V in red light and 2.03 V in UV light because the generated holes help in the de-intercalation of lithium ion from TiS2-TiO2 NSs. electrode) in dark and light. (a) Red LED, (b) UV light at a scan rate of 0.1mV/s. (c) Competitive photocharging during the discharge of the battery with TiS2-TiO2 photoelectrode (inset- charging capacity plots). (d) Energy efficiency (%) for discharge in dark at constant current load for two 16 cycles and discharge in white light during the third cycle (inset schematic of photo-battery model with a light window). To further test the effect of light on the charging and discharging processes of these cells, the cells were first electrochemically charged and discharged three times (in dark) till 1 V (Figure 3 (c)) and charged back to 2.9 V by a constant currentdensity of ~ 21 mAg-1 (Figure 3 (c)). During this electrochemical charging, the capacity values are found to be ~ 97 mAhg-1 (1st charge), ~ 87 mAhg-1 (2nd charge), and ~81 mAhg-1 (3rd charge), respectively in dark (Figure 3 (c), inset). Discharge capacity values in dark are found to be ~201 mAhg-1 (2nd dark) and ~ 169 mAhg-1 (3rddark) (Figure 3 (c)).The fourth discharge of the same cell in presence of white light (< 1 sun white light) delivers a significantly higher capacity value of ~ 585 mAhg-1. This capacity is ~ 245% higher than that obtained in the 3rd cycle. A comparison of the specific discharge capacity in presence of light in TiS2-TiO2 NSs based photoelectrode with other reported photo-rechargeable two systems is given in Table S1. This comparison clearly demonstrates that the present cell delivers the highest capacity enhancement in light with reasonably good specific capacity. The energy efficiency (details in SI section 5) enhancement in lightis also calculated by taking the ratio of discharging and charging profiles for discharge in dark and light (see, SI section 5 for details). This calculation shows that the energy efficiency in dark is ~141% in 1st cycle and ~134% in 2nd cycle (Figure 3 (d)). This value is found to be enhanced to ~544% when discharged in white light. This result confirms that competitive charging is happening upon light exposure during discharge (Figure 3 (c)). In addition to the competitive charging process as demonstrated above, direct charging of the cell using light is also investigated. To check the light assisted de-lithiation (or 17 photocharging) process in the TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode, the lithium half cell was constructed that shows an initial open circuit voltage (OCV) of 3.1 V. The battery was discharged in dark with ~21 mA g−1 discharge current density (Figure 4a, black area). After the discharge of cell up to 1.0 V, the cell voltage was allowed to equilibrate (Figure 4a, pink area). After the voltage stabilization (at ≈1.95 V),24 a white light having a power density of 70 mWcm−2 is turned on. The voltage enhancement is visible during the exposure of light as shown in Figure 4a (white area, enhanced up to 2.89 V within 14.6 h). This rise in the voltage is due to the light assisted de- lithiation or photocharging of lithiated TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode. After charging, the cell is allowed to discharge with current density of ~ 21 mAg−1. The ensuring discharge capacity of ~ 278 mAhg-1, is close to the initial discharge capacity 283 mAhg-1 (Figure 4b),indicating photocharging. In another set of control experiments, the same cell is allowed to discharge until 1 V as discussed earlier (Figure S10) with a current density of ~21 mAg−1. After the voltage stabilization in dark, the cell was further stabilised at 1.97 V (similar to the previous value). Following this, equilibration procedure, the cell is again discharged with the same current load of ~21 mAg−1. It can be seen that the voltage has suddenly dropped without giving any significant capacity (inset of Figure S10). Further photocharging was conducted in this cell and then it was discharged with a higher current load (compared to previous) of ~ 46 mAg−1, to check its efficacy in delivering higher power density. Further light charging and discharging capacities of the cell are shown in Figure 4c. In this case, consistent charging and discharging capacities were obtained as shown in Figure 4c:,1st photo charge:~254 mAhg-1, 1st discharge:~237 mAhg-1, 2nd photo charge:~228 mAhg-1, 2nd discharge:~217 mAhg-1.Similar photocharging and discharging capacities indicate that the maximum lithium intercalation is happening in TiS2, in tune with the DFT based binding energy calculations (discussed later). 18 Photoefficiency was calculated for TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode and compared with a previously reported single material photo-battery electrode material (Figure S12). The figure indicates a high photoefficiency (0.23% at high current density load of 0.46 mAg-1, the corresponding calculation is shown in section 5 and Figure S13) even in comparison to MoS2/MoOx solar battery 9 or other reported organic or inorganic photo-batteries (Table S2). Lithium metal as counter electrode: (a) Discharging in dark by constant current load (light grey area) followed by voltage stabilization (dark yellow area), photocharging (white area) and 19 discharge after photo charge (black area). (b) Comparison of specific capacity of 1st discharge and 2nd discharge after photo charge of TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrodes (inset capacity comparison of conventional and photo Li ion battery). (c) Photo charge capacity and corresponding discharge capacity comparison(d) Long-term photo-battery (cell) cycling done at constant current for discharge (in light grey) and photo charge by red light (LED red light , 100 mWcm-2) shown in light violet colour. The long-term cyclability of photo-rechargeable batteries is another concern among the reported systems.3 In Figure 4 (d) we demonstrate the cyclability of the current set-up. The photocharging time was kept fixed at 10 h and the cell was discharged with a constant current density of ~ 21 mAg−1. The mechanism of photocharging of the TiS2-TiO2 NSs based photoelectrode for Li ion battery isassumed to be similar to the MoS2/MoOx based photoelectrode (SI, section 5).9 In addition to the liquid electrolyte containing Li ion batteries discussed above, where they bring major safety as well as battery lifespan concerns due to the flammability of the electrolyte,26,27 solid-state batteries have particular interest in light assisted charging process as the decomposition of the electrolyte can be avoided. Due to the high Li ion diffusion capabilities of TiS2, it has been shown to be an efficient electrode in solid-state batteries.26 Using our previously reported method,28 we developed a solid electrolyte for Li ions and constructed a solid-state solar battery(details in SI). Initially, the electrochemical charging and discharging of the solid-state battery, with TiS2-TiO2 NSs electrode and Li metal having solid electrolyte (20% LiClO4 in Polyethylene oxide) are tested, Figure S14a. The initial capacity of ~ 214 mAhg-1 is obtained for this cell and further electrochemical charging and discharging gave a capacity values of ~ 196 mAhg-1 in both the second and third cycles (Figure S14b). The photocharging of 20 such a solid-state cell is shown in Figure S14c. It is found that a capacity of ~ 58 mAhg-1(Figure S14d)is obtained after the first discharging (after photocharging the cell) of the cell thatis photo charged to a voltage of 2.60 V from 1.88 V. This indicates the possibilities of solid-state solar batteries, which addresses safety issues and electrolyte degradation issues while ensuring a high discharge capacity with light (Figure S14). Furthermore, the mechanism of intercalation and de-intercalation of Li ions in the TiS2- TiO2 electrode is studied using in situ Raman spectroscopy experiments. Details of the experiment and the results are shown in SI (section 7 and Figure S15-16). In a nutshell, it can be seen that Li ion intercalation happens in both TiS2 and TiO2 (to a lesser extent) and the photocharging brings the Li ions from the TiS2, indicating the veracity of the above-mentioned charging mechanism. The preferential binding of Li to TiS2 as compared to TiO2 is also supported by the calculated binding energies of Li+ to TiS2 and TiO2, -1.6 eV and -1.0 eV, respectively. Control experiments were also conducted where photo irradiation with and without external circuit (Schematic representation in Figure S17) was performed. During this experiment, in the absence of any external electron transport path, voltage did not enhance even after 5 h of light exposure, Figure S17 (a). But the voltage of the same cell enhanced to 2.65 V from 1.88 V within 5 h, once connected with an external circuit, Figure S17 (b). This observation indicates that light assisted degradation (oxidation) of the electrolyte is not the cause for the voltage enhancement. Paolella et al. reported that the photoelectrons oxidise the electrolyte only (parasitic process) but cannot reduce Li ion on the other electrode.3 Such a process cannot ensure the proper long term cycling of the solar battery and hence the process happening at the other electrode needs to be studied by constructing a full cell. 21 Full cell solar battery is also constructed using pre-lithiated TiS2-TiO2 electrode (cathode, details of preparation in SI) and graphite anode (schematics of the experiment and the cell are shown in Figure S15 (c) and Figure S19, respectively). The light assisted charging of such a cell is studied using in situ Raman spectroscopy, where the Raman signal is collected from the graphite side while doing the photo exposure (white light, 70mWcm-2) from the other side of graphite are visible with charging process (Figure S15d) and the details can be seen in SI. Powder XRD of the graphite is also taken after the charging process (Figure S15e) and it is compared with that of electrochemically charged graphite electrode made out of a similar full cell (details in SI, section 7). It can be seen from the XRD comparisons that the formation of LiC6, LiC12 and/or similar lithium intercalated graphite compositions are there on both the graphite electrodes, indicating the successful photoelectron transfer to the anode (detail mechanism discuss in SI, section 8). Theoretical possibilities of such a process to form lithium intercalated graphite is also further verified. While the reduction of work function of graphene upon increasing the concentration of metal adatom is well documented,29 current study reveals that the work function of the Li- intercalated graphene can be matched with the work function of the photoexcited lithiated TiS2- TiO2 heterostructure (detailed calculations in SI, Figures S20-S30). The relative positions of the Fermi level of Li1C12 as compared to TiO2 and TiS2 is shown in Figure S31. Relatively small difference between LiC12 and TiS2 energy levels indicate the possibilities of such reactions with the generated photoelectrons at the photocathode. Moreover, reversible changes in the diffraction planes of TiS2 are also observed while conducting post-XRD analyses on lithiated and de- 22 lithiated (photocharging) TiS2-TiO2 electrodes, while such a reversible process was not happening in TiO2 electrode. In conclusion, possibilities of lithium ion based solar battery full cells having conventional graphite anode and intercalated cathode material is tested here and it is shown that such a system can be realized. In this attempt, TiS2-TiO2 nanosheets were functioned as cathode material where TiS2 nanosheet regions were formed on nanosheets of anatase TiO2 nanosheets, which were prepared using a chemical route. This type II semiconductor lateral heterostructure ensures high photoelectron generation while having high binding energy of Li for TiS2 (-1.6 eV), as confirmed using DFT based calculations. Band alignment calculations using both theoretical and experimental techniques are in line with each other indicating the formation of this type II structure. Apart from the photoelectron formation, the heterostructure based electrode is shown to work efficiently as photocathode. Both half cell and full cell studies are conducted, and a discharge energy efficiency of ~>500% is achieved with this electrode under white light illumination (<1 sun). Similar charging and discharging capacities (~250 mAhg-1) were obtained under battery cycling in ‘light’ indicating the efficient shuttling of Li ions between the electrodes during the charge-discharge processes. The formation of intercalated graphite compounds (possibly LiC12), shown with in situ and ex situ experiments and theoretical analyses, establishes the functioning of battery full cells with light assisted charging process. Hence this work establishes the potential of the concept of solar battery, where it can be fully functional as an electrochemical battery while harvesting solar energy. 23 1. Experimental Section Materials: Titanium oxide (TiO2, Sigma-Aldrich), Potassium carbonate (K2CO3, Sisco Research Laboratories Pvt. Ltd., (SRL)), Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, SRL), Hydrochloric acid (Sigma Aldrich), tetramethylammonium hydroxide aqueous solution (SRL), Carbon disulfide (CS2, Spectrochem), Lithium hexafluoro phoshphate in EC/EMC solvent (Sigma Aldrich), Ethylene carbonate (Sigma Aldrich), Polythelene carbonate (Sigma Aldrich), Lithium perchlorate (LiClO4, ACS, >95%), ITO coated glass 25mm x 25 mm (Sigma Aldrich), Acetylene black (MTI Corporation), PVDF (Sigma Aldrich), N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone (NMP, Avra Synthesis Pvt. Ltd.), Whatman Glass microfiber filter paper (GE Healthcare Life sciences) Methods: Synthesis of 2D Ti0.87O2 nanosheets: First of all we synthesised layered titanate (K0.8[Ti1.73Li0.27]O4) by calcined of solid-state mixture at 1273K for 20 hour, where 5 g of Li2CO3, K2CO3, and TiO2 (solid-state mixture at molar ratio, 0.14:0.4:1.73) were placed in a crucible.14 Further for proton exchange of layered titanate, the layered titanate precursor was immersed in acidic solution (0.5 mol L−1 HCl). To completely obtain protonated titanate (H1.07Ti1.73O4·H2O), we stirred solution for 48 h, during course of this period the HCl solution were refreshed in every 24 h. After that, the mixture solution was centrifuged at 7500 rpm, and the solid material was washed with distilled water. Further solid compound were dried at room temperature under a vacuum for 48 h. To exfoliate the layered protonated titanate (H1.07Ti1.73O4·H2O) into the single-layer Ti0.87O2 nanosheets by exchanging the protons of protonated titanate. The protonated titanate were re-dissolved in the saturated tetramethylammonium hydroxide aqueous solution (TMAOH) (keeping 1:1 molar ratio), were 24 shaken for 48 h. To completely remove water, Ti0.87O2 solution was placed in the freezer for 40 hand then freeze dried for 72 h in Lyophilizer.14 Synthesis of 2D Annealed TiO2: 1g of 2D Ti0.87O2 was placed in a quartz container of the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) setup. The flow parameters were set at Ar at 700 °C for 2 h using a tube furnace. Black and white annealed TiO2 nanosheets were obtained. Synthesis of 2D TiS2-TiO2 hybrid and 2D TiS2: 1g of 2D Ti0.87O2 was placed in a quartz container of the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) setup. The flow parameters were set at CS2/Ar at 700 °C for 20 minute for TiS2-TiO2 hybrid and 1 hour for 2D TiS2 using a tube furnace. Slight and deep Olive-colour TiS2-TiO2and TiS2 2D nanosheets were obtained.14 Preparation of the photo electrodes: For the photo electrode fabrication, the sample (TiS2-TiO2 NS or Annealed TiO2 NS or TiS2 NSs) was mixed with 10 weight % carbon (C) black and 10 weight % PVDF (polymer) binder.9 They were mixed well in N-Methyl-2-Pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent and drop-casted on an ITO coated glass plate.9 The coating was further dried at 80 °C for 4 hours. In order to prepare solid electrolyte of polyethylene oxide (PEO) and LiClO4, 1 g of PEO and 0.2 g of LiClO4 were dissolved in excess of acetonitrile at 60 oC till a homogeneous thick slurry is obtained.28 The bubble free slurry was casted onto aluminium foil. The coating was first allowed to dry at room temperature then dried at 60 oC.28 The thickness was optimized for 0.6 mm and is kept same for all the different membrane. The other electrode (anode) of the cell was a lithium chip. The coin cells were assembled inside the glove box as follows: a cathode disc was placed on the coin cell. The SE was then dipped in ethylene carbonate–propylene carbonate solution (0.2 g ethylene carbonate in 1 mL of propylene carbonate) and placed on cathode followed by lithium chip as anode. The coin cell was then closed and sealed through punching.28 25 Characterisation: To determine vibrational Raman modes of TiS2-TiO2 NS, Annealed TiO2 NS, TiS2 NSs and conduct in-situ Raman analysis, Renishaw in Via Raman microscope (532 nm excitation) was used. Further to know the surface topography and composition of the sample, FESEM, JEOL JSM-7200 Falong with EDS was used. To identify the elemental composition and chemical structure of NSs, PHI Quantera X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Survey: pass energy, 140 eV, high-resolution spectra, 26 eV) was used. To determine valance band edge we used Ultraviolet photon spectroscopy (UPS) using He I excitation (21.2 eV) and recorded with a constant pass energy of 5 eV in the ultrahigh vaccum (UHV) chamber of the XPS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed using a probe aberration corrected microscope, (Thermo Fisher Scientific Titan Low Base working at 300 kV). This microscope is equipped with a high-brightness field-emission gun (X-FEG) and with an EDS spectrometer (Oxford Instruments Ultim Max 100). Powder XRD data of the materials is acquired from RIGAKU Smartlab X-Ray diffractometer at operational power of 9kW with Hypix-3000 detector. Diffuse reflectance UV-visible (DR UV-vis) spectra have been recorded on a Shimadzu UV-2550 spectrophotometer. Photo conductivity measurements were conducted using a three-electrode system with Ag/AgCl as reference electrode and graphite as a counter. A potentiostat -Biologic SP-300 was used for the measurements. For such studies, the samples were coated on a glassy carbon electrode and applied 0.3 V external bias in 0.2 M Na2SO4. White, UV and red LED light (Holmarc Opto-Mechatronics) sources were used for the measurements. For freeze drying we used Lyophilizer from Christ. Furthermore, galvanostatic charge and discharge tests were conducted using Neware Battery testing system. During in-situ Raman analysis, we used potentiostat Biologic SP-300 for galvanostatic charge and discharge. 26 All the electrochemical experiments were carried out at room temperature, and all the experiments were repeated more than thrice under identical conditions to check the reproducibility. Acknowledgements: TNN and SG acknowledge the support from Infosys-TIFR “Leading Edge” Research Grant. Authors from TIFR also thank the support of Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under Project Identification No. RTI 4007. Authors thank Pallavi Thakur and Dr. Sai Smruti Samantaray for valuable suggestions on some experiment. R.A. acknowledges financial support from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation MCIN and the Spanish Research Agency AEI (PID2019-104739GB-100/AEI/10.13039/501100011033), Gobierno de Aragon (DGA, E13-20R), and from the European Union H2020 programs "ESTEEM3" (grant agreement No 823717) and Graphene Flaghsip CORE3 (grant agreement No. 881603).TEM and XPS measurements were performed in the Laboratorio de MicroscopicasAvanzadas (LMA) at the Universidad de Zaragoza (Spain).Wethank G.Antorrea (LMA, U Zaragoza,Spain) for help with XPS acquisition.K.G. is grateful for getting the financial support from Ministry of Textiles Science and Technology, Government of India for the execution of this work. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests. 27 Author contributions T.N.N. conceived the idea with S.G. and planned the work with A.K. A.K. performed most of the electrochemical experiments and photo-battery design. R.H. did most of the computational calculations. M.P. performed in UPS and DRS experiments. R.A. helped to conduct the XPS and TEM analyses. A.K., R.H., M.P., R.A., K.G., S.G. and T.N.N. co-wrote the paper, and all the authors discussed the manuscript. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of the study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Figure S20 and S22 shows the structural units of TiS2 and TiO2 respectively that are employed in band structure calculations, Figure S21 and S23. Figure S24 and S25 show the planar averaged Hartree potential in TiS2 and TiO2 monolayers for work function calculations whereas Figure S26 shows the non-monotonous convergence of work function with respect to number of layers. The simulation cells with multiple layers of TiS2 and TiO2 are shown in Figure S27 and S29 respectively. The corresponding plots for planar averaged Hartree potentials are provided in Figure S28 and S30. The simulation cell for Li1C12 is shown in Figure S32 whereas the corresponding computed planar averaged Hartree potential is shown in Figure S33.