Superconductor-ferromagnet hybrids for non-reciprocal electronics and detectors Zhuoran Geng1, Alberto Hijano2,3 , Stefan Ili ╠üc2, Maxim Ilyn2, Ilari J. Maasilta1, Alessandro Monfardini4, Maria Spies5 , Elia Strambini5 , Pauli Virtanen1 , Martino Calvo4, Carmen Gonz ╠üalez-Orell ╠üana2, Ari P. Helenius1, Sara Khorshidian5 , Clodoaldo I. L. de Araujo5,6 , Florence Levy-Bertrand4 , Celia Rogero2,7 , F. Giazotto5 , F. Sebasti ╠üan Bergeret2,7, and Tero T. Heikkil ╠ła1 1 Department of Physics and Nanoscience Center, University of Jyv ╠łaskyl ╠ła, P.O. Box 35 (YFL), FI-40014 University of Jyv ╠łaskyl ╠ła, Finland 2 Centro de F ╠ü─▒sica de Materiales (CFM-MPC) Centro Mixto CSIC-UPV/EHU, E-20018 Donostia-San Sebasti ╠üan, Spain 3 Department of Condensed Matter Physics, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48080 Bilbao, Spain 4 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut N ╠üeel, 38000 Grenoble, France 5 NEST, Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR and Scuola Normale Superiore, I-56127 Pisa, Italy 6 Laboratory of Spintronics and Nanomagnetism (LabSpiN), Departamento de F ╠ü─▒sica, Universidade Federal de Vi ╠¦cosa, Vi ╠¦cosa, 36570-900, Minas Gerais, Brazil 7 Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), 20018 Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain E-mail: zhuoran.z.geng@jyu.fi E-mail: maxim.ilin@ehu.es E-mail: alessandro.monfardini@neel.cnrs.fr E-mail: elia.strambini@cnr.it E-mail: pauli.t.virtanen@jyu.fi E-mail: fs.bergeret@csic.es E-mail: tero.t.heikkila@jyu.fi arXiv:2302.12732v4 [cond-mat.supr-con] 23 Oct 2023 CONTENTS 2 Abstract. We review the use of hybrid thin films composed of superconductors and ferromagnets for creating non-reciprocal electronic components and self-biased detectors of electromag- netic radiation. We begin by introducing the theory behind these effects, as well as discussing various potential materials that can be used in the fabrication of these components. We then proceed with a detailed discussion on the fabrication and characteriza- tion of Al/EuS/Cu and EuS/Al/Co-based detectors, along with their noise analysis. Additionally, we suggest some approaches for multiplexing such self-biased detectors. Contents 1 Introduction 2 2 Fundamentals 2 2.1 Non-reciprocal transport in hybrid su- perconductor/ferromagnet structures . . 2 S/FI layer structures . . . . . . . 4 Interface transport model . . . . 6 Material specific implementation 8 2.2 Materials and device preparation . . . . 8 Device Fabrication . . . . . . . . 9 EuS properties . . . . . . . . . . 10 2.3 Tunnel characteristics . . . . . . . . . . 12 Characterization and optimiza- tion of the exchange splitting . . 12 Spin selective tunnel junctions . 15 Thermoelectricity in spin selec- tive tunnel junctions . . . . . . . 16 3 Applications 17 3.1 X-ray detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 Linear theory . . . . . . . . . . . 18 Numerical results . . . . . . . . . 19 X-ray detector design . . . . . . 21 3.2 THz detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 3.3 Multiplexing read-out of self-powered detectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 Principle and design . . . . . . . 24 Planar superinductances . . . . . 25 3-D lumped-element capacitance 26 4 Discussion and outlook 26 1. Introduction Conventional superconducting electronics rely on a combination of supercurrent and quasiparticle current transport across superconducting wires and different types of weak links. These combinations enable various functionalities, such as magnetometry , current or voltage amplifiers , voltage standards , and detectors based on resistance or inductance that depend on the nonequilibrium state of the system. Compared to their semiconductor counterparts, superconducting electronics lack a basic element: non-reciprocal devices such as diodes or thermoelectric elements. The absence of non- reciprocity can be attributed to the intrinsic electron- hole symmetry of the superconducting state. However, this symmetry can be broken using combinations of magnetic and superconducting elements , which allow, in principle, the achievement of strong non- reciprocity or thermoelectric figure of merit. These phenomena can be employed to create superconducting spintronic tunnel diodes , building blocks for superconducting logic and cryogenic memory, or novel types of detectors, such as the superconductorŌĆō ferromagnet thermoelectric detector (SFTED), with applications in astrophysics for the detection of the cosmic microwave background , and terahertz- radiation sensing used, for example, in security imaging . Remarkably, in the SFTED the absorbed radiation directly generates the desired measurement signal, without the need for a separate bias current or voltage. This review is divided into two parts. The first part focuses on the fundamentals of the building blocks for the SFTED, namely superconductor-ferromagnetic- insulator (S/FI) bilayers. We begin with a brief account of the underlying theory, focusing on aspects of the physics that are important for functionalities. The full theory for the underlying transport phenomena has been summarized elsewhere . We then discuss the main material combinations used so far, along with their basic properties, and the characterization of the superconducting state in the presence of the magnetic proximity effect, as well as the basic non-reciprocal current-voltage characteristics and thermoelectric signals. The second part focuses on the realization of radiation sensors operating in two different ranges of detected electromagnetic signals, and their readout. We provide an outlook and present some open challenges in the last section. 2. Fundamentals In this first part of the article, we concentrate on the fundamental aspects related to the fabrication of the SFTED. It comprises three sections that present the theory underlying thermoelectricity and non-reciprocal transport in superconductor-ferromagnetic insulator systems, the fabrication process of these building blocks, and their spectral characterization. 2.1. Non-reciprocal transport in hybrid superconductor/ferromagnet structures The aim of this work is to identify and realize two types of functionalities in an electronic device at low temperatures. The first of them is non-reciprocity. CONTENTS 3 Density of states (solid line) and charge carrier density (shaded region) in thermal equilibrium for a (a) p-n junction and (b) spin-split S/N tunnel junction. The dashed lines in panel (b) represent the density of states of the filtered states. Here ╬╝p and ╬╝n are the quasi-chemical potentials of the p- and n-regions, and NA and ND are the holes and electrons supplied by the acceptor and donor impurities, respectively. Non-reciprocal electronic transport in solid-state devices implies an asymmetry in the current-voltage characteristic: I(V ) ╠Ė= ŌłÆI(ŌłÆV ). Non-reciprocity is associated with inversion symmetry breaking, meaning that non-reciprocal elements usually consist of hybrid structures involving different materials. A typical example is provided by p-n diodes, which consist of p-type and n-type semiconducting layers in contact with each other. In addition to the broken inversion symmetry, the non-reciprocal electron currents require the breaking of the electron-hole symmetry resulting from the n- and p-doping of the two semiconducting layers. The working principle of a p-n diode can be understood from the sketch in Fig. 1(a), which shows a positively biased p-n junction. In the p- n junction, free electrons from the n-region diffuse into the p-region and vice versa for the holes. The regions near the interface lose their charge neutrality, with the negatively charged acceptor dopant atoms remaining in the p-region and the positively charged donor dopants remaining in the n-region, forming the depletion layer. This charged region establishes a built-in potential that counteracts quasiparticle diffusion, leading to zero net current at equilibrium. A forward bias allows the majority carriers of each region to cross the depletion layer and be injected into the nearby region, where they recombine with opposite charge quasiparticles. For several electronics-based quantum technolo- gies, the interesting operating regime lies at sub-Kelvin temperatures. This poses certain challenges to tradi- tional semiconductor technology, and substantial effort has been dedicated to scaling this technology down to the lowest temperatures . Due to these chal- lenges, research into new alternatives for non-reciprocal electronic transport at low temperatures has intensi- fied. An alternative realization of non-reciprocity to traditional semiconducting devices can be achieved by combining two types of correlated interacting electronic phases: superconductivity and magnetism. This review concentrates on hybrid heterostructures formed using these elements. We illustrate the working principle of a superconducting spintronic tunnel diode in Fig. 1(b). There, the spin-split superconducting state along with spin-polarized tunneling conspire to provide unidirectional current. The quasiparticles pass through the insulating barrier due to quantum tunneling. In the absence of spin splitting, at T = 0, there is no tunneling current until the applied bias is greater than the superconducting gap e|V | > Ōłå, since the chemical potential difference must provide enough energy to create an excitation in the superconductor. If particle-hole symmetry is broken due to spin-splitting and spin filtering, for instance, the bias required for a finite current in the forward bias configuration eV > ŌłåŌłÆh is smaller than in the backward bias eV < ŌłÆŌłåŌłÆh (h is the exchange field), so that the charge transport is non-reciprocal. The second functionality we discuss is thermoelec- tricity, where linear electric excitation leads to heat currents, or temperature differences can be associated with charge currents. In other words, the linear re- sponse charge and heat currents I, ╠ćQ can be expressed in terms of bias voltage V and temperature difference ŌłåT as ’┐Į I ╠ćQ ’┐Į = ’┐ĮG ╬▒ ╬▒ŌĆ▓ GthT ’┐Į ’┐Į V ŌłåT/T ’┐Į , (1) where G and Gth are charge and heat conductances, respectively, and ╬▒ is the thermoelectric coefficient. By Onsager symmetry, ╬▒ŌĆ▓ is obtained from ╬▒ through the time-reversal transformation. In general, ╬▒ characterizes the degree of electron-hole symmetry breaking in the spectrum. When ╬▒ŌĆ▓ = ╬▒ (appropriate for this paper), the thermoelectric effects are characterized by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = ╬▒2/(GthGT ŌłÆ ╬▒2). In ordinary metals with a large Fermi energy (EF ) it is of the order of o(kBT/EF ), and therefore very small at sub-Kelvin temperatures. Semiconductor materials exhibit the most significant thermoelectric effects at around room temperature . However, due to their 10-100 meV scale energy gap, semiconductors tend to freeze out at sub-Kelvin temperatures, and the thermoelectric efficiency is lost. Similar to the diode functionality, sub-Kelvin thermoelectricity can be realized through the combination of superconductors and ferromagnets, as detailed in the following sections. Both non-reciprocity and thermoelectricity can be utilized in detectors. The majority of existing superconducting detector types, such as transition edge sensor (TES) and kinetic inductance detector (KID) are based on probing how the response of the material changes upon irradiation. This requires CONTENTS 4 I ŌłØ ╬öT ŌłØ P╬│ P╬│ I Schematic idea for biasless detection based on thermoelectricity. Absorbed light with power P╬│ heats up one part of the heterostructure, creating a temperature difference ŌłåT, which results in a thermoelectric current I = ╬▒ŌłåT/T ŌłØ P╬│. the use of additional probing lines, which can also introduce added noise. Moreover, such detectors tend to be rather non-linear and therefore they can saturate relatively quickly. Conversely, using a diode or a thermoelectric element as a sensor enables converting the detected radiation directly into a current or voltage. Hence, such detectors are self-biased by the radiation (as in Fig. 2). In the following, we describe how the spin- dependent scattering at an interface between a superconductor (S) and a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) leads to two key phenomena underlying both the non-reciprocity and thermoelectric transport in such systems: spin splitting of the density of states and spin- polarized transport. 2.1.1. S/FI layer structures The magnetic proximity effect concept in hybrid systems, comprising ferromag- netic insulators and superconductors, was introduced early on by de Gennes within the realm of super- conductivity theory. The first experimental observa- tions of spin splitting associated with the interfacial ex- change interaction in superconductors were, however, obtained much later in Refs. using EuO/Al sys- tems, followed by observations in EuS/Al systems, also at zero external field . Subsequently, other material combinations have been explored, and the theoretical understanding has been refined. Electron transport at ferromagnetic insulator interfaces is explained by a scattering model as introduced in Ref. and further discussed in . layer between two conductors. At the FI interface, an incident electron with spin Žā =Ōåæ, Ōåō can reflect back, exhibiting a spin-sensitive amplitude given by rŌåæ/Ōåō = r0 Ōåæ/Ōåōe┬▒i╬ś/2. In a thicker FI layer, while the reflection probabilities for both spins are nearly one, the amplitudes differ by a scattering phase shift ei╬ś, where ╬ś is called the spin-mixing angle. If Spin-dependent scattering and tunnelling through a ferromagnetic insulator (FI) sandwiched between two conductors (L and R). In a simplified band model, the electron bands of the FI exhibit a gap Eg, and are spin split by an intrinsic exchange field hFI. Electron scattering from L to R at Fermi level EF is spin-dependent: the reflection coefficients r acquire a spin-dependent phase shift ╬ś, and the transmission is polarized to favor one spin direction. Top right: The magnetic proximity effect can also be interpreted through interaction with local moments at the FI interface. The physics is greatly influence by the interface quality. conductor L is a clean thin film of thickness d, electron eigenstates in it are given by a quantization condition e2ikz(╬ĄŌåæ/Ōåō)d┬▒i╬ś/2+iŽå0 = 1, where Žå0 is a spin- independent phase shift. Consequently, ╬ś induces a spin splitting ╠äh = ╬ĄŌåæ ŌłÆ ╬ĄŌåō 2 Ōēł ╬ś 4d ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į dkz d╬Ą ’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į’┐Į ŌłÆ1 = vF cos(╬▒)╬ś 4d , (2) where kz = kF cos ╬▒ = ’┐Į 2mŌłŚ╬Ą ŌłÆ k2 Ōłź is the incident momentum of the electron hitting the FI interface at angle ╬▒, |╬ś| Ōē¬ 1, and mŌłŚ is the effective mass. The splitting depends inversely on the thickness d{, as predicted by de Gennes . A scattering calculation in such a band model, assuming the FI has a band gap Eg and an internal exchange field hFI, gives the spin-mixing angle ╬ś Ōēł 2[ ’┐Į EF /Eg + ’┐Į Eg/EF ]ŌłÆ1(hFI/Eg) cos ╬▒ = ╬ś0 cos ╬▒ for Eg Ōē│ EF , which is proportional to hFI. On the other hand, the transmission amplitudes tŌåæ/Ōåō ŌłØ exp ’┐Į ŌłÆdFI ’┐Į 2mŌłŚ(Eg ┬▒ hFI) + k2 Ōłź ’┐Į are spin-dependent and the spin-filtering polarization P = (|tŌåæ|2 ŌłÆ thickness dFI, which is also observed . Qualitatively, this simplified model predicts then both the presence of the magnetic proximity effect and the spin-polarized tunneling, even though its quantitative accuracy is limited . The effect of FI interfaces on superconductors can also be described by modeling the exchange interaction between the conduction electrons and the localized magnetic moments Sr at the FI interface, Hex = ŌłÆJex ’┐Į r╬▒╬▓ ╬©ŌĆĀ ╬▒(r)(Sr ┬Ę Žā)╬▒╬▓╬©╬▓(r) , (3) CONTENTS 5 where Jex is an effective parameter describing the interaction strength. Semiclassical theory suggests the generation of a localized interfacial Zeeman field for conduction electrons, represented as hint(z) = hŌĆ▓ ex╬┤(z), complemented by spin-flip scattering. Such ╬┤- function model can match experiments reasonably well . Here hŌĆ▓ ex = ŌłÆJexnmŌ¤©SŌ¤®/─¦, with nm the 2D surface density of magnetic moments and Ō¤©SŌ¤® their average spin. In certain limits, this model can be mapped to the scattering model, as the scattering matrices can be incorporated to boundary conditions of semiclassical transport equations . These models allow for a convenient description of FI/superconductor(S) hybrid systems, also in cases where the superconductors are not ideal, e.g., containing potential or magnetic impurities. One way to probe the magnetic interface prop- erties experimentally is via spin transport measure- ments . In the scattering model, these proper- ties are often characterized by the complex-valued spin- mixing conductance GŌåæŌåō. The spin-dependent current incoming to the interface is IŽāŽāŌĆ▓ in ŌłØ (aŽāŌĆ▓ in)ŌłŚaŽā in, where ain are the incoming spin-dependent scattering ampli- tudes. The difference compared to the reflected current is IŽāŽāŌĆ▓ in ŌłÆ IŽāŽāŌĆ▓ refl = [1 ŌłÆ (rŽā)ŌłŚrŽāŌĆ▓]IŽāŽāŌĆ▓ in = gŽāŽāŌĆ▓IŽāŽāŌĆ▓ in . (4) The spin-mixing conductance GŌåæŌåō = e2 2ŽĆ─¦ ’┐Į nnŌĆ▓[╬┤nnŌĆ▓ ŌłÆ (rnnŌĆ▓ Ōåæ )ŌłŚrnnŌĆ▓ Ōåō ] is defined by summing gŌåæŌåō over all scattering channels n, and describes the absorbed spin current transverse to the magnetization of the FI. In the simple interface scattering model, and assuming complete reflection |rŽā| = 1, we have gŽāŽā = 0 and gŌåæŌåō = gr ŌåæŌåō + igi ŌåæŌåō, gr ŌåæŌåō = 1 ŌłÆ cos ╬ś, gi ŌåæŌåō = sin ╬ś. For |╬ś| Ōē¬ 1, gŌåæŌåō Ōēł i╬ś is imaginary, and the spin-mixing conductance per square area is found to be Im GŌåæŌåō/A Ōēł e2 ─¦ NF hŌĆ▓ ex Ōēł e2 ─¦ k2 F 16ŽĆ2 ╬ś0 , (5) where NF is the Fermi level density of states per spin. That the imaginary part of GŌåæŌåō is associated with the interfacial exchange holds also more generally . Physically, the absorbed spin current produces spin torque acting on the FI magnetization, leading to phenomena observable for example in ferromagnetic resonance experiments; see Ref. for a review. Furthermore, in conjunction with the spin- Hall effect, it provides an observable contribution to the magnetoresistance. The magnetic proximity effect in S/FI bilayers can also be observed by probing the density of states (DOS) NŽā(E) in S, as the effective exchange field ╠äh from (2) splits the BCS peaks in the DOS. In ideal superconductors, NŽā = NBCS,Žā, the splitting is NBCS,Žā=Ōåæ/Ōåō(E) = Re ŌłÆi(E ┬▒ ╠äh + i0+) ’┐Į Ōłå2 ŌłÆ (E ┬▒ ╠äh + i0+)2 . (6) Although the splitting ╠äh in the ballistic model depends on the momentum direction, it is expected to be averaged by disorder of the bulk and the interface, and by Fermi liquid interactions . For thin films, in this case one expects ╠äh Ōēł hŌĆ▓ ex d (7) which scales similarly with film thickness d as in the ballistic limit. Experimental evidence is compatible with momentum independent ╠äh . Experimentally, NŽā can be probed via spin- polarized tunneling . Tunneling current through a spin-polarized contact to a spin-split superconductor is I(V ) = ’┐Į Žā=Ōåæ,Ōåō GŽā e ’┐Į Ōł× ŌłÆŌł× (8) where fN,S are Fermi distribution functions on the su- perconductor/normal sides of the tunnel junction, and GŽā are the spin-dependent tunneling conductances. In S/FI/N junctions, where the ferromagnetic insulator also serves as the tunnel barrier, the spin-dependent conductances GŽā ŌłØ |tŽā|2 inherit spin-dependence from the tunneling amplitudes tŌåæ/Ōåō. In F/I/S/FI structures, where the tunnel electrode itself is ferromagnetic, the spin-dependence in GŽā ŌłØ NF,Žā is influenced by its spin- dependent density of states. However, interface prop- erties generally play a significant role as well . Usually, experimental I ŌłÆ V characteristics do not match Eq. (8) with the ideal BCS density of states of Eq. (6). These discrepancies can be addressed by considering the non-idealities of the superconductor that alter NŽā, as discussed below. Other contributing factors may include the structure of the tunnel junction, such as pinholes and other irregularities, as well as features of the experimental setup like voltage fluctuations . To account for these features phenomenologically, one can introduce the Dynes parameter ╬ō > 0 and replace E with E + i╬ō in Eq. (6). We return to these points in Sec. 2.3. The phase diagram of thin spin-split supercon- ducting films has been extensively studied, theoret- ically and experimentally . A main feature at low temperatures is the presence of a first-order transition between superconducting and normal states, which in the ideal case occurs at the ChandrasekharŌĆōClogston value of the exchange field hc = Ōłå/ ŌłÜ 2. This is expected to be affected by factors CONTENTS 6 (a) Critical exchange field for different thicknesses d of the superconductor and (b) critical thickness for different interfacial exchange fields hŌĆ▓ ex. The dashed lines represent the temperatures at which the transition is of first order. The inset in panel (a) shows effective exchange field ╠äh (full line) and the thin film approximation (7) (dashed line) as a function of the thickness of the S layer for hŌĆ▓ ex = 0.5Ōłå0╬ŠS. such as Fermi liquid interactions, and short spin-flip Žäsf or spin-orbit Žäso scattering times in the superconduc- tor which generally reduce the effect of the exchange field and also change the tunneling DOS. The thickness dependence of the average exchange field (2) and (7) implies there is a critical thickness dc of the S film, defined by ╠äh(dc) = hc, below which the film is not superconducting. Prediction from a semiclassical model is shown in Fig. 4(a) for the critical interfacial exchange field, and in Fig. 4(b) for the critical thickness. Inset of Fig. 4(a) shows ╠äh(d), which is well approximated by Eq. (7) for thicknesses d smaller than the coherence length ╬ŠS. For d Ōē│ 3╬ŠS, it becomes weak enough allowing superconductivity at zero temperature for any value of the interfacial field. The magnetic properties of the FI also have im- portant consequences for the physics. Generally, the form of the magnetic hysteresis is determined by them, and magnetic details of the interface can matter for the temperature dependence. Additionally, for bilay- ers with lateral dimensions surpassing the domain sizes in the FI, spatial variations in the exchange field intro- duce complexities that must be considered. Moreover, the magnetic fringe fields of the FI lead to orbital depairing in the superconductor, generally suppressing superconductivity and rounding (a) I(V ) curve of a N/FI/S junction for different values of the polarization P. (b) Rectification coefficient R = Isym/Iasym. Parameters used in the plots: h = 0.3Ōłå, TN = TS = 0.1Ōłå, ╬ō = 10ŌłÆ3Ōłå. sharp superconducting features in its density of states. There are numerous additional factors that influence the experimental outcomes. The physics is very sensitive to the interface quality: on the one hand, conduction electrons that scatter back before interacting with localized FI magnetic moments, do not acquire magnetic phase shifts or spin splitting. On the other hand, e.g. subgap bound states at the interface are predicted also to enhance the spin mixing. Hence, the behavior of the magnetic proximity effect is sensitive to the materials and growth conditions influencing the interface physics. We return to these points in Sec. 2.1.3 and Sec. 2.2. 2.1.2. Interface transport model The interplay of spin-splitting and spin-filtering in FI/S structures is predicted to lead to electron-hole symmetry breaking . Namely, in Eq. (8), due to the combination of spin-dependence of the conductance (GŌåæ ╠Ė= GŌåō), and the spin-dependent asymmetry of the is possible to have I(ŌłÆV ) ╠Ė= ŌłÆ I(V ). These features enable both thermoelectric effects and non-reciprocal charge transport. Thermoelectricity. For tunnel junctions, main fea- tures of spin-split superconductor thermoelectric ef- fects are expected to follow Eq. (8). Experiments indeed match its predictions well. For small CONTENTS 7 temperature differences between the normal and su- perconducting sides of the tunnel junction, ŌłåT = TS ŌłÆ TN Ōē¬ T, low voltages eV < Ōłå ŌłÆ h, and low temperatures kBT Ōē¬ Ōłå, h, Eq. (8) reduces to I(V, ŌłåT) = ŌłÆ╬▒ŌłåT T + IS ’┐Į eeV/kBT ŌłÆ 1 ’┐Į + IS(P ŌłÆ 1) ’┐Į cosh eV kBT ŌłÆ 1 ’┐Į . (9) The first term describes the thermoelectric effect. Here, P = (GŌåæŌłÆGŌåō)/(GŌåæ+GŌåō) is the spin polarization of the tunnel junction, and ╬▒ is the thermoelectric coefficient, which in the ideal case (6) has the value ╬▒ Ōēł P(GT /e) ’┐Į 2ŽĆ ╠āŌłåeŌłÆ ╠āŌłå[Ōłå sinh( ╠āh) ŌłÆ h cosh ╠āh], where ╠āŌłå = Ōłå/kBT and ╠āh = h/kBT. Moreover, IS = GT /eK1( ╠āŌłå)e ╠āh, where K1 is a modified Bessel function. Thermoelectric applications generally require, in addition to the description of the electrical circuit where the thermoelectric element is embedded, also modeling the induced temperature difference ŌłåT. Generally, it depends on the various possible thermal conductance channels. Tunneling of electrons is one of these and can also be described in the above approach, but it is often not the most significant contribution. In particular, the electron-phonon coupling often dominates in a wide temperature range, see Refs. for a review. Generally, all heat conductances are exponentially suppressed in the superconducting state, due to the presence of the superconducting gap. This is why, in the presence of radiation with frequency larger than the gap, superconductors tend to heat up more than normal metals. A combined electrothermal theory for S/FI junction detector applications is discussed in more detail in Sec. 3.1. Rectification. The second and the third term in Eq. (9) describe the non-reciprocal charge transport in the form of a non-ideal Shockley diode equation. Namely, the second term is the ideal Shockley contri- bution, while the third term describes deviations from ideal behavior, and vanishes at perfect polarization P = 1. The I-V characteristic is shown in Fig. 5(a). The rectification can be characterized by decompos- ing the current into antisymmetric Iasym = 1 2|I(V ) ŌłÆ I(ŌłÆV )| and symmetric Isym = 1 2|I(V ) + I(ŌłÆV )| parts in voltage, and defining the rectification coefficient R = Isym Iasym . (10) The maximum of R(V ) is determined by the spin- polarization of the junction, as shown in Fig. 5(b), which provides a way to estimate the polarization parameter from the experimental I(V ) curves. In the presence of an AC voltage Vac, N/FI/S junctions produce a rectified DC current, which at high frequencies and low temperatures (─¦Žē Ōē½ Ōłå, h, eVac and kBT Ōē¬ Ōłå ŌłÆ h) has the form Irc = PGT 2e e2V 2 ac ─¦2Žē2 h. (11) Note that the sign of the rectified current is determined by the relative sign of h and P, namely, sign(Irc) = sign(hP). Similarly, for the current produced by the thermoelectric effect, Ith = ŌłÆ╬▒ ŌłåT T , we have sign(Ith) = ŌłÆsign(ŌłåT╬▒) = ŌłÆsign(ŌłåTPh). Therefore, Ith and Irc, have the same sign if ŌłåT < 0, meaning that the normal side of the junction is at a higher temperature. On the other hand, if the superconducting side of the junction is at a higher temperature (ŌłåT > 0), the two currents have opposite signs, so the rectification and thermoelectric effects compete. Therefore, to produce the maximal signal using FI/S junctions in e.g. radiation detectors, special care must be taken to optimize the ratio of rectification and thermoelectric effects, which depends on material- specific parameters and junction geometry. The results above assume ideal I-V characteristics. As noted in Sec. 2.1.1, several sources of nonideality can be phenomenologically described by introducing the Dynes parameter ╬ō in the superconducting density of states. It enables subgap conduction channels, which can provide significant contributions at very low temperatures when ╬ō Ōłå Ōē│ Ōłå kBT eŌłÆŌłå/kBT . In particular, the correction to the tunneling current due to small ╬ō at kBT, h, eV Ōē¬ Ōłå is ╬┤I = GT ╬ōV Ōłå ’┐Į 1 + 3 2 eV h Ōłå2 ’┐Į , (12) yielding the rectification coefficient of R Ōēł 3PeV h/(2Ōłå2). Similarly, nonzero ╬ō also affects the thermoelectric re- sponse. At low temperatures kBT Ōē¬ Ōłå ŌłÆ h and for small ╬ō the thermoelectric coefficient obtains an extra contribution ╬┤╬▒ = GT hŽĆ2k2 BT 2Ōłå2╬ō e(Ōłå2 ŌłÆ h2)5/2 . (13) On the other hand, the thermoelectric voltage (or Seebeck coefficient), represented as ŌłÆ╬▒kBŌłåT/(eG), generally decreases due to G increasing more than ╬▒ . Besides the Dynes parameter, somewhat similar effects on the thermoelectric coefficients are provided by spin-flip scattering as described in . Detector yield. The efficiency of conversion of ab- sorbed radiation can be characterized by the quantum yield, i.e., the number nth(Žē) of electrons transported across the junction per absorbed photon at frequency CONTENTS 8 Žē. For steady-state thermoelectric conversion, the es- timation can be made using Eq. (9) and a heat balance model aS/NP╬│ = GS/N th (TS ŌłÆ Tbath) ┬▒ Gth(TS ŌłÆ TN). (14) This describes fractions aS and aN of the absorbed power P╬│ = ─¦Žē/╬┤t distributed on the S and N sides in time ╬┤t, and relaxing via junction and parasitic thermal conductances Gth and GS/N th . Now, assume that kBT Ōē¬ Ōłå, h so that GS th Ōē¬ Gth Ōē¬ GN th, and that ─¦Žē Ōē│ 2Ōłå so that absorption aS is non- negligible. Using the low-temperature values of the junction transport coefficients, nth = Ith╬┤t/e Ōēł aSP ─¦Žē Ōłå ŌłÆ h sgn(h), (15) for ╬ō Ōē▓ eŌłÆŌłå/kBT Ōłå2/h. In the opposite limit of large ╬ō, nth Ōēł 3aSP─¦Žēh/(Ōłå2 ŌłÆ h2) which is smaller by only a factor of h/Ōłå. Hence, absorption of a single photon fairly generally transports nth > 1 electrons across the junction. A similar estimate can be made for the rectifi- cation effect, assuming that fraction a > 0 of the incoming power P╬│ generates an AC voltage across the N/FI/S junction, aP╬│ = V 2 ac/(2 ╠āR). Here ╠āR = R/(1 + RGT ) is the parallel resistance of the junc- tion and a radiation absorber of resistance R. Using Eq. (11), nrc = Irc╬┤t/e = aP h ─¦Žē GT ╠āR. (16) Here nrc < 1 at ─¦Žē Ōē│ Ōłå, indicating that the thermoelectric effect can dominate AC rectification, and lead to better device performance. 2.1.3. Material specific implementation The results above highlight that for practical purposes it is desirable to find suitable superconductor/ferromagnet combinations. Thermoelectricity and non-reciprocal effects are maximized by having, on one hand, a good spin-filter efficiency and, on the other hand, a sizable spin-splitting of the superconductor. Both of these effects depend crucially on interfacial parameters. As discussed in the next section, very good experimental control over spin split superconductivity has been achieved in EuS/Al systems . Crucial for the splitting is the size of the imaginary part of the mixing conductance, as explained in section 2.1.1. This value can be notably large at EuS/metal interfaces, as demonstrated in spin Hall magnetoresistance experiments on EuS/Pt systems , which found hŌĆ▓ ex Ōēł 0.8 meV nm, as extracted from measured Im GŌåæŌåō using Eq. (5). This value corresponds to the superconducting gap ŌłåAl of aluminum with a film thickness of d Ōēł 4 nm. In EuS/Al the induced effective exchange field can range from values much smaller than ŌłåAl, up to such large values that superconductivity is fully suppressed, as observed in . Recent experiments also suggest a finite induced exchange field in YIG/NbN and YIG/Nb , even though the spin-mixing conductance of YIG/metal interface is dominated by the real part and not the imaginary part, in contrast to EuS based structures . With respect to spin-selective transport, Eu- chalcogenides serve as highly efficient spin-filtering barriers. Efficiencies larger than 95% have been achieved in EuSe barriers, whereas 80% spin-filter efficiency has been achieved in EuS barriers . However, a fundamental challenge arises when using these magnetic barriers in several of the devices discussed herein: achieving high spin filter efficiency necessitates thick barriers, which subsequently exhibit substantial resistances. ŌĆØOne way to circumvent this issue is to utilize a ferromagnet as the normal metal electrode in lieu of a magnetic barrier. . Indeed the thermoelectric effect has been observed in EuS/Al/Co , EuS/Al/Fe , and in Al/Fe tunnel junctions . In the latter, an external magnetic field was applied to provide the spin-splitting in the superconductor. A spin filtering efficiency of 75% was reported in NbN/GdN/NbN Josephson junctions , and a sizable interfacial exchange coupling was seen in Nb/GdN samples . on FI/S structures, providing values for the spin filtering efficiency and the spin-splitting field. 2.2. Materials and device preparation For cryogenic thermoelectric detectors and non- reciprocal electronics that utilize spin-polarized tun- neling junctions with exchange-split superconducting electrodes, there are application-dependent consider- ations that for example require maximizing the am- plitude of the thermoelectric effect, which depends on the splitting of DoS, or setting limits on the tunnel junction resistance to achieve rapid readout. This im- plies having good control on the properties of the de- vices constituent material as well as the growth pa- rameters of the heterostructures. In this section, we focus on the elements concerning the interface between a superconducting thin film and a magnetic insula- tor or semiconductor that creates a spin-split density of states. Application-dependent issues are discussed in the corresponding sections. In the early works of Meservey and Tedrow, many different material com- binations were tested, including chalcogenides of rare- earth elements as well as very thin metallic layers inter- CONTENTS 9 Summary of reported values for spin filtering efficiency (barrier polarization, P) and exchange splittings ( ╠äh) across different experimental studies. Color coding indicates ferromagnets and spin-split superconductors. Material combination Barrier polarization P Exchange splitting ╠äh @ applied field B Reference EuO/Al/AlO3/Al no spin-filter barrier 1 T @ 0.1 T . . . 1.73 T @ 0.4 T Au/EuS/Al 0.8 1.6 T @ 0 T Al/EuS/Al 1.9-2.6 T @ 0 T Ag/EuSe/Al > 0.97 0 T @ 0 T EuSe/Al/AlO3/Ag no spin-filter barrier 4 T @ 0.6 T NbN/GdN/NbN 0.75 ŌłÆ NbN/GdN/TiN 0.97 1.4 T @ 0 T EuS/Al/Fe 1.5 T @ 0.4 T Cu/EuS/Al 0.48 1.83 T @ 0.1 T EuS/Al/AlOx/Co 0.3 1.67 T @ 0 T EuS/Al/AlOx/Al no spin-filter barrier 2.52 T @ 0 T faced with Al and V layers (for a review see ). The effect of the exchange splitting is usually explored via tunneling spectroscopy. Spin splittings corresponding to effective magnetic fields of the order of several Tesla have been achieved, in particular using ferromagnetic insulators. The splitting decreases with the increase in thickness of the superconducting film in close accor- dance with the predictions of the de GennesŌĆÖ theory . In the case of metallic magnetic layers adjacent to superconducting films the situation is more subtle since Cooper pairs can leak into the magnetic region leading, in general, to a suppression of superconduc- tivity. For this reason, in order to obtain a good split- ting, it is more convenient to use magnetic insulators. Many different ferromagnetic insulators (FI), including transition metal oxides or rare earth oxides, such as gadolinium gallium garnet (Gd3Ga5O12) and yttrium iron garnet (Y3Fe5O12) were tested. However, EuS was the first FI where spin filtering was determined , which has implications in magnetic tunnel junctions and spin valves , as well as in superconducting elec- tronics, and radiation sensors . To obtain reliable and reproducible amplitudes of the exchange splitting, it has been demonstrated that the quality of the interfaces is crucial . Introducing a thin insulating layer between the magnetic and superconducting films results in a complete quenching of the exchange interaction . Moreover, in many examples where lithography-based nano-fabrication was used to create devices with exchange split DOS, especially based on the combination of Al and EuS , the exposure of EuS to atmosphere before the deposition of the superconductor prevents maintaining the exchange splitting without external magnetic field even after the initial saturation of the magnetization below the Curie temperature of the EuS. These findings suggest that the EuS was partially oxidized during the lithographic nanofabrication, which causes formation on the interface of the paramagnetic Eu- based compound with zero magnetic remanence. In contrast, in several references of devices prepared by Moodera and coworkers, a zero-field exchange split DoS was demonstrated in the absence of any external magnetic field . The explanation lies in the method of device fabrication, which is in- situ shadow mask evaporation. In the early works of Meservey and Tedrow, the crossed-wire tunneling junctions used in tunneling spectroscopy experiments were created by subsequent deposition of the FI and S materials using different shadow masks in a high vacuum environment (1x10-8 mbar) and preventing the exposition of the layers to the air . More recently, it has been shown that the EuS sublimation temperature also plays a significant role, with a trend toward Eu-rich compounds at higher sublimation temperatures . This modification to the chemical composition is mirrored in the magnetic properties, with an increase in magnetic moment and Curie temperature. Therefore, the need for precise control of the composition and cleanliness of the interface between the superconductor and the magnetic layer places constraints on the fabrication techniques for tunneling junctions. To illustrate the growth of the required het- erostructures for fabricating cryogenic thermoelectric detectors or non-reciprocal electronics, in the subse- quent paragraph, we detail the shadow mask fabrica- tion procedure of the EuS/Al-base devices described in Ref. , which was similar to the one summarized long time ago in the review by Meservey and Tedrow. To complement it, we discuss those aspects relevant to understand and control the device performance. These example potentially serve as a foundational elements for a SFTED. 2.2.1. Device Fabrication As we mentioned before, in Ref. the procedure to fabricate X/AlOx/Al/EuS tunnel junctions was essentially shadow mask fabrica- tion. Here, X denotes a metallic layer, either supercon- ducting or magnetic. The sequence is schematically CONTENTS 10 Substrate EuS sublimation Al evaporation Oxidation in plasma Co evaporation (CVD from stoichiometric powder) (PVD from a rod) (PVD from cold lip evaporator) represented in Fig. 6, and it includes: i) the deposi- tion of the magnetic EuS on the insulating substrate via electron-beam (e-beam) sublimation from stoichio- metric powder; ii) the growing of the superconducting Al electrode through the shadow mask; iii) the forma- tion of the tunneling barrier via the oxidation in the oxygen plasma; iv) the deposition of the counter elec- trodes X through another shadow mask; and v) finally deposition of the capping layer to protect the devices from the atmosphere. All the process is done without breaking the vacuum at any time, and therefore pre- venting the undesirable oxidation or contamination of the layers and interfaces. The substrates for fabricating cryogenic thermo- electric detectors or non-reciprocal electronics must be good insulators, such as high-quality polished silica or SiN. Thin film of EuS layer is deposited as a continuous film by employing a Knudsen cell (Tungsten crucible) filled with commercially available stoichiometric EuS powder, as Smoes and coworkers demonstrated in 1977 . During the sublimation process, the crucible tem- perature can be estimated via the power vs tempera- ture calibration curve and the growth rate is calibrated using a quartz microbalance, or monitored via a flux monitor. This is relevant for sample preparation be- cause EuS powder decomposes during evaporation and the ratio Eu:S in the gas phase varies with increasing temperature, which affects its magnetic behaviour . Superconducting and magnetic metallic wires, Al and Co in example of Fig. 6 must be deposited over the EuS layer in the same vacuum chamber, i.e. without breaking the vacuum, in order to avoid the oxidation of the EuS surface. There are several methods to deposit aluminum layers in vacuum environments, being the thermal evaporation used in Ref. one of the most convenient, because of its reproducibility, its cleanness and its precise control of film thickness and composi- tion. Although for the SFTED, the second metallic electrode needs to be a ferromagnet, as for example Co, for the characterization of the spin-splitting induced by the EuS in the Al wire, it is convenient to first grow an Al/AlOx/Al/EuS structure . Regarding oxide barrier fabrication, the conven- tional method to grow the AlOx barrier is thermal ox- idation, where aluminum is directly exposed to air (or pure molecular oxygen), resulting in many instances in amorphous layers that lead to inhomogeneous in- terfaces . Moreover this method is self-limited in the barrier thickness, being only possible to grow bar- riers of around 2 nm . Among alternative methods to produce tunnel barriers, the most popular is the oxygen glow discharge plasma oxidation that employs atomic oxygen instead of molecular one to produce much thicker barriers in shorter time. However, this is an aggressive technique because the oxygen atoms that arrive to the sample have high kinetic energy and can create defects in the AlOx layer. This drawbacks can be overcome by Inductively Coupled Plasma sources, which produce barriers with very low amount of pin- holes and high reproducibility . Typical tunneling spectroscopy measurements of the Al/AlOx/Al/EuS junctions shown in Fig. 7 revealed the spin-split DoS of the bottom Al electrode even in the absence of an external magnetic field. The characteristic splitting of the differential conductance (dI/dV ) curves becomes more pronounced when the magnetization of the sample is saturated, and remains almost intact when the field is reduced back to zero. Work discussed the possibility of a systematic control of the exchange coupling strength via tuning of the parameters of sublimation of EuS. The control of the effective exchange field is essential to optimize the SFTED. 2.2.2. EuS properties Early works aimed at the growth of thin films of EuS unveiled a strong variation in their chemical composition associated with different deposition conditions . Since the evaporation of sulfur, which is required for Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), is technically challenging, the CONTENTS 11 preferred technique for growing EuS is sublimation from stoichiometric powder. Detailed study of the thermodynamics of this process showed that solid EuS decomposes due to the heating and the proportion of Eu to S in the gas phase changes slowly with increasing temperature from nearly 1:1 ratio at 1400 K to the Eu-reach mixture at temperatures above 2000 K . Usually, the temperature of sublimation is kept high to obtain higher growth rate. Excess of Eu in the deposited films is compensated by means of heating of the substrate. For instance, it has been demonstrated that increasing the temperature to 630 K results in near-stoichiometric films, while cooling the substrate promotes the growth of Eu-rich films . In the pioneering works of MooderaŌĆÖs group on the fabrication of the exchange-coupled Al/EuS bilayers, EuS (and Al) are usually deposited on the substrates cooled down with liquid nitrogen because it results in higher magnetic remanence (more rectangular hysteresis loops), which is an advantage for the applications that require persistence of the exchange-coupling between the EuS and Al in zero magnetic field. A recent work, Ref. , has shown that deposition of the EuS on the substrates kept at room temperature or cooled with liquid nitrogen has to be accompanied by the control of the sublimation temperature in order to limit the exchange coupling strength in the Al/EuS - based devices. It was found that the interaction gets stronger with the increase in Eu concentration. It quickly surpasses the critical value, quenching the superconductivity of the thin Al films, once the Eu/S ratio becomes higher than unity . Control of the power of the e-beam evaporators allows for precise manipulation of the EuS sublimation temperature, which opens up a way to the tuning of the exchange coupling. For instance, in the series of samples listed in Table 2, effective exchange field variations of up to a factor of three are obtained by tuning the layer thicknesses and/or the growth temperatures. The capability to control the exchange coupling strength in the Al/EuS bilayers enables the validation of the theoretical description of the proximity effect for hybrid S/FI systems presented in Section 2.1.1.Fur- thermore, by tuning the exchange coupling strength to be near the critical value, it becomes possible to investigate the magnetization reversal process in EuS films across a temperature range below 1.2 K. This range is typically inaccessible for the majority of magnetic measurement systems . Figure 7 (c) presents typical results for tunneling spectroscopy of the Al/AlOx/Al/EuS tunnel junction. In this spec- trum, the characteristic splitting induced by the ex- change interaction between the superconductor and the magnetic insulator is observable within a narrow range of external magnetic fields. This behaviour was in- terpreted in Ref. as decreasing of the average effective field in the Al/EuS bilayer close to the co- ercive field and quenching of the superconductivity in the Al wire interfaced with EuS, once the applied field saturates the magnetization of the magnetic layer. Thorough measurements of the transport properties of the Al wire coupled to EuS showed that magnetiza- tion reversal causes step-wise changes of the resistance. This indicates local quenching of the superconductiv- ity. Phase diagram built for the range of temperatures from 30 mK to 1.2 K and within the |B| Ōē▓ 50 mT al- lowed for tracking a variation of the coercive field with temperature. This unveiled a number of critical tem- peratures that we attributed to the presence of small superparamagnetic particles of EuS . These find- ings were correlated with results of magnetic character- ization by means of XAS/XMCD spectroscopy, magne- tometry and low-temperature ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) . For instance, it was observed that sulfur-rich and near stoichiometric polycristalline EuS films with moderate exchange coupling strengths show very broad and shallow peaks of FMR, meanwhile the Eu-rich films possess sharper resonance but their cou- pling to thin Al films causes quenching of the supercon- ductivity. Besides the preparation of polycrystalline films, growth of textured and single crystal epitaxial EuS layers was reported . The temperature of the substrate and the density of dislo- cations were crucial to controlling the stoichiometry of EuS . Small lattice mismatch and suitable range of the substrate thermal stability made possible the growth of very high-quality epitaxial EuS/InAs(001) films . These layers were employed to rigorously study their magnetic and electronic properties and to grow the fully epitaxial Al/EuS/InAs(001) het- erostructures . Together with results obtained in the GdN/NbN system , these works make up a solid base for understanding the exchange coupling phenom- ena in the epitaxial S/FI layers. An alternative approach to the fabrication of het- erostructures, which may overcome the challenges as- sociated with traditional growth methods, involves uti- lizing two-dimensional (2D) materials. Van der Waals stacking of magnetic insulator and superconductor lay- ers, as reported in several recent studies, has produced high-quality samples exhibiting a diverse array of in- triguing properties. This showcases the significant po- tential of this technique . Inherently, 2D mate- rials exhibit a sharp interface between adjacent layers in their stacks. This permits the engineering of het- erostructure interfaces with a level of precision only achievable with the most advanced Molecular Beam Epitaxy systems . Due to minimal chemical inter- mixing between layers, it is possible to combine distinct CONTENTS 12 slabs of various 2D materials and even single atomic layers in the case of graphene or hexagonal boron ni- tride. This precision opens up a way to study the phe- nomena typically unobserved in bulkier heterostruc- tures. For example, a rich assortment of strongly cor- related electronic states is evident in twisted bilayer graphene . On the other hand, sharp well-defined interfaces between dissimilar 2D materials enable en- gineering of interface-dependent effects, like exchange splitting of the electronic density of states in the su- perconductors . For instance, a heterostructure that integrates an insulating layer of the ferromagnetic CrBr3 and superconducting NbSe2 showcases these ca- pabilities . While some 2D materials exhibit strong reactivity and chemical instability, a possibility of ob- taining single layers via exfoliation is widely accepted as a feature of the 2D materials, which facilitates build- ing of the heterostructures by means of stacking of the layers via mechanical micromanipulations. Neverthe- less, exfoliation produces flakes of variable thickness that requires evaluation and selection procedure incom- patible with automatic fabrication processes. There- fore, technologies for growing macroscopic (wafer-size) single-layer films and the protocols of transferring of these films have being developed for a number of most relevant 2D materials . Such advancements pave the way for implementing 2D materials in the ap- plications and creates incentives for further research activity in the field. However, several challenges still need to be addressed to fully leverage the benefits of this new group of materials. In terms of materials sci- ence, significant work is required to broaden the selec- tion of materials available as large, high-quality wafer- size single layers. While progress is being made in de- veloping growth processes for semiconducting and su- perconducting materials, exfoliation remains the most common method for obtaining single-layer magnetic 2D material. An alternative to wafer-scale production of 2D materials could involve the develop- ment of moderate-temperature growth techniques for 2D layers, which could be compatible with standard lithography-based nanofabrication . On the front of device physics and technology, significant efforts will be required to adapt fabrication processes to the new materials and address common challenges associated with implementing electronic devices, such as estab- lishing electrical contacts to the 2D layers . Specific challenges related to realizing superconducting electronic devices with non-reciprocal transport prop- erties include determining the spin-filtering efficiency and the strength of spin splitting due to exchange cou- pling in heterostructures of 2D superconductors and 2D magnetic insulators. This topic requires further experimental investigation. 2.3. Tunnel characteristics In this section, we summarize the low-temperature characterization methods, which provide information on spin-splitting and polarization of the tunneling transport and how to improve it. We also discuss experiments on the thermoelectric and rectification effects in different junctions based on S/FI elements. 2.3.1. Characterization and optimization of the ex- change splitting The properties of the ferromagnetic superconductor generated with a FI/S bilayer are heav- ily influenced by factors such as operating tempera- tures and external magnetic fields as well as material characteristics including the quality of the interface be- tween the two layers, the thicknesses of layers and the material selection for the FI and S layer . Different materials combinations are discussed in Sec. 2.1.3. In the most typical case of using Al as the superconductor, the critical temperature is relatively low (TC Ōł╝ 1 ŌłÆ 2 K, depending on the film thickness), but also the spin- orbit interactions (SOI) are weak due to the low atomic mass of Al. In the presence of disorder, SOI leads to spin relaxation and therefore the spin-splitting es- sential for non-reciprocal electronic properties of the tunnel junction is clearest in metals with weak SOI. By contrast, the disadvantage of operating below 1 K is not significant for detection applications that typically need to operate at ultra-low temperatures to minimize thermal noise. The FI that pairs optimally with Al is EuS due to a minimal lattice mismatch making ideal Al/EuS interfaces so that a strong ferromagnetic exchange interactions can be induced in the Al. Such interactions generate an effective Zeeman splitting ( ╠äh) in the DoS comparable to the Al superconducting gap (Ōłå0 Ōēā 200 ╬╝eV), i.e., equivalent to the Zeeman splitting induced by an external magnetic field of a few Tesla. For the fabrication of optimal FI/S bilayers two experimental parameters are crucial: the quality of the FI/S interface to induce strong exchange interactions in the S film and the thickness of the S that facilitates such interactions through the film thickness d. It has been demonstrated that for d Ōēź 3╬ŠS the induced ╠äh is almost negligible, determining the upper limit to the S thickness. On the other hand, to maximize ╠äh the Al thicknesses (d) can be lowered down to a critical thickness (dc) below which the ferromagnetic correlations increase up to the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit and kill superconductivity as described in Sec. 2.1.1. Using Eq. (7), in thin layers such a lower limit can be CONTENTS 13 Samples Structure Ōłå1 (╬╝eV) Ōłå2 (╬╝eV) ╠äh (╬╝eV) ╠äh/Ōłå2 S1 254 131 68 0.5 S2 118 S3 200 275 150 0.57 S4 ╠äh > ╠ähcr aEuS and Al grown at cold T (150 K) estimated from the Zeeman splitting of a sample as: dc = ŌłÜ 2d ╠äh(d) Ōłå0 Ōēā ŌłÜ 2hŌĆ▓ ex Ōłå0 . (17) It is worth noting that from this equation, dc depends only on the intrinsic parameters hŌĆ▓ ex and Ōłå0. As described in Sec. 2.1.3, for an Al/EuS bilayer with ŌłåAl Ōēā 200 ╬╝eV and hŌĆ▓ ex Ōēā 0.8 meV nm it is possible to estimate dc Ōēā 4 nm. This limit has been numerically evaluated and demonstrated by comparing the tunneling spectroscopy of samples made with Al/EuS bilayers of different thicknesses . Besides the direct magnetic proximity effect, external magnetic fields can also be exploited to enhance ╠äh. Interestingly, a large increase is typically observed even at small fields for which the simple additional Zeeman term would be negligible. This suggests a superparamagnetic behavior in EuS since the spins at the Al interface surface likely have a weak coupling with the bulk EuS. . This effect has already been observed in early experiments and in some samples can be strong enough to induce a S to N phase transition. Characterization of the magnetic proximity effect was also necessary in the SuperTED project and was quantified from the tunneling spectroscopy of Al/AlOx/Al/EuS samples of different thicknesses. the extracted values for the order parameter of the Al tunnel electrode (Ōłå1) and of the Al layer adjacent to the EuS (Ōłå2), as well as the induced exchange splitting ╠äh, and the ratio ╠äh/Ōłå2. In Fig. 7 we show an example of tunneling spectroscopy of an Al/EuS bilayer in which the Al thickness was optimized to set ╠äh just below the maximal Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit. It corresponds to sample S3-e in Table 2 and it is partially reported in ref. . The EuS/Al bilayer is in tunnel contact with an Al probe that allows us to quantify ╠äh from the amplitude of the splitting observed in the energy spectrum of the tunneling conductance. Notably, after the cooldown of the device and before the magnetization of the EuS layer a small splitting was already visible in the tunneling spectroscopy as shown in the black line of Fig. 7b. This indicates the presence of magnetic domains with sizes larger than the superconducting coherence length ╬Š0 in the EuS film as described in previous works . Domain sizes much below ╬Š0 would lead to a vanishing average spin splitting. Upon the application of an external magnetic field (B) the magnetic domains start to align and the observed splitting increases as shown in Fig. 7a up to an in-plane field of 16 mT. Above this field the secondary peak at the higher energy suddenly disappears as a consequence of the S to N transition induced in the Al/EuS bilayer by the increased ╠äh(B). The superparamagnetic component of the EuS is further confirmed by measuring the tunneling spectroscopy at lower magnetic fields as shown in Fig. 7c. The magnetic field response is hysteretic: By tracing B back a N to S transition can be observed at B < 9 mT with the re-appearance of the secondary peak. The splitting then decreases by lowering B down to -12 mT. Below -12 mT the EuS layer reverses its polarization and ╠äh increases again above the Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit with the resulting quenching of superconductivity. By reversing the sweep this picture reverts as expected for a ferromagnetic system (data not shown). Interestingly, by following the position of the two peaks in B we notice an almost linear decreasing of the splitting (as underlined by the black fit lines in Fig. 7c) consistent with a linear field dependence of ╠äh = ╠äh(0) + 35╬╝BB. ╠äh(0) Ōēā 145 ╬╝eV represents the intrinsic exchange splitting induced by the ferromagnetism of the EuS while the linear part in B is the superparamagnetic component (35 Ōē½ 2) and corresponds to the action of the external magnetic field on the polarization of the surface spins interacting with the Al layer and weakly coupled to the bulk EuS. In addition, the action of B (< 9 mT) applied anti-parallel with respect to the EuS polarization results in a decreasing of ╠äh(B). The tunneling spectroscopy of the junction at higher temperatures reveals an even richer and non- trivial dependence of the bilayer superconductivity on the external magnetic field. This dependence is especially relevant for extending the temperature CONTENTS 14 Tunneling spectroscopy of sample S3-e. (a) First magnetization of the EuS. Before the application of any magnetic field (B = 0, black arrow), a clear ╠äh is observed (broad peak around V = ┬▒0.4mV ) in the tunneling conductance. It is a signature of the magnetization of the individual EuS grains not being aligned with respect to one another. Sweeping from 0 to 30 mT said broad peak quickly splits into two (the magnetization directions of the individual EuS grains are being aligned) and then disappears above around 16 mT (dashed line) where the superconductivity of one Al layer is quenched (the bottom Al layer 10 mT (green) and 20 mT (blue), indicated in (a) by arrows. (c) Magnetic field sweep of the tunneling spectroscopy at T = 30 mK. After the first polarization of the EuS layer, a spin-splitting in the tunneling spectroscopy is observed between around +8 mT and -12 mT. The split peaks move slightly towards each other throughout the sweep. Here, the surface spins of the EuS are dependent on and therewith behaving like the EuS grains which are responsible for the narrowing. Beyond mentioned applied magnetic field strengths, the spin-splitting disappears. Now, the ╠äh is again so large that it quenches the superconducting state of the bottom Al layer. The superconductivity of the top Al layer is preserved, as can be concluded from the remaining peaks and the gap. Throughout the sweep of the B field, the peaks shift almost linearly in B as represented by the fit lines: (solid line) two curves, it is possible to estimate ╠äh(B) = 145╬╝eV + 35╬╝BB and to extract Ōłå1 Ōēā 240╬╝eV. From the tunneling spectroscopy at 15 mT it is possible to evaluate Ōłå2 Ōēā 200╬╝eV (d) Tunneling spectroscopy at no applied magnetic field: before the first magnetization field sweep of the tunneling spectroscopy at T = 1 K. At a higher temperature, the size of the superconducting gaps (Ōłå1,2) decreases and the spin-split peaks are only visible when the external magnetic field is opposed to the polarization of the EuS layer. The surface spins have enough energy at this temperature to be independent of the EuS grains, explaining why the spin-splitting increases with increasing applied magnetic field. A third, so called matching peak located between the superconducting gap and the spin-split peaks is likewise observed. With increasing negative B field the peaks shift almost linearly in B as represented by the fit (green dash-dotted line) eV3 = Ōłå1 ŌłÆ Ōłå2 + ╠äh = 140╬╝eV ŌłÆ 172╬╝BB. With a simple linear combinations of the three fit functions it is possible to estimate ╠äh(B) = 45╬╝eV ŌłÆ 172╬╝BB, Ōłå1 Ōēā 195╬╝eV and Ōłå2 Ōēā 100╬╝eV with the assumption of a negligible dependence of Ōłå1,2 on B. (f) Tunneling spectroscopy at B = ŌłÆ9.5 mT, taken from panel (e). The spin-split peaks (brown and blue) and the matching peak (green) are visible (indicated by a circle of the respective color as corresponding to the fit lines in (e)). range of the detectors. In particular, as shown in Fig. 7d, the tunneling spectroscopy measured at 1 K is characterized by a normal state for the EuS/Al bilayer for most of the magnetic fields explored including at zero magnetic field, while only when the polarization of B is anti-parallel with respect to the polarization of the EuS layer (ŌłÆ2 mT > B > ŌłÆ10 mT), the bilayer is in the superconducting state. This behavior can be explained by an increase of dC(T, ╠äh) overcoming the physical thickness of the device at higher temperature as estimated in Fig. 4(b) and the monotonic relation with ╠äh. In contrast to the low-temperature measurement, now the exchange splitting is enhanced by the external magnetic field ╠äh(B) = ╠äh(0) ŌłÆ 172╬╝BB (notice the opposite slope in B) with a stronger superparamagnetism (larger CONTENTS 15 plane external magnetic field for sample S1-b. Subgap states and delta vary with B. The inset shows the field dependence of the zero bias conductance G0(B) normalized respect to the normal state conductance GN. slope) and a weaker intrinsic effect ╠äh(0) Ōēā 45 ╬╝eV. This high-temperature scenario is likely related with a ferromagnetic to paramagnetic transition of the EuS surface spin pattern expected to have a transition around Ōēā 900 mK , much below the transition temperature of the bulk EuS (Ōēā 17 K). As a result of this transition, the surface spin alignment, determining the spin splitting in the Al, is only weakly coupled to the magnetization of the bulk EuS. Notably, at high temperature, the tunneling spectroscopy is enriched by a third peak representing the matching peak appearing at eV Ōēā Ōłå1ŌłÆŌłå2+ ╠äh. The almost linear evolution of the three peaks in B is reported in Fig. 7d and underlined by three fit lines. Finally, similarly to the low temperature spec- troscopy, by repeating the measurement in the opposite field direction the features are reversed with respect to the magnetic field (data not shown) confirming the magnetic hysteresis of the device and the ferromag- netism of the EuS layer. Within the same batch of samples some devices (S1) showed a weaker ╠äh so that superconductivity could survive at larger in-plane magnetic fields. In Fig. 8 we show the evolution of the tunneling spectroscopy at large magnetic fields, up to 400 mT. Also for these devices a clear superparamagnetic effect is visible in the enhancement of the Zeeman splitting at large magnetic fields. Moreover, increasing the magnetic field also lowers the amplitude of the peaks and increases the zero bias conductivity, a phenomenon that can be described with an enhancement of spin-scattering and/or inelastic scattering events typically described by a generic Dynes parameter ╬ō . The evolution of the zero-bias conductance (G0) compared to the normal state conductance (GN) is shown in the inset of Fig. 8. Although the precise origin of the magnetic field dependence is not clear from this data, a possible explanation is the orbital depairing from the combination of the external field and the stray fields of the EuS. 2.3.2. Spin selective tunnel junctions As shown in Sec. 2.1, to obtain non-reciprocal transport from a FI/S based tunnel junction a spin selective probe is required. There are two primary methods to achieve this: (i) by using a FI as a spin selective tunnel barrier in S/FI/N or S/FI/S junctions using a ferromagnetic probe in FI/S/I/F and S/FI/F configurations. For both configurations, clear non-reciprocal transport has been observed with an I ŌłÆ V characteristic of the junction similar to an ideal semiconducting pn diode for small voltage bias (V < Ōłå0), with corrections dependent on the non-ideal spin polarization (1 ŌłÆ P) as described in Eq. (9). The non-reciprocity is also visible in the asymmetry of the tunneling spectroscopy as depicted in Fig. 9a and b showing the differential conductance measured at different magnetic fields and bias voltages for an EuS/Al/AlOx/Co tunnel junction. From the amplitude of the asymmetric peaks it is possible to extract the spin polarization of the junction P Ōēā 0.2 at 28 mT and P Ōēā 0.15 at 0 mT, then showing a permanence of spin-polarization even at zero field. Unlike tunnel barriers that employ non-ferromagnetic probes, the zero bias conductivity (G0) is not much smaller than the normal-state conductance GN, an effect similarly observed in prior experiments and similar devices. Such subgap conductance depends also on the applied external magnetic field as shown in Fig. 9d, showing ╬ō(B) evaluated from the ratio between the normal-state and zero-bias conductances for three similar devices. Notably, for all the devices ╬ō(B) shows a similar trend with a minimum at low magnetic fields parallel to the polarization of the two ferromagnetic layers while a local maximum appears at the coercive field up to the global maximum of unity above 100 mT and corresponding to the quenching of superconductivity. The origin of this subgap conductivity is still under debate. For example, stray fields from the Co layer as well as pin-holes in the AlOx barrier can impact the superconductivity of the Al layer. Independent of the microscopic origin of the subgap conductance, the net effect on the device performance is a reduction of non-reciprocal charge transport that, to the first order, is linear in ╬ō as shown in Eq. 12 while it is less detrimental (by a factor hT 2/Ōłå3) for CONTENTS 16 (a) (b) (c) (d) different bias voltages V and magnetic fields. The field was swept from -140 to +140 mT. (b) Traces selected from (a) showing: a persistency of the spin polarization and filtering also in the absence of magnetic field (B = 0 blue dots); the maximal asymmetry at 28 mT (red dots); no asymmetry and spin filtering at the coercive field of EuS (B = 6 mT green dots); and an almost flat tunneling spectroscopy corresponding to the quenching of superconductivity at large magnetic fields (B = 140 mT green dots). (c) Rectification coefficient R = Isym/Iasym extracted from the same IV characteristics used in panel (b). Notably, the R(V ) curves provide an alternative method to quantify the asymmetry of the junction and the degree of spin polarization as described in Sec. 2.1.2. (d) Field dependence of the Dynes parameter ╬ō = G0/GN extracted from the tunneling spectroscopy of three similar samples of EuS/Al/AlOx/Co. Notably, the increase of ╬ō at B Ōēā 6 mT corresponds to the switching field of the EuS and Co layers, while at large fields (|B| > 100mT) ╬ō tends to unity as a consequence of the quenching of the superconducting layer. thermoelectricity as shown in Eq. 13. 2.3.3. Thermoelectricity in spin selective tunnel junctions Thermoelectricity in spin selective tunnel junctions has been observed, for the first time, in Al/AlOx/Fe junctions . Here the Zeeman splitting of the Al layer was induced by an external in-plane magnetic field as shown in the tunneling spectroscopy measurement of Fig. 10a. The Fe contact was heated by a Joule current and thermoelectric current generated from such a thermal gradient was measured with a third Cu contact using a circuit scheme shown in Fig. 10b. With this configuration a thermocurrent up to 100 pA was observed at B = 1 Tesla, 100 mK bath temperature and Ōēā100 mK thermal gradient (data reported in Fig. 10c extracted form Ref. ). Notably, a sizable thermoelectric signal was visible only above 0.5 T, a field at which the tunneling spectroscopy shows an asymmetry, confirming the intimate relation between thermoelectricity and non-reciprocity. From the measurement a Seebeck coefficient up to Ōēā 100 ╬╝V/K was estimated. The measured effects were in a very good agreement with the tunneling theory of discussed in Sec. 2.1.2. One year later, the same group performed a similar experiment on a EuS/Al/AlOx/Fe junction . Thanks to the presence of the additional EuS layer a larger thermometric signal (up to 0.7 nA) was visible already at small magnetic fields due to the strong exchange interaction induced by the FI layer as shown in Fig. 10e. However, thermoelectricity was not visible at zero magnetic field consistently with the weak ferromagnetic response of the EuS as observed also from the tunneling spectroscopy in Fig. 10d. This was likely due to the poor interface between EuS and Al resulting from the nanostructuring procedure that requires exposing EuS to air before the growth of the CONTENTS 17 (a) Differential conductance of an Al/AlOx/Fe tunnel junction as a function of voltage bias V for different magnetic fields B. (b) False-color scanning electron microscopy image of a region of the Al/AlOx/Fe sample. The image displays the measurement configuration for thermoelectric measurements. (c) Thermoelectric current Ith as a function of magnetic field B measured at a base temperature T0 = 100 mK, together with theoretical fitting. (d) Differential conductance of the tunnel junction EuS/Al/AlOx/Fe as a function of the applied bias V for various applied fields. (e) Thermoelectric current Ith measured for the sample in (d) as a function of the applied magnetic field ╬╝0H at different base temperatures T0. Data adapted from . Al layer. After adding an antenna to the setup of Fig. 10, the system could in principle be used as a thermoelectric detector. There the effect of transverse rectification in detection is likely negligible due to the fact that the lateral size of the junction is much smaller than the characteristic length estimated in . However, the operation of the detector is likely hampered by the necessity of applying a relatively large magnetic field to reveal the magnetic proximity effect. 3. Applications In this second part, we explore the applications of S/FI structures in radiation detection. In the first section, we describe how an SFTED can be used as a microcalorimeter for X-ray detection. The second section is devoted to THz detection, whereas in the third section, we discuss possible multiplexing read- out. 3.1. X-ray detection A microcalorimeter is a microscale thermal detector that thermalizes the energy of an absorbed particle, creating a temperature deviation which is then mea- sured by a sensor. Modern microcalorimeters should possess high energy resolution, broad bandwidth, min- imal dissipation, straightforward fabrication, and the capability for operation in a sensor-array with readout- multiplexing. The superconductor-ferromagnet het- erojunction is an attractive sensing device for cryo- genic microcalorimeter applications. The pro- nounced thermoelectric effect in this device con- verts the absorbed energy into an electrical signal with- out requiring bias power, fundamentally reducing the heat dissipation and wiring complexity of the detector. Theoretical studies indicate that a superconductor- ferromagnet thermoelectric detector (SFTED) has the potential to be a swift cryogenic microcalorimeter. Its energy resolution could rival state-of-the-art ultra- sensitive detectors, such as the transition-edge sensor CONTENTS 18 (TES), kinetic inductance detector (KID), and the superconducting tunnel junction (STJ). This section reviews the linear microcalorimeter theory of the SFTED as presented in Refs. . We also address the time-domain analytical models and the pulse excitation solutions for the SFTED. Furthermore, design considerations and optimizations of the detector are discussed with numerical examples using practical parameters. 3.1.1. Linear theory A simplified schematic of the SFTED is presented in Fig. 11. Consider an X-ray photon with energy Ept impacting a superconducting absorber. The thin superconducting electrode of the junction is assumed to be thermalized with the bulk absorber, thus sharing the same electron temperature Tabs, which jumps above the phonon bath temperature Tb after the absorption of an X-ray photon, and then decays exponentially due to the heat flow into the bath. Conversely, the normal electrode of the junction remains at the bath temperature Tb. A finite temperature difference, ŌłåT = Tabs ŌłÆ Tb, induces a thermoelectric voltage VJ across the junction, simultaneously creating a heat current ╠ćQJ(ŌłåT, VJ) [see panel (b)] and a thermoelectric charge current IJ(ŌłåT, VJ) [see panel (c)], transporting energy and charge between the hot and the cold electrodes, until the detector is restored back to its quiescent state ŌłåT = 0. The detectorŌĆÖs thermal and electrical balance govern ╠ćQJ(ŌłåT, VJ) and IJ(ŌłåT, VJ), and within the small-signal regime ŌłåT < Tb, the balance can be expressed in a linearized form using the state variables ŌłåT and VJ as: Cabs dŌłåT dt = ╠ćQin ŌłÆ Gtot th ŌłåT + ╬▒VJ IJ = ╬▒ŌłåT Tb ŌłÆ 1 RJ VJ, (18) where Cabs is the heat capacity of the absorberŌĆĪ, RJ ŌēĪ ŌłéVJ/ŌłéIJ and ╬▒ ŌēĪ TbŌłéIJ/ŌłéŌłåT are the dynamic resistance and thermoelectric coefficient of the junction at VJ = 0 and ŌłåT = 0, respectively. In Fig. 11(b)ŌĆÖs thermal model, Gtot th = Gth + Gep represents the total thermal conductance between the sensing elements ŌĆö the absorber and superconducting electrode ŌĆö and the bath, where Gth ŌēĪ Ōłé ╠ćQJ/ŌłéŌłåT and Gep ŌēĪ Ōłé ╠ćQep/ŌłéŌłåT are the thermal conductances through the tunnel barrier of the junction and through the electron-phonon coupling in the superconductors, respectively. ŌĆĪ Due to the large volume difference between the absorber and the thin superconducting electrode (< 20 nm) in practical devices, we assume that the absorber heat capacity dominates and omit the contribution of the electrode. In the electrical model from Fig. 11(c), the thermoelectric current IJ at frequency Žē is given by inductance and capacitance of the lumped circuit. As a result, Eqs. (18) read as ╠ćQin(Žē) = Yth(Žē)ŌłåT ŌłÆ ╬▒VJ and ╬▒ŌłåT/Tb = Yel(Žē)VJ in frequency domain, where Yth = iŽēCabs + Gtot th and Yel = 1/RJ + iŽēC + 1/(iŽēL) are the total thermal and electrical admittances . Thus, the voltage and current responsivity of the detector, considering capacitive and inductive loads, can be defined as: ╬╗V ŌēĪ VJ ╠ćQin = ╬▒ YthYelTb ŌłÆ ╬▒2 , ╬╗I ŌēĪ IL ╠ćQin = ╬╗V iŽēL, (19) where IL is the current in the inductor. The noise equivalent power (NEP) is a key metric to evaluate the performance of a detector, particularly important for bolometric applications. It is defined as the input radiation power in 1 Hz bandwidth required by the detector to generate a signal equal to its noise. For a SFTED, the total NEP2 tot = NEP2 amp+NEP2 TED, where NEPamp is induced by the noise from the amplification chain that is used to readout the detector signal, and NEPTED arises from the junction noise combined with the thermodynamic fluctuation noise (TFN) : NEP2 TED = 4kBT 2 b Gtot th ZT ’┐Į 1 + (1 + ZT)Žä 2 thŽē2’┐Į , (20) where Žäth = Cabs/Gtot th is the thermal time constant and ZT is the thermoelectric figure of merit reading as ZT(Žē) = ╬▒╬╗V (Žē). Here it is worth noting that a ZT value exceeding one enhances the NEP of SFTED over a standard bolometer at low frequency, and this comes about because of the direct negative electrothermal effect on the noise . Furthermore, it has been shown that the zero- frequency NEPTED can be optimized with respect to RT yielding a condition Gth/Gep = ŌłÜ1 + zTi where zTi = ╬▒/(GthTb/RJ ŌłÆ ╬▒2) is the intrinsic figure of merit of the SFTED. As a result, the optimal detector intrinsic zero-frequency noise equivalent power reads as: NEP2 TED,opt = 4kBT 2 b Gep zTi ’┐Į 1 + ’┐Į 1 + zTi ’┐Į2, (21) which is an important result particularly in guiding the design of SFTED for the bolometric applications. For calorimetric applications, the performance of the detector is widely benchmarked by the energy resolution ŌłåE. In the small-signal limit it is ŌłåE = ’┐Į ’┐Į Ōł× 0 dŽē 2 ŽĆNEP2 ’┐ĮŌłÆ1/2 , (22) CONTENTS 19 and the electrical circuit of the SFTED. obtained by applying the optimal filter and assuming an infinite bandwidth amplifier. For SFTED, the intrinsic energy resolution ŌłåETED (omitting the amplifier noise) can be simplified to : (ŌłåETED)2 = 4kBT 2 b Cabs ŌłÜ 1 + ZT ZT . (23) As one can see, the intrinsic energy resolution of the SFTED can go below the level of a TFN-limited feedback-less calorimeter (ŌłåE2 TFN = 4kBT 2 b Cabs) when ZT Ōēź 1.6. Furthermore, shows how Eqs. (18) can be solved analytically in time-domain, providing a direct description of the potentially complex behavior of the signal pulse of SFTED and a guide for designing and optimizing the detector and readout components. For the sake of simplicity, here we only revisit a case that the detector signal is readout from the inductive load, i.e., by a cryogenic current amplifier based on Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID), and the capacitance in Fig. 11(c) is omitted (C ŌåÆ 0). Because of the strong similarity between the thermoelectric effect and the electrothermal feedback of a transition edge sensor (TES) , Eqs. (18) can be rearranged to a first-order differential matrix format analogous to those of the TES , reading as d dt ’┐Į IL ŌłåT ’┐Į = ’┐Į ŌłÆŽä ŌłÆ1 el LIGtot th ╬▒L ŌłÆ ╬▒RJ Cabs ŌłÆŽä ŌłÆ1 I ’┐Į ’┐Į IL ŌłåT ’┐Į , (24) where we have defined LI = ╬▒2RJ/(Gtot th Tb) as an analog of the constant current-bias low-frequency loop gain of the TES, ŽäI = Žäth/(1 ŌłÆ LI) as the constant current thermal time constant, and Žäel = L/RJ as the electrical time constant. It is worth mentioning that, despite the similarity, the main differences between Eqs. (24) and those of TES are in the definition of LI, and that the thermoelectric ╬▒ appears in a dual role both within LI and as the analog of the DC current of the TES. In particular, the thermoelectric factor ╬▒ has a unit of current, making LI correctly dimensionless. One should also note that it is totally different from the dimensionless logarithmic temperature sensitivity of the resistance for the TES, which is also typically denoted by ╬▒. Equations (24) have analytical solutions , which yield two time constants, denoted as Žä ŌłÆ1 ┬▒ = (Žä ŌłÆ1 el + Žä ŌłÆ1 I ┬▒ ŌłÜ Ōłå)/2, where Ōłå = (Žä ŌłÆ1 el ŌłÆ Žä ŌłÆ1 I )2 ŌłÆ 4LI(ŽäelŽäth)ŌłÆ1. These time constants signify the rise (Žä+) and decay (ŽäŌłÆ) time of the SFTED current pulse in response to a delta-impulse absorption event. The general stability condition of a microcalorimeter de- tector requires that the signal pulse decays back to the quiescent state either with oscillation (underdampled case Ōłå < 0) or without (critically damped Ōłå = 0 or overdampled Ōłå > 0), requiring the real part of Žä┬▒ to be positive. An unbiased SFTED calorimeter is al- ways stable because the loop gain satisfies LI < 1 . However, an oscillatory signal extends the recovery time and significantly slows down the detec- tor, therefore a more restrictive exponential pulse de- cay condition Ōłå Ōēź 0 is desired for the SFTED. 3.1.2. Numerical results It is a non-trivial task to achieve the best performance of a detector. This is also the case when designing a SFTED. In particular, the non-ideality of the fabricated junction and the noise of the readout circuit and the amplifier will degrade the performance of a SFTED compared to the optimal operation regime. These topics have been analyzed and discussed in previous studies . Here we revisit the key conclusions with numerical examples that incorporate practical detector parameters. To achieve this, we employed numerical computations based on Eq.(22) to determine energy resolution, as demonstrated in Fig.12 and Fig.13. Furthermore, we examine the transient pulses by numerically solving the eigenfunction Eq.(24), as illustrated in Fig.14. The most important parameters for designing a SFTED include: the tunneling resistance RT , the exchange field h, the polarization P and the broadening parameter ╬ō of the tunnel junction, the volume Vabs and heat capacitance Cabs of the absorber, the noise CONTENTS 20 the read-out noise and (b) with a current read-out that has current noise ŌłÜSI = 60 fA/ ŌłÜ Hz. The black dotted lines denote four thermal time constant contour lines. The total noise equivalent power NEPtot at 10 kHz of the detector read out by (c) voltage pre-amplifier with voltage noise spectral density ŌłÜSV = 0.3 nV/ ŌłÜ Hz and (d) current pre-amplifier with current noise ŌłÜSI = 60 fA/ ŌłÜ Hz. The white dashed lines denote where the detectors intrinsic NEPTED equals the NEPamp contributed from the respective power spectra density (PSD) of the read-out amplifier, and the temperature Tb of the bath. Among these parameters, the tunneling resistance RT and the bath temperature Tb are of paramount importance to the optimization of the detector, as they are technically relatively easy to adjust. Tb can be controlled by the cryogenic apparatus on-the- fly, whereas RT can be tuned in detector fabrication by modifying the area of the junction and/or the oxidation time of the tunnel barrier . In Fig. 12, the theoretical energy resolution and the thermal time constant of a SFTED are demonstrated as functions of RT and Tb, when a set of realistic parameters, h = 0.3Ōłå0, P = 0.5, ╬ō = 10ŌłÆ3Ōłå0, C = 10 nF, L = 2.6 ╬╝H and Vabs = 104 ╬╝m3 are selected to represent a real device. The intrinsic energy resolution of the SFTED ŌłåETED is presented in panel (a) together with four contour dotted-lines denoting different thermal time constants as functions of RT and Tb. Optimal SFTED performance is achieved around a temperature of 0.2 K with a tunneling resistance under 100 ╬®. Increasing or decreasing the temperature leads to a reduced figure of merit ZT (see Fig. 2 panel (b) of Ref. ), whereas larger RT degrades ŌłåE by limiting the bandwidth of the detector. The electrical signal from a cryogenic mi- crocalorimeter is typically too small to be directly read out by room temperature electronics. Consequently, a low-temperature pre-amplification of either the volt- age or the current signal is required. Typically, volt- age read-out works better for high-impedance sensors, whereas low-impedance sensors prefer current read- out. For a SFTED, it is not immediately obvious which type of read-out works better as RT can be adjusted via fabrication, and the total energy resolution ŌłåE de- pends on the noise of the amplifier. The total noise equivalent power NEPtot of the detector at 10 kHz as functions of Tb and RT are plotted in panel (c) when using a state-of-the-art cryoHEMT as voltage read-out (ŌłÜSV = 0.3 nV/ ŌłÜ Hz, assuming L ŌåÆ Ōł×) and in panel (d) for using a transformer coupled SQUID as current read-out (ŌłÜSI = 60 fA/ ŌłÜ Hz, assuming C ŌåÆ Ōł×). In both panels, the white dashed lines signify the condition NEPTED = NEPamp such that the amplifier noise dominates the NEPtot on the right (left) side of the dashed line when using a voltage (current) read- out. When compared to the intrinsic energy resolution presented in panel (a), one can find that a SFTED with RT less than 100 ╬® with Tb between 0.2 Ōł╝ 0.25 K provides the best performance [ŌłåETED < 2 eV with > 10 kHz bandwidth, see panel (a)] for a voltage read- out. Although with higher RT the noise is dominated by the detectorŌĆÖs intrinsic noise and a smaller NEPtot is CONTENTS 21 obtained [see panel (c)], it leads to an undesired overall performance because of either a degraded intrinsic energy resolution [see panel (a)] or a large thermal time constant. As for a current read-out, it can be seen that the read-out noise matches to that from a SFTED with RT around 10 Ōł╝ 40 ╬® at Tb between 0.2 Ōł╝ 0.25 with a performance similar to the case of the voltage read- out. As an example, panel (b) shows the total energy resolution ŌłåE of a SFTED using a current read-out with noise of ŌłÜSI = 60 fA/ ŌłÜ Hz. One finds that the energy resolution degrades drastically in the parameter region with higher RT , the effect being stronger for low Tb. Clearly, optimizing between Tb and RT is critical. In general, current read-out offers a larger bandwidth, has lower dissipation and good multiplexing schemes . Hence it is preferable to be used with SFTED. As a result, to demonstrate the influence of other detector parameters in the following section, we consider a current read-out and set the detector to have RT = 40 ╬® at a temperature of T = 0.23 K, based on the above discussion. The total energy resolution, including the ampli- fier noise, is demonstrated as a function of the ex- change field h and the polarization P in Fig. 13 pan- els (a) and (b), respectively, with different read-out noise levels denoted by different colors. As discussed in Sec. 2.1.1, h and P characterize the ferromagnetic- superconductor junction. They are influenced by both the ferromagnetic insulator and the ferromagnetic elec- trode materials, as well as by junction fabrication con- ditions. Optimal resolution appears to be achieved when h = 0.4 ŌłÆ 0.5 and P is maximized, which aligns with findings from Refs. . The broadening parameter ╬ō of the tunnel junc- tion, describing the broadening of the superconducting DOS and the excess sub-gap current, also influences the energy resolution, as discussed in Ref. . As shown in Fig. 13 (c), a higher ╬ō leads to a degraded energy resolution. To achieve, for example, ŌłåE < 2 eV with an amplifier with ŌłÜSI = 100 fA/ ŌłÜ Hz, ╬ō needs to be smaller than 10ŌłÆ2Ōłå0. The absorber of a microcalorimeter absorbs the incident photon, and transfers and relaxes its energy to the electron and phonon systems within 10ŌłÆ9 s, the precise time depending on the absorber material and size . In Fig. 13(d) we demonstrate the dependence of ŌłåE on the volume Vabs of a superconducting Sn absorber. This takes advantage of the weak electron-phonon coupling in a superconductor, reducing heat loss to the bulk phonons . In contrast, a normal-metal absorber would often necessitate a more intricate micro- machined membrane or beam support structure to confine the absorbed energy in the phonon system . Superconducting absorbers have been used in microcalorimetry applications , in particular together with superconducting tunnel junction sensors . Generally speaking, the volume Vabs of the absorber should typically be determined by the desired X-ray energy range of the application such that the temperature change of the sensor induced by the absorption would stay in the linear response range of the detector, i.e., Ex-ray/Cabs < 0.1T where Ex-ray is the energy of the X-ray photon. For example, a Sn absorber with a volume Ōł╝ 10ŌłÆ14 m3 has Cabs Ōł╝ 1014 J/K , and thus can be used for the detection of an X-ray photon with keV energy. Moreover, it is also worth mentioning that the SFTED likely has weaker constraints on Vabs than a TES, as the transition to the non-linear regime is not as abrupt. We now illustrate the transient evolution of the detector signal in Fig. 14. Panel (a) displays the pulse cycles in the signal current-temperature space (IL-ŌłåTJ) under four distinct conditions, whereas the corresponding current pulse signals in time domain are plotted in panel (b). With these examples, SFTED has a desirable response when Ōłå > 0 (overdamping) and ŽäI > Žäel, triggering faster pulses (blue curves). In contrast, two undesired conditions are also demonstrated with the orange (Ōłå > 0 but ŽäI < Žäel) and red (Ōłå < 0) curves, both leading to slow response and recovery due to the reverse self-biasing , which should be avoided. On the other hand, the green curve represents the condition Ōłå = 0 wherein double roots emerge from Eq. (24). Such a condition is often considered as an optimized compromise between the energy resolution and the slew rate requirement (finite detector rise-time) of the read-out electronics . 3.1.3. X-ray detector design In the operation of an X-ray microcalorimeter, detecting a photon typically involves the detector to first absorb the energy of the incident photon, converting it to thermal excitations, and then to confine the excitations temporarily, creating a finite temperature excursion pulse. At the same time, these excitations need to be transduced to a measurable electrical signal. For a practical device, these functions are carried out by the absorber, the thermal isolation and the sensing structures, respectively . a real SFTED microcalorimeter, designed for X-ray detection. In this device, the sensing structure of the detector is a superconductor-ferromagnet heterojunction, consi- sisting of layers of EuS/Al/AlOx/Co (from bottom to top), on the top of a nitridized Si substrate. Such a tunnel junction is fabricated by depositing a 200 ╬╝m- wide ferromagnetic (Co) electrode on the top of and or- thogonal to a 200 ╬╝m-wide superconducting (Al) elec- CONTENTS 22 (c) broadening parameter ╬ō and (d) absorber volume Vabs. The three colored lines demonstrate ŌłåE with three different current read- out noise levels, and the black dashed line demonstrates the intrinsic resolution. Panel (d) is computed with materials parameters for an Sn absorber. current pulse under different operational conditions corresponding to panel (a). trode with a thin plasma oxidized AlOx layer in be- tween serving as the insulating tunnel barrier. The junction parameters are optimized for the detection of X-rays based on the discussion presented in previous sections. The absorber structure is a 350 nm thick superconducting Sn square (with an area of 100 ╬╝m ├Ś 100 ╬╝m) providing 90% and 13% absorption efficiencies for 1 keV and 6 keV photons, respectively . It contacts directly the superconducting Al electrode (with the insulating barrier AlOx removed chemically) and is placed laterally next to the junction area. Such a superconducting absorber configuration has been adopted before by superconducting tunnel junction (STJ) and TES detectors , and has been extensively studied both numerically and experimentally . Lastly, to confine the quasiparticles in the Sn absorber and Al electrode (the thermal excitations in an SFTED) and to minimize their excess escape, the Al electrode is patterned into an island with a lateral size of about the size of the absorber+junction, separated from the remaining leads, as illustrated in Fig. 15. In addition, a superconducting Nb lead is used to contact to the Al island via a set of narrow fingers. Due to the larger superconducting energy CONTENTS 23 ter, in which the material compositions are illustrated with dif- ferent colors. A superconductor-ferromagnet heterojunction area is marked with the white dashed line, consisting of layers of Si/SiN/EuS/Al/AlOx/Co from the bottom to the top. A Sn ab- sorber is placed to the side of the junction, contacting directly the Al lead with AlOx layer removed via chemical etching. gap of Nb (typically > 1 meV) contrasting to that of Al (typically Ōł╝ 0.2 meV), such a lead provides an electrical connection, while effectively trapping the quasiparticles inside the Al island . On the other hand, because the temperature difference ŌłåT between the superconducting and ferromagnetic electrodes produces the electrical signal in a SFTED, the Co electrode is kept with a large area of 200 ╬╝m ├Ś 4 mm, helping it to thermalize to the bath. 3.2. THz detection The SFTED detector can be applied to measure electromagnetic radiation in a wide range of the spectrum. Besides X-rays, we consider here the measurement in the THz range. We define in this context the THz range as the range of frequencies comprised between 0.1 and 3 THz. In terms of wavelengths this is equivalent to a range of 0.1 to 3 mm. This region of the electromagnetic spectrum is particularly interesting for present and future astrophysics applications. Specifically, this includes observations of galaxy clusters, primordial galaxies, cold interstellar dust, and star-forming regions in our galaxy as well as neighboring galaxies . High- precision observations will in particular be needed in the coming years to be combined and complement with the exceptional JWST (James Webb Space Telescope) infrared data. To enhance the sensitivity of the SFTED junctions to incoming THz radiation, we have investigated several options. Among them, in decreasing order of fabrication complexity: ŌĆó Implementing a higher gap superconducting (e.g. of the SFTED junction. The cryostat optics is described in . Nb) planar antenna, feeding the SFTED sensor. From the fabrication point-of-view, this would have required adding a further metal layer (S2), and realising high-quality metal-on-metal contacts. On top of that, in order to properly match the typical antenna impedance with the SFTED junction, a lithography and etching of the SFTED structure would have been required. ŌĆó Patterning the SFTED junction into an impedance- matched absorber. The focusing of the THz radi- ation is achieved by adopting a micro-lens on the back of the silicon substrate. We stress that the dielectric substrate is transparent to THz radia- tion, allowing back-illumination. This approach is compatible with the existing layers, but would have required an additional, delicate lithography and etching of the SFTED junction structure. ŌĆó Based on the previously available shadow masks, post-patterning a non-optimised absorber in the existing S wire leading to the SFTED junction. This only requires a lithography on the superconducting (Aluminium) wire, away from the SFTED junction. After discussions, we concluded that the last option was the safest for an initial proof-of-concept. For this purpose, a photosensitive resist, type S1805, is spun onto the chip and then baked. With UV lithography the pattern is subsequently realized. For both the development and the etching of the Aluminium, the developer solution MF319 is employed. environment that has been fabricated and tested, together with a schematic of the optical cryogenics measurement setup. The preliminary results of the testing under illumination at 150 GHz and 110 GHz along the InPol (parallel to the S and the absorber wires) and CrossPol (parallel to the N wire) electric field polarisation directions are shown in Figs. 17 and 18. CONTENTS 24 25 20 15 10 5 dI/dV (╬╝S) -400 -200 0 200 400 V (╬╝V) InPol (S) 150GHz 110GHz OFF CrossPol (N) 150GHz 110GHz OFF junction shown in Fig. 16 under different illumination conditions. In particular, varying the direction of the polarisation and the frequency of the millimetre-wave source. H = 20 mT along the direction of the superconductor (S) and T = 120 mK. -3.6 -3.4 I (nA) 200 150 100 50 0 time (arb. units) InPol CrossPol 0.21nA 0.14nA function of the 150 GHz illumination conditions (polarisation, and ON/OFF). H = 20 mT along the direction of the superconductor (S) and T = 120 mK. In our initial measurement, we traced the SFTED junctionŌĆÖs conductance-voltage characteristic under various illumination conditions. This measurement has been taken under an applied magnetic field of 20 mT along the direction of the superconductor (S). The millimeter-wave radiation distinctly impacts the curves, especially the residual conductance within the superconducting gap. In a subsequent experiment, we left the detector unbiased and observed the current flowing into the N electrode. This represents the standard way for a SuperTED detector. We plot in Fig. 18 the time- traces of the current, expressed in nA, while switching ON/OFF the millimetre-wave source, and switching its polarisation between InPol and CrossPol. The ON/OFF steps, despite the presence of an offset current, represent the first hint of detection of 150 GHz photons from an un-biased SFTED junction, possibly related to the thermoelectric effect. Although the signal has a low S/N ratio, it appears to be roughly 50 % stronger in the InPol (absorber, S) direction than in the CrossPol (N) direction. This is in nice agreement with the 3D electromagnetic simulations that we have run on the structure shown in Fig. 16. These simulations predict the expected absorption of the metallic structure in the range 100-300 GHz. Based on this first preliminary detection, the SuperTED detector, after decisive optimisations, might have the potential to compete with the existing cryogenic sensors operating at THz frequencies, i.e. Kinetic Inductance Detectors (KID), Transition Edge Sensors (TES), high-impedance bolometers and others. To our knowledge the preliminary data shown here is the first demonstration of biasless superconductor- based radiation sensing. However, further work is still needed for its analysis and optimization. 3.3. Multiplexing read-out of self-powered detectors The thermoelectric detectors TED are expected to generate a current upon absorbing electromagnetic radiation. In view of addressing hundreds of detectors at cryogenic temperature, we developed an idea for a possible highly multiplexed readout. Such a readout would solve both the complexity and the thermal load created by the hundreds of wires needed to address individual detectors. The readout is based on planar superconducting resonators biased by the DC- like current generated by the TEDs. 3.3.1. Principle and design A superconducting resonator can be modelled as an LC-circuit in which part of the inductance is coming from the kinetic inductance Lk of the superfluid: the entire superfluid condensate opposes changes in the current direction. The resonator resonates at a frequency f = 1/(2ŽĆ ŌłÜ LC), where C is the capacitance and L = LK + LG is the total inductance, i.e., the sum of the kinetic and geometric inductances. State-of-the- art superconducting resonators have a quality factor of millions. In thin films at low temperature the superfluid contribution to the sheet kinetic inductance is : LK = m 2nse2d (25) where m is the effective electron mass, d is the superconductor thickness, ns is the superfluid density and e is the elementary charge. Equation (25) highlights a key principle for the readout scheme: a decrease of the superfluid density ns results in an increase of the kinetic inductance LK, and thus in a change of the resonance frequency. Since the circulating current in a superconductor decreases the superfluid density ns , the superconducting resonator frequency can be adjusted using a small bias current. The first demonstration of this concept, for CONTENTS 25 one resonator, has been achieved by M. R. Vissers and collaborators in 2015 . The current generated by a thermoelectric detec- tor will be sent into a superconducting resonator. In turn, the resonance frequency will vary with the cur- rent. For a current I small compared to the critical current IŌłŚ the relative frequency shift is ╬┤f f = ŌłÆ╬▒ 2 ’┐Į I IŌłŚ ’┐Į2 , (26) where ╬▒ is the fraction of the kinetic inductance over the total inductance (kinetic plus geometric) at zero bias current. Detection of a small current then requires a small critical current IŌłŚ. For this purpose, two parameters can be optimized: the material dependent critical current density JŌłŚ = IŌłŚ/S, and the cross section S of the superconducting wire. Small critical current density can be achieved especially in disordered superconductor materials, such as granular aluminium, for which JŌłŚ Ōł╝ 3 ├Ś 1010 A┬ĘmŌłÆ2 . Using electronic e-beam lithography nanowire width as small as 100 nm can be obtained for superconducting film thickness of the order of 50 nm. Eventually, we estimate that for superconducting granular aluminum it is possible to achieve critical current as low as 150 ╬╝A. For a resonance at 1 GHz such critical current leads to a frequency shift of 14 kHz for an injected current of 800 pA. In principle, it is thus possible to detect the 800 pA generated by the thermoelectric detectors for typical millimeter detection application. The general problem is to design a resonator that achieves a high quality factor even when connected to detectors with low impedance (less than one Ohm). To achieve this, the dc-current lines must act as, or go through, a low-pass filter to allow the dc-current (DC-kHz) to flow from the detector to the resonator but prevent the resonating ac-current (GHz range) to leak out of the resonator. We have explored different options, including planar superinductances , 3- D lumped-element capacitors or inductive-grounded coplanar waveguide configurations. We describe in the following the first two options. 3.3.2. Planar superinductances We use two different granular aluminium (grAl) compositions: a low kinetic inductance grAl for the resonator part (in blue in Fig. 19) and a high kinetic inductance grAl (in red in Fig. 19) for the two wires connecting the resonator to the detector (superinductances). Figure 19 shows the design of the readout scheme for current bias kinetic inductance detectors (iKIDs). We designed thirteen resonators. For testing purposes, only eight were connected to DC-current ports. The readout line (blue horizontal line) allows monitoring simultaneously the resonance frequencies. The resonance frequencies are adjusted by varying the total length of the (a) (b) low LK high LK dc-current lines resonator readout line tuned length different materials design (a) Resonators (in blue) are to connect to the detectors (not shown) via the dc-current lines (in red). The blue horizontal line is a readout line to monitor the resonance frequencies. (b) Zoom on a resonator. two different materials. The matrix of thirteen resonators is in the center. Only the readout line is clearly visible: it is the horizontal line. The bottom PCB-board is connected to the resonators and to the cables. resonators. The electromagnetic simulations foresee resonance frequencies in the 5-7 GHz range and quality factor in the 3-8├Ś104 range. An iKID prototype chip was realised and packaged in collaboration with I. Pop and P. Paluch from Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. designed sample holder with an ad-hoc PCB-board. The PCB-board (at the bottom) is connected on one side to the superinductances via micro-bonding and on the other side to input DC cables. The prototype was cooled down at 100 mK with cables connected to a dc-current source at room temperature. The measurements demonstrate a sensitivity of the resonance frequency upon the circulating current but most probably due to Joule heating instead of kinetic inductance variation as the quality factors were concomitantly reduced. The Joule heating may be due to the high resistive contacts between the two different CONTENTS 26 (a) dc-current lines resonator plane bottom capacitor plane dielectric readout line 1488 0 -40 -20 0 |S12| (dB) 2 1 0 frequency (GHz) f0 = 2.206 GHz -8 -6 -4 -2 0 |S34| (dB) frequency (GHz) f0 = 2.206 GHz (c) (d) (b) At 2.206 GHz J [A/m] 1 3 2 4 21. Electromagnetic simulation of a promising configuration of iKID based on 3-D lumped-element capacitance. (a) 3D-model. The dielectric is a 30 nm thick alumina. The metal, green and pink, is aluminum. (b) Current distribution at the resonance. (c) Electrical response of the KID. The quality factor of the resonance is of about 4┬Ę103. (d) Electrical response of the DC-lines. The DC-lines are low pass filters. materials. 3.3.3. 3-D lumped-element capacitance In this case, both ends of the MUX resonator are grounded (at high frequency) by dielectric parallel-plate capacitors. The size of each capacitor is of about 100 ├Ś 500 ╬╝m2, smaller than the resonator, assuming a 30 nm thick alumina as dielectric with ╬Ą Ōēł 10. In Fig. 21 we show the electromagnetic simulation of the model. The resonance exhibits a promising quality factor of the order of about 4 ┬Ę 103, paving the way to achieving a multiplexing factor, i.e. the number of detectors that can be read out on a single wire, of hundreds to thousands. In summary, based on the first prototype results, thoughts on the new design and previous experience with disordered superconductors , we conclude that an iKID should be realised using a single (patterned) layer of granular Aluminium near the insulating transition. This should be capped with a 30 nm thick alumina layer and a second superconducting metal layer, e.g. standard aluminium, to realise the low-pass filter. The quality factor of the resonating readout circuits will allow achieving a multiplexing factor of hundreds to thousands. 4. Discussion and outlook In this review, we have presented the fundamentals of a new type of a detector based on thermoelectric and non-reciprocal effects. These arise from the interplay of two phenomena: The spin-splitting of the density of states of a superconductor via the magnetic proximity effect, and spin polarization in transport through tunnel barriers. In the first part of the text we focus on studying the hybrid thin film structure composed of the ferro- magnetic insulator EuS adjacent to a superconduct- ing Al. As discussed in Sec. 2.1-2.3, such EuS/Al- based devices can be used beyond detectors as non- reciprocal elements for low temperature electronics, such as diodes. We can also envisage more elaborated circuits including mixers, reverse current regulators, voltage clamping, and other passive super- conducting electronics, with the additional control provided by magnetic fields. Optimizing these devices requires increasing spin polarization using new combinations of materials with higher spin-filter efficiency and reducing their size. An interesting future direction is to use magnetic two-dimensional van der Waals materials either as sources of the magnetic proximity effect or as spin filtering tunneling barriers. Interestingly, the non- reciprocity of transport in these devices is a new way to characterize the magnetic proximity effect and spin polarization, an alternative to tunnel spectroscopy. In particular, when the induced spin splitting field cannot be directly resolved from the presence of the BCS peaks in tunneling characteristics, its presence can be determined from the non-reciprocal characteristics of the device. In this text we have concentrated on the non-reciprocal quasiparticle tunneling characteristics. Besides that, in the presence of either spin-orbit coupling or position dependent exchange field, also the supercurrent becomes non-reciprocal . Such effects form a complementary way of characterizing the magnetic proximity effect. In the second part, we concentrate on the properties of the SFTED. Specifically, in Sec. 3.1, we review the microcalorimetry theory of the SFTED detectors and determine their noise-equivalent power and energy resolution as a function of the system parameters. We also discuss in this section possible designs of the SFTED for the X-ray detection. Section 3.2 briefly discusses the THz range accessible for SFTED, and present preliminary measurements of a SFTED junction. Finally, in Sec. 3.3 we discuss possibilities of read-out and multiplexing. CONTENTS 27 The detector work also highlights challenges in fabricating the SFTED device. It would be desirable to have a detector controllable only with a rather small magnetic field, as the coil used to create it may complicate coupling of the radiation into the detector. Ideally no field would be required at all and one would rely on the intrinsic magnetization of the ferromagnetic insulators. However, for example for EuS the Curie temperature is rather low (about 14-17 K, depending on doping), and it needs to be magnetized after the sample has been refrigerated to the base temperature. Besides coils, this could perhaps be done using permanent magnets aligned with the sample. To minimize the required magnetic field, and thereby to ensure optimal magnetic proximity effect, we have prepared the EuS/Al systems using in-situ shadow mass patterning without breaking the vacuum. Such a process results to relatively large junctions, with lateral dimensions of the order of a few hundred ╬╝m2. Optimal THz detectors would constitute planar antennas with small-size absorbers and small-size junctions (much smaller than the wavelength), and further size reduction is desired. In the X-ray regime the energy resolution is mostly determined by the relaxation time of the radiation absorber, which is inevitably significant, so the mere size of the junction is not a problem. However, in that regime the detection requires fairly transparent junctions, i.e., with a low normal-state tunneling resistance RT (see Fig. 12). This requirement is not straightforward to realize in large junctions without the presence of pinholes and the resulting large number of subgap states, quantified with the parameter ╬ō. Ideal detector would also require rather low ╬ō Ōē▓ 10ŌłÆ2Ōłå as indicated in Fig. 13. Moreover, an improved energy resolution for the detection of keV X-rays could possibly be obtained by suspending the absorber to prevent the premature escape of athermal and thermal phonons. Such design has been widely adopted for transition edge sensors. On the other hand, the junctions themselves should not reside in the suspended region, as maximizing the temperature difference would require thermalizing the normal part of the junction as well as possible. We are confident that these technical challenges have a solution. For example, it may be better to pay the price of a sub-optimal FI/S interface to get a nanos- tructured detector. Once such detectors are in place, SFTED-based detectors can rival existing supercon- ducting detectors such as transition edge sensors and kinetic inductance detectors. Subsequantly, the next step would be to construct a large number of detectors and replace the current read-out with a multiplexing technique, such as the nanowire based multiplexing dis- cussed in Sec. 3.3. One of the issues to be handled in such an SFTED detector array would be the dipolar coupling between the magnetizations. However, as the performance of the detector does not rely on the pos- sibility of (locally) switching magnetization from one state to another, the whole array could be controlled with a single magnetic field. Besides detectors and nonreciprocal electronics, superconductor-ferromagnet multilayers enable other novel phenomena. The spin-split superconductors can be used to create absolute spin valves, thermal logic circuits, coherent caloritronic systems, devices mixing nonequilibrium spin and equilib- rium supercurrent transport and thermal quan- tum devices. Moreover, a rich dynamical response of the hybrid systems can be envisaged: The presence of superconductors influence the magnetic res- onance by mediating magnetic interactions (as a conse- quence of the magnetic proximity effect) and via the modified spin battery effect. Moreover, they may give access to coupling different collective modes, those inherent to magnetism with those relevant for superconductivity . We wish to finally mention that a very large thermoelectric response was recently observed in fully superconducting tunnel junctions composed of differ- ent superconductors. These systems, al- though being perfectly reciprocal, exhibit a sponta- neous breaking of the electron-hole symmetry in the presence of a large thermal bias, thereby pro- viding sizable thermoelectric figures of merit that could be exploited for the implementation of novel-concept nanoscale thermoelectric machines and sensitive passive radiation detectors. Acknowledgements This work was mainly funded by EUŌĆÖs Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under Grant Agree- ment No. 800923 (SuperTED). F.S.B and C.R also acknowledge funding from the Spanish MICINN-AEI (Projects No. PID2020-114252GB-I00 (SPIRIT) and TED2021-130292B-C42), and the Basque Government (grant IT-1591-22), M.S. and E.S. acknowledge par- tial funding from the European UnionŌĆÖs Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sk’┐Įlodowska Curie Action IF Grant No. 101022473 (Su- perCONtacts). C. I. L. A. acknowledge partial funding from CNPq, CAPES and Fapemig. F.G. acknowledges the EUŌĆÖs Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro- gram under Grant Agreement No. 964398 (SUPER- GATE) for partial financial support. The data of the figures in this work can be obtained at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7798143. CONTENTS 28