Effect of hydrostatic strain on the mechanical properties and topological phase transition of bi-alkali pnictogen NaLi2Bi Seyed Mohammad bagher Malek Hosseini Department of Physics, Vali-e-Asr University of Rafsanjan, Rafsanjan, Iran Shahram Yalameha Faculty of Physics, University of Isfahan, 81746-73441, Isfahan, Iran. The bi-alkali pnictogens have attracted significant attention for optoelectronic and photo- cathodic device applications. However, in most of the compounds belonging to this family, there has been less effort put into investigating the mechanical properties and topological phase transitions (TPT) of the compounds. Here, in the framework of density functional theory, the mechanical properties and topological phase transition of NaLi2Bi under hydro- static pressures are investigated. Elastic constants and phonon calculations have shown the mechanical and dynamical stability of this compound under hydrostatic tension and compres- sion. The analysis of the elastic constants show that the NaLi2Bi in the equilibrium state is an auxetic material with a negative Poisson’s ratio of -0.285, which changes to a material with a positive Poisson’s ratio under hydrostatic tension. Meanwhile, Poisson’s ratio and Pugh ratio indicate that this compound has brittle behavior and maintains it under hydrostatic pressures. The calculated results of the band structure within the generalized gradient ap- proximation (GGA) (Tran-Blaha modified Becke-Johnson exchange potential approximation (TB-mBJ)) show that NaLi2Bi is a nontrivial topological material (trivial topological mate- rial). It was found that hydrostatic compression (tension) in the GGA (TB-mBJ) approach leads to a transition from a nontrivial (trivial) to a trivial (nontrivial) topological phase for this compound. Moreover, the calculated Wannier charge centers confirm the TPT. Identi- fying the mechanisms controlling the auxetic behavior and TPT of this compound offers a valuable feature for designing and developing high-performance nanoscale electromechanical and spintronic devices. Keywords: Mechanical properties; Bi-alkali pnictogen; Topological phase transition; auxetic mate- rial; Hydrostatic pressure I. INTRODUCTION In general, bi-alkali pnictogens have the for- mula XY2Z, in which X and Y represent al- kali metals and Z represents group 7 elements. These compounds comprise an interesting class of semiconducting compounds that have techno- logical importance in optoelectronics, sensing, and photocathodic devices, due to their favor- able electronic properties . It is expected that these compounds will provide high-intensity X- ray electron Lasers in the future [2–4]. In ad- dition, these compounds are used in electron radiative devices because of their feasible work function . Recently, some of these compounds have attracted the attention of researchers due to their narrow band gap and strong spin-orbit coupling (SOC) . From the experimental point of view, bi-alkali pnictogens have also been investigated. Using the in-situ X-ray diffraction method, Ruiz et al., investigated the crystalline structure of multi- alkali photocathodes. Also, Cultrera et al., have synthesized and characterized top-ordered bi and multi-alkali pnictogen photocathodes and involved the Rb element in their chemical struc- ture. Feng et al., studied the effect of surface roughness on the emission of alkali penictogen cathodes in electron guns and developed K-Cs- Sb cathodes using co-deposition. Ding et al. showed that co-evaporation is the best growth method for KCs2Sb photocathodes because it produces films with a smooth surface, high quan- tum efficiency, and proper crystal structures. Schubert et al., investigated the bi-alkali pnictogen photocathodes for high-brightness ac- arXiv:2302.12605v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 24 Feb 2023 Malek Hosseini et al. celerators. From the theoretical perspective, the major attention on the bi-alkali pnictogens is to inves- tigate their electronic and structural properties. However, there are also reports on the optical, elastic, and topological properties of a number of bi-alkali pnictogen compounds. Khan et al., reported the structural and optoelectronic prop- erties of bi-alkali pnictogen compounds XY2Z (X and Y = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs; Z = N, P, As, Sb, Bi). Amador et al., described the electronic structure and optical properties of cubic Na2KSb and hexagonal NaK2Sb compounds. Murtaza et al., investigated the structural, elastic, elec- tronic, and optical properties of some bi-alkali antimonides. Cocchi et al., studied the elec- tronic and optical properties of the CsK2Sb com- pound. Kalarasse et al., reported the elec- tronic and elastic properties of the alkali pnictide compounds Li3Sb, Li3Bi, Li2NaSb, and Li2NaBi in the equilibrium state. Jin et al., in- vestigated the electronic structure, doping ef- fect, and topological signature in hexagonal com- pounds Li3−xNaxM (x = 3, 2, 1, 0; M = N, P, As, Sb, Bi). Sklyadneva et al., reported that the KNa2Bi compound is nontrivial topo- logical material. Yalameha et al., investi- gated that the crystal structure of KNa2Sb was also a topological insulator (TI) under hydro- static pressure. Furthermore, they have recently shown that Rb(Na, K)2Bi and Cs(Na, K)2Bi compounds can take a diverse set of topological states by strain-engineering . They also investigated the mechanical and anisotropic elas- tic properties of Cs(Na, K)2Bi compounds under hydrostatic pressure . Very recently, Song et al. comprehensively investigated the ther- mal transport and thermoelectric properties of the bi-alkali bismuthide compound NaLi2Bi. So far, no comprehensive study has been de- voted to examining the mechanical, anisotropic elastic, and topological properties of the cubic bi-alkali pnictogen compound NaLi2Bi. In this work, the effect of hydrostatic tension and com- pression on mechanical properties (e.g., Young’s modulus, Poisson’s ratio, Pugh ratio, Cauchy pressure, etc.) and the TPT of this compound have been investigated. The mechanical and dy- namic stability of the compound under the stud- ied pressures has also been studied. It should be noted that in this composition, the TPT point in PBE-GGA (from nontrivial to trivial state) and TB-mBJ (from trivial to nontrivial state) ap- proaches and their critical pressures have been observed and investigated. Even though this compound does not have any experimental re- ports, it is hoped that, based on these results, experimental research on this compound can be conducted. II. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS In this paper, the density functional the- ory (DFT)-based Wien2k package has been used to explore various physical properties of the titled compound. This package implements the full potential linearized augmented plane wave method (FP-LAPW) . In this work, the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) of the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange- correlation functional is used . The Tran- Blaha modified Becke-Johnson exchange poten- tial approximation (TB-mBJ) calculations were also conducted in order to obtain improved band gaps. The important parameters Gmax (i.e., the potential and charge density Fourier ex- pansion parameter) and RMT×Kmax, where RMT is the smallest muffin-tin (MT) sphere radii and Kmax is the largest reciprocal lattice vector used in the plane wave expansion, are set to 15.0 Bohr−1 and 9.5 (Ry)1/2, respectively. In the calculations of this compound, a 13×13×13 k- mesh of points is used to achieve self-consistency. The phonon dispersion is calculated using the Phonopy package . In Phonopy, first- principles phonon calculations are performed us- ing the finite displacement method . So, we used a supercell model and the finite dis- placement approach with a 2×2×2 conventional unit cell supercell and atomic displacement dis- tance of 0.01 ̊A. Irelast and ElATools codes are used for elastic constants calcu- lations and their analysis, respectively. Wan- nier90 and Z2pack packages have been used to calculate Wannier charge centers (WCC). It is noteworthy that the hydrostatic pressures (tension- and compression-type) are Page 2 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. evaluated using the volume ratio V/V0, where V0 is the equilibrium volume of the primitive unit cell. In all calculations presented in this study, spin-orbit coupling (with full relativis- tic effect) has been considered unless otherwise stated. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION III.A Structural properties, stability conditions The crystal structure of the NaLi2Bi com- pound is cubic with space group Fm-3m (No. 225), and the schematic conventional crystal structure of this compound is shown in Fig. 1(a). The atomic positions in a unit cell for Li(1)/Li(2), Na, and Bi atoms are (0.75, 0.25, 0.25)/(0.25, 0.75, 0.75), (0, 0, 0), and (0.5, 0, 0), respectively. A list of the results of first- principles calculations of the structural and elas- tic properties of this compound along with avail- able theoretical lattice constants, is provided in state to the total energy as a function of vol- ume, the equilibrium lattice parameter (a0) can be determined (see Fig. 1S of Supplemen- tary Information). The calculated equilibrium lattice constant (7.021 ̊A) is in good agreement with theoretical predictions (see Table I). There are only three independent elastic con- stants for materials with cubic symmetry: C11, C12, and C44. As can be seen in Table I, the cal- culated elastic constant values at the equilibrium state (V/V0 = 1.0) in this work are consistent with other theoretical results. In order for a cu- bic crystal system to be mechanically stable, it needs to satisfy the following Born-Huang crite- ria , C44 > 0, C11 − C12 > 0, C11 + 2C12 > 0; (1) According to Table I and Eq. 1, all elastic con- stants at the studied pressures of this compound satisfy the criteria of mechanical stability. In the equilibrium state and for hydrostatic ten- sion (V/V0 = 1.06 and 1.07) and compression (V/V0 = 0.930 and 0.940) values, phonon disper- sion curves for NaLi2Bi along the high-symmetry points in the Brillouin zone (see Fig. 1(g)) are plotted in Figs. 1(b-f). It reveals that the NaLi2Bi compound is dynamically stable at the studied pressures and equilibrium state since there are no modes with negative frequency val- ues. To find the thermodynamical stability of the NaLi2Bi compound, the Formation energies (E f) of volume ratios V/V0 = 0.93, 0.94, 1.0, 1.06, and 1.07 are calculated. Table 1S shows the calculated values of the E f per formula unit. In this table, the calculated values of E f per formula unit are negative, indicating this com- pound in the studied pressures is thermodynam- ically stable. The thermal stability of this com- pound has been recently investigated by Song et al. . Thus, the NaLi2Bi compound is stable and can be synthesized in the laboratory. III.B Mechanical properties The elastic constants (Cij) are key param- eters for the mechanical behaviour of materi- als, including mechanical stability, anisotropic response, stiffness, and hardness. The com- puted Cij and their related mechanical prop- erties, such as Poisson’s ratio (ν), Pugh ratio (B/G), machinability index (μM), and the uni- versal anisotropic index (AU) under hydrostatic pressures, are reported in Table I. It is worth mentioning that the studied hydrostatic pres- sures are of two types, tension and compression, which are addressed by the volume ratios (V/V0) in this table. However, the range of pressures re- lated to volume ratios is also included. The vol- ume ratios in this study have been chosen in a way that allows us to observe changes in mechan- ical behaviour (e.g., negative Poisson’s ratio) as well as topological phase transition (TPT). Among the three constants C11, C12, and C44, the C44 constant represents resistance to shear deformation, while the C11 relates to unidirec- tional strain along the principal crystallographic directions. The value of C44 in Table I is lower than C11 in all pressures, which means that the cubic cell is more easily deformed by a shear in comparison to the unidirectional stress. A material’s Cauchy pressure (CP ) can also be a useful mechanical parameter, and it is defined Page 3 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. (a) (g) no imaginary frequency (negative frequency), confirming the dynamic stability of these compounds. (g) The first 3D Brillouin zone and the high-symmetry points. Note that here the meaning of the G (Gamma) point is the same as Γ point. for NaLi2Bi compound. It should be noted that the equivalent pressures are specified with each of the volume ratios. V/V0 Pressure (GPa) a0 ( ̊A) C11 (GPa) C12 (GPa) C44 (GPa) CP (GPa) ν B/G μM AU AE 1.7 1.0 0.8 0.4 1.0 0 6.97 a, -1.3 -1.5 aRef. , bRef. , cRef. . as CP = (C12 - C44) . Angular character- istics of atomic bonding as well as the brittle- ness and ductility of a material can be described by Cauchy pressure . The Cauchy pres- sure of a ductile material is positive, while the Cauchy pressure of a brittle material is nega- tive. On the other hand, ionic and covalent bonding in a material is correlated with positive and negative Cauchy pressures, respectively. Ac- cording to Pettifor’s rule , a material with a large positive CP will possess significant metallic bonds and exhibit high levels of ductility, while a material that has a negative CP will possess more angular bonds, resulting in greater brit- tleness and covalent bonding. Hence, the nega- tive value of CP predicts that the NaLi2Bi com- Page 4 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. pound is brittle in nature, and some covalent bonding is present in this compound. In addi- tion, these results demonstrate that in tension (compression) hydrostatic pressures, this mate- rial approaches a high level of ductility (brittle- ness). Using the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) ap- proximation, the Poisson’s ratio (ν) and Pugh ratio (B/G) are estimated. Details of this ap- proximation are addressed in Ref. . Pois- son’s ratio and Pugh ratio are two factors that determine a system’s brittle and ductile nature in addition to Cauchy pressure. The Poisson’s ratio measures deformation (i.e., expansion or contraction) along the perpendicular to the load- ing direction. Frantsevich et al. have sepa- rated the brittleness and ductility of a material based on Poisson’s ratio (ν), defining the bor- der between the two as ν = 0.26. So, materials with Poisson’s ratio values greater and smaller than 0.26 are considered ductile and brittle, re- spectively. Moreover, in 1954, Pugh has pro- posed that the bulk modulus to shear modulus ratio (or vice versa) represents a good criterion to identify the brittleness and ductility of mate- rials . The critical value that separates brit- tle and ductile materials is about 1.75. There- fore, materials with a Pugh’s ratio greater than 1.75 are predicted to be ductile; otherwise, they are expected to be brittle. Based on these two criteria, it can be seen that the NaLi2Bi com- pound has brittle in nature in the equilibrium state (V/V0 = 1.0), and this characteristic is preserved in the studied hydrostatic pressures. It is noteworthy that a significant agreement ex- ists between the two conditions related to ν and B/G, and the results associated with CP . Pois- son’s ratio is more sensitive to the detection of physical characteristics than two CP and B/G parameters. The Poisson’s ratio also provides in- formation about the bonding nature of the mate- rials. Materials that are covalently bonded tend to have Poisson’s ratios around 0.1, whereas ma- terials that are ionic tend to have Poisson’s ra- tios around 0.25 . Based on Poisson’s ratio values, it is predicted that most of the chemi- cal bonds in this composition are covalent, and the covalent bonds become more intense at com- pression hydrostatic pressures. Also, in tensile hydrostatic pressures, ionic chemical bonds play a prominent role compared to covalent bonds. A Poisson’s ratio can provide insight into the nature of interatomic forces in solids . Materials that have Poisson’s ratios within 0.25 and 0.50 are called central force solids, whereas non-central force solids have Poisson’s ratios ei- ther less than 0.25 or greater than 0.50 . In the NaLi2Bi compound, therefore, non-central forces of atoms prevail, while in tension hydro- static pressures, central forces become more im- portant (see Table I). Another useful mechanical performance in- dex is the machinability index (μM), and it is defined as μM = B/C44 (B is bulk modulus). This parameter measures a material’s machin- ability, or its ability to be machined using cut- ting or shaping tools. A material’s degree of machinability is becoming increasingly impor- tant to the industry today because it determines factors such as how much power is needed for cutting, what temperature to use, and how much plastic strain to apply. Furthermore, it can be used to determine a solid’s plasticity and dry lubricating ability . Having a high μM value indicates excellent lubricating properties, which results in lower friction. The value of μM (= 0.6672) indicates that the NaLi2Bi compound has a good level of machinability. Under hy- drostatic compression (V/V0 ¡ 1), however, this characteristic increases, indicating it could be an attractive feature for machine tool applications. Plastic deformation in crystals, the forma- tion of microscale cracks in ceramics, and plas- tic relaxation in thin films are all influenced by elastic anisotropy. Hence, evaluating elas- tic anisotropy factors is essential for predicting solid behaviour under different external stress conditions. The universal anisotropy index (AU) and the anisotropy of Young’s modulus (AE) of NaLi2Bi are listed in Table I (the calculation of this two indices is detailed in Ref. ). In V/V0 = 1.0, there is the highest degree of anisotropy (AU = 2.0192). According to the trend of changes in this index under hydrostatic tension and compression, it can be found that the de- gree of anisotropy (i.e., AU) decreases slowly in tension-type of pressures and more rapidly in compression-type of pressures. Young’s modu- Page 5 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. V/V0 = 0.940; AE= 2.20 V/V0 = 0.955; AE = 2.27 V/V0 = 0.970; AE = 2.58 V/V0 = 0.985; AE = 2.45 V/V0 = 1.060; AE =1.81 V/V0 = 1.045; AE =2.07 V/V0 = 1.030; AE =2.01 V/V0 = 1.015; AE =2.32 V/V0 = 1.0; AE = 2.60 The more localized the colours and the more complex the colour distribution pattern, the higher the level of anisotropy. The purple arrow in V/V0 = 1.060 shows that the localization in the color’s distribution is reduced. lus (E) can also be a good indicator of the level of anisotropy. The 3D representation surfaces of Young’s modulus are calculated by ElaTools and included in Fig. 2. The more localizing col- ors and the more complex the pattern of color distribution in this figure, the higher the level of anisotropy is. According to AE in Table I and Fig. 2, it can be seen that NaLi2Bi has high anisotropy. With increasing tension-type pressure, anisotropy decreases, and its minimum value corresponds to a state with V/V0 = 1.060 and AE = 1.81. This is due to the reduced lo- calization in the colors distribution pattern (see purple arrow). Materials belonging to the auxetic family possess negative Poisson’s ratio (NPR), caus- ing expansion under tension rather than contrac- tion. So, this enables the development of inno- vative technologies for impact-resistant compos- ites, ultra-precise sensors, tougher ceramics, and high-performance armor due to auxetic materi- als’ atypical elastic behaviour . This fea- ture is investigated using 3D surface representa- tions (see Fig. 3) and 2D polar plots (see Fig. 4) of Poisson’s ratio of NaLi2Bi in (100)-plane un- der hydrostatic tension and compression. Based on Fig. 3, the NaLi2Bi compound has a NPR of νnegative = -0.285 along the ( or )- direction in the equilibrium state. As a result, this compound can be regarded as an auxetic material. The results show that with increas- ing hydrostatic tension, the negative Poisson’s rate decreases and reaches a critical value of - 0.017 (see Fig. 3(a)). From this point on, the compound loses its auxetic behaviour (see Fig. 2S). Therefore, a type of mechanical phase tran- sition (MPT) from the auxetic state to the non- auxetic state has occurred for this compound. Fig. 4 displays the 2D polar representation of Poisson’s ratio in the (100)-plane for the stud- Page 6 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. 0.15 0.5 0.0 0.35 0.0 -0.017 vmax vmin vnegative 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.35 0.0 vmax vmin vnegative 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.3 0.0 vmax vmin vnegative (a) (b) (c) V/V0 = 0.940 V/V0 = 1.0 V/V0 = 1.060 Tension-type Equilibrium Compression-type V/V0 = 1.060 states. The maximum positive, minimum positive, and negative values of Poisson’s ratio are νmax, νmin, and νnegative, respectively. The maximum and minimum values of Poisson’s ratio are located at ( or ) and ( or ) directions, respectively. ied pressures. The blue (green) represents the maximum (minimum) value and the red repre- sents the negative value. In this figure, it can be clearly seen that with the increase of hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1), the value of NPR decreases to the critical point of V/V0 = 1.060. In hy- drostatic compression (V/V0 ¡ 1), the value of NPR remains almost constant. It is noteworthy that the maximum and minimum values of Pois- son’s ratio are located at ( or ) and ( or ) directions, respectively. III.C Topological properties Topological insulators (TIs) with novel sur- face states have recently drawn considerable the- oretical and experimental attention . The spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and band inver- sion at the Fermi energy give TI remarkable elec- tronic properties. This makes TI ideal for ap- plications in electronics, thermoelectrics, opto- electronics, superconductors, and magnetics [47– 50]. It has been found that it is possible to control topological band order using electromag- netic fields, alloying, pressure, strain, and tem- perature effects [19, 20, 51–53]. Here, the mech- anism of hydrostatic strain is employed in this study in order to investigate the TPT of the NaLi2Bi compound. Here, the mechanism of hy- drostatic strain is employed in this study in order to investigate the TPT of the NaLi2Bi compound using PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ approaches. • PPE-GGA approach: To investigate topo- logical band order, we first examine the equi- librium state of the NaLi2Bi compound. Fig. Page 7 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. V/V0 = 0.940 V/V0 = 0.955 V/V0 = 0.970 V/V0 = 0.985 V/V0 = 1.060 V/V0 = 1.045 V/V0 = 1.030 V/V0 = 1.015 V/V0 = 1.0 maximum (minimum) positive and negative values of Poisson’s raito, respectively. With the increase of hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1), the value of NPR decreases until the critical point V/V0 = 1.060, while in hydrostatic compression (V/V0 ¡ 1), the value of NPR remains almost constant. 3S illustrates the orbital projected band struc- ture of NaLi2Bi without SOC at an equilibrium state. Compared to Ref. , the bandgap of this compound along high symmetry line L-Γ-W is 0.41 eV, which is in good agreement with this reference (0.4 eV). In this figure, based on the orbital projected bands (fat bands), it is given that the Bi-s-liked (Γ1) is above Bi-p-liked (Γ5) at Γ point. It can be concluded that in the ab- sence of SOC, the band inversion did not occur and thus the compound is a semiconductor with an trivial bandgap. This configuration is similar to HgTe compound in the absence of SOC . When the SOC is included, the bandgap is closed and Bi-s-liked orbitals are exchanged with Bi-p- liked (Bi-s-liked below Bi-p-liked band), and a band inversion of sp-type occurs (see Fig. 5(a and c)). In this case (V/V0 = 1.0), the com- pound is reduced to a zero-gap semimetal with an inverted band order. This is the result of fa- miliarity, which is created due to the presence of strong SOC in TIs and topological semimetals . In cubic crystals and in the presence of SOC, the Γ point around Fermi level can be traced back to the s-like doublet Γ6 (j = 1/2) state, the p-like quartet Γ8 (j = 3/2) state, and Page 8 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al.          ) ) )  ()  ()  ()  ()  ()  () (c) (f) (d) (g) (a) (b) (e) Γ6 Γ8 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 Γ8 Γ6 TPT point Compression-type Equilibrium Tension-type       = 1.00 (a) The band structures of the NaLi2Bi compound under hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1 ), compression (Bi-p-liked) states are marked with orange and green arrows, respectively. The black arrow shows the critical point of the topological phase transition in the V/V0 = 0.955 state. The orbital projected band structures of the NaLi2Bi Γ-W. The evolution lines of the Wannier charge centers along ky in the kx = 0 and kx = 0.5 planes in the (e) V/V0 and kx = 0.5 planes. the split-off doublet Γ7 state (j = 1/2) ((Γ7 state is indicated in Fig. 4S)) . Here ”j” is the to- tal angular momentum. In fact, SOC splits the Γ5 state (see Fig. 3S in the absence of SOC) into Γ8 (j = 3/2, denoted as p3/2) and Γ7 (j= 1/2, denoted as p1/2) states . Based on the energy difference between the Γ8 and Γ6 states in the band structure, a parameter can be de- fined (i.e., δ = [Γ6 -Γ8]) that shows the band inversion behaviour, which is known as the band inversion strength (BIS). Therefore, for nontriv- ial topological phases, this value is negative (δ ¡ Page 9 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. Compression-type Equilibrium Tension-type kx = 0 kx = 0.5 kx = 0 kx = 0.5 kx = 0 kx = 0.5 Bi-s Bi-p Bi-s Bi-p Bi-s Bi-p (a) (b) (e) (c) (f) (d) (g) (a) The band structures of the NaLi2Bi compound under hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1 ), compression (Bi-p-liked) states are marked with orange and green arrows, respectively. The black arrow shows the critical point of the topological phase transition in the V/V0 = 1.06 state. The orbital projected band structures of the NaLi2Bi Γ-W. The evolution lines of the Wannier charge centers along ky in the kx = 0 and kx= 0.5 planes in the (e) V/V0 and kx = 0.5 planes. 0) and for trivial topological phases, this value is positive (δ ¿ 0). Also, this value becomes zero for the TPT point. In order to investigate TPT, the evolution of the band structure at the Γ point under hydrostatic tension (V/V0 ¿ 1) ,and com- pression (V/V0 ¡ 1) has been evaluated in Fig. 5(a). In addition, in this figure, Γ6 and Γ8 states are marked with orange and green arrows, re- spectively. It can be found that when hydro- static pressures of the tension type are applied, Page 10 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. the nontrivial topological phase is preserved and the —δ— (δ ¡ 0) also increases. For example, the orbital projected band structure in the V/V0 = 1.060 state from Fig. 5(d) shows that there is the sp-band inversion and the only difference with the equilibrium state is in the value of the δ. Meanwhile, with the increase of the hydrostatic pressure of the compression type, the δ decreases and reaches zero value in V/V0 = 0.955 state. This state shows the critical point of the topo- logical phase transition, which is indicated by the black arrow. The value of critical pressure, in this case, is estimated as 1.0 GPa, according to Table I. It is worth noting that the TPT is from the nontrivial to the trivial state. When we cross the critical point of the TPT, at V/V0 = 0.940, the Bi-p-liked (Γ8) is below the Bi-s- liked (Γ6) and the compound is converted into a semiconductor with a trivial bandgap of ≈ 0.1 eV (see Figs. 5(a and b)). To confirm that the topological phase tran- sition occurs in this structure under hydrostatic tension and compression, we calculated the topo- logical Z2-index by the evolution lines of Wan- nier Charge Centres (WCC) along ky in the two time-reversal invariant planes kx= 0 and π in the Brillouin zone, as shown in Figs. 5(e-g). For V/V0 ¿ 0.955 states, an odd number of points in the kx=0 plane are crossed by the evolution curve in any arbitrary line horizontal axis (green line), while an even number of points in the kx= 0.5 plane are crossed (e.g., Figs. 5(f and g)); thus + (z2)0.5) mod 2] = 1. Accordingly, NaLi2Bi is a nontrivial topological zero-gap semimetal with a topological index Z2 = 1 for V/V0 ¿ 0.955. In the same way, for the states that are after the TPT point V/V0 ¡ 0.955 (e.g., V/V0 = 0.940 state in Fig. 5(e)), the topological index becomes Z2 (z2)0.5) mod 2] = 0), which shows that the com- pound has transitioned to the trivial topological phase. • TB-mBJ approach: It is well known that TB-mBJ gives a very well estimate of the band gap of solids as is the case for the GW method and the hybrid functional, but with a less cost . In Fig. 6, we re-performed the calcula- tions related to Fig. 5 (PBE-GGA approach) in the TB-mBJ approach to better understand the topological properties of the studied compound. In the equilibrium state (V/V0 = 1.0), the com- pound has a trivial bandgap (0.62 eV) in the presence of SOC, as shown in Fig. 6(a). As can be seen in Fig. 6(c), this compound is a conven- tional (trivial topological semiconductor) semi- conductor since the band inversion has not oc- curred (Bi-p-liked below Bi-s-liked band). The calculations of the topological Z2-index (Z2 = 0) performed by the evolution lines of WCC are also a confirmation of this issue (see Fig. 6(f)). With the TB-mBJ approach, in contrast to the PBE- GGA approach, where the TPT occurs under hydrostatic compression, the trivial bandgap in- creases during hydrostatic compression and the compound maintains its trivial topological phase as a result (see Fig. 6(a)). For example, Figs. 6(b and e) show the orbital projected band struc- tures and WCC at V/V0 = 0.93, which indi- cates that the band inversion did not occur and that the topological Z2-index is zero (Z2 = 0). As can be seen in Fig. 6(a), with the increase of the hydrostatic pressure of the tension-type, the bandgap decreases and in the V/V0 = 1.06 state, we reach the critical point of the TPT (see black arrow) where the BIS is zero. The hydrostatic pressure of this critical point is -3.4 GPa (in this literature tensile hydrostatic pres- sure is indicated by the negative sign). It is at this critical point that the TPT from a trivial to a nontrivial state occurs. A band inversion of sp-type has occurred above the critical pres- sure (i.e., V/V0 = 1.07 state), as exhibited in Fig. 6(a and d), and the BIS has become neg- ative. The compound in this case results in a nontrivial topological zero-gap semimetal. As seen in Fig. 6(g), the evolution lines of WCC also show that the topological Z2-index is nonzero ( Z2 = 1). In Fig. 7(a), we can compare the TPT of PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ approaches based on how the band inversion strength (δ) changes as a function of V/V0. The yellow and blue areas represent δ ¡ 0 (nontrivial state) and δ ¿ 0 (trivial state), respectively. As seen, in PBE-GGA ap- proach, TPT point corresponds to hydrostatic compression (V/V0 ¡ 1.0), while in TB-mBJ ap- proach, it corresponds to hydrostatic tension Page 11 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. p+ s+ p– s– s+ p– s– p– – p s+ p– p– s+ p– p+ s+ p– s– p– p– s+ p– p– + s p s+ – – p s– s– s– s– s– PBE-GGA TB-mBJ W SOC W/O SOC W SOC V/V0 < 0.955 V/V0 = 0.955 V/V0 > 0.955 W/O SOC V/V0 < 1.06 V/V0 = 1.06 V/V0 > 1.06 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1 EF δ (eV) V/V0 PBE-GGA TB-mBJ Trivial Nontrivial (a) (b) ±1/2 ±1/2 ±1/2 3/2 ± ± /2 3 ± /2 3 ± /2 3 ± /2 3 ± /2 3 ± /2 1 ± /2 1 ± /2 1 III II I III II I (a) Band inversion strength (δ) of NiLi2Bi compound in two approaches, PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ, as a function of V/V0. The black arrows show the topological phase transitions (TPT) points. (b) Schematic evolution of the atomic energy levels at Γ point under hydrostatic pressure with (denoted as W SOC) and without SOC (denoted as W/O SOC) within PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ approaches. The symbols ”+” and ”-” label the parities of the bands at the Γ point. Orange, black, and green rectangles represent nontrivial states, TPT points, and trivial states, respectively. (V/V0 ¿ 1.0) (see black arrows). It should be noted that the TPT point in the PBE-GGA ap- proach is from a nontrivial state to a trivial state, while it is reversed in the TB-mBJ approach. It is possible to define δSOC (= [Γ8 - Γ7]) as an- other parameter similar to δ, which indicates the strength of SOC. The changes of this parameter within PBE-GGA and TB-mBJ approaches are shown in Fig. 4S. The results obtained in two approaches show that this parameter increases (decreases) with the increase of hydrostatic pres- sure of the compression (tensile) type. To explain the physical mechanism underly- ing the band inversion and the parity exchange of this compound, the schematically evolution of the energy levels of the atomic levels at Γ point under hydrostatic pressure (compression and tension types), in the presence and absence of SOC for the two approaches studied, is shown in Fig. 7(b). As per the normal band flling order near Fermi energy, the valence band con- sists of Bi-p orbitals, while the conduction band is composed of s-type orbitals (see green rect- angle), which, due to the formation of chemical bonds in this compound, hybridize and split into bonding and antibonding states in the absence of SOC (i.e., p+ (s+) and p− (s−) with different parities) . The system is therefore an con- ventional semiconductor with trivial bandgap as shown in Fig. 7(b) in both PBE-GGA and TB- mBJ approaches. In the PBE-GGA approach, when the SOC is taken into account under hy- drostatic pressures, V/V0 ¿ 0.955, (see orange rectangle of stage (I)) the p− state splits into the —p−, ± j〉 with a total angular momentum of j = 3/2 and j = 1/2. On the other hand, the energy band gap reaches zero and the com- pound becomes a topological semimetal system. In this case, the parity of s and p±3/2 states near the Fermi energy have been exchanged and band inversion occurs (s+ state below p− ±3/2 state). At the critical point (V/V0 = 0.955) from stage (II) (see black rectangle), these two states are close together and at the V/V0 ¡ 0.955, their parity is exchanged with respect to the stage (I), and the system transitions from the nontriv- ial state to the trivial state (see blue rectangle of stage (III)). There is a similar mechanism in the TB-mBJ approach, but the only difference is Page 12 of 15 Malek Hosseini et al. that during stage (I), the compound has a triv- ial bandgap, and after reaching the TPT point, the parity of s and p±3/2 states is exchanged and the compound becomes a semimetal mate- rial with nontrivial topological phase (from the trivial state to the nontrivial state). I.V. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK In summary, the mechanical properties and topological phase transition of bi-alkali pnicto- gen NaLi2Bi are investigated in the PBE-GGA approach from the first-principles calculation. Calculations based on phonon modes and elastic constants indicate that this compound is stable the studied hydrostatic tension and compression. The results show that applying hydrostatic ten- sion leads to a kind of mechanical phase tran- sition in the compound so that the auxetic be- haviour of the material changes to non-auxetic behaviour after the critical pressure of -1.5 GPa (V/V0 = 1.060). According to the Cauchy pres- sure, Poisson’s ratio, and Pugh ratio, it has been determined that this compound has a brit- tle behaviour in the equilibrium state, and this behaviour is maintained under the hydrostatic pressures studied in this work. Based on the study of the electronic band structure in the equilibrium state, it can be concluded that the NaLi2Bi compound has a zero-gap semimetal in the PBE-GGA approach, in which the sp-band inversion has occurred, and its topological index is Z2 = 1. On the other hand, these calculations show that, in tension-type hydrostatic pressures, the topological phase transition occurs from the non-trivial phase to the trivial phase, and the critical pressure is ≈1 GPa. Additionally, the TB-mBJ approach indicates that this compound is a semiconductor with a trivial bandgap. It is possible to close the bandgap by increasing the tension-type hydrostatic pressure by ≈-3.4 GPa, and after passing through this point the compound transforms from a trivial phase into a topological nontrivial phase and becomes a zero- gap semimetal with an inverted band structure (sp-band inversion occurs). By comparing the two studied approaches in the equilibrium state of the NaLi2Bi compound, it can be concluded that conventional approaches like GGA may pro- vide false results in the detection of topological phases and band inversion in materials. The fi- nal point we suggest in this paper is that uniaxial strain may induce other topological classes suit- able for practical application in this compound, which deserves further study. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT