1 1 Abstract—A theoretical and experimental performance analysis of a Semiconductor Optical Amplifier – Mach-Zehnder Interferometer (SOA-MZI) photonic sampling mixer used as a frequency up-converter is presented employing Switching and Modulation architectures. An active mode-locked laser, generating 2 ps-width pulses at a repetition rate equal to 10 GHz, is used as a sampling source. An optical carrier intensity modulated by a sinusoidal signal at 1 GHz is up-converted to 9 GHz and 39 GHz. High Conversion Gains (CGs) of about 15 dB are demonstrated for the frequency conversion to 9 GHz using both architectures, whereas up to 4 dB and 9 dB for the conversion to 39 GHz employing Switching and Modulation architectures, respectively. Small-signal equations for the up-converted signal in both architectures are formulated and developed, which permit to quantify the CG from closed-form expressions. The numerically calculated CG values are in very good agreement with those obtained experimentally. The validated equations are subsequently employed to explain the performance differences between the two architectures in terms of the CG. Furthermore, signals modulated by QPSK and 16-QAM complex modulation formats at different baud rates are up-converted from 750 MHz to 9.25 GHz and 39.75 GHz and their Error Vector Magnitude is evaluated and compared. The maximum bit rate that meets the Forward Error Correction (FEC) limit is achieved using the Modulation architecture. It is 1 Gbps and 512 Mbps for QPSK and 16-QAM modulations, respectively. Index Terms—Semiconductor Optical Amplifier (SOA), Mach- Zehnder Interferometer (MZI), All-optical mixer, Frequency conversion, Switching architecture, Modulation architecture. I. INTRODUCTION adio over Fiber (RoF) systems have attracted significant attention by enabling the transmission of microwave frequency signals via optical fiber, thus benefiting from the advantages of low loss transmission, low weight, wide bandwidth and immunity to electromagnetic interference compared to an all-electrical transmission. The potential range This work is part of a Ph. D. Thesis under co-supervising scheme ‘Cotutelle’ between ENIB in France and DUTH in Greece with the support of Brest Métropole in the frame of ARED ‘Choraal’ project. It is also supported by the French state, Brittany region and FEDER in the frame of CPER SOPHIE- Photonique-ATOM. D. Kastritsis is both with Lab-STICC UMR CNRS 6285, École Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Brest, 29238 Brest, France, and with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lightwave Communications Research of RoF applications includes, but is not limited to, cellular communications, satellite communications, Wireless Fidelity (WiFi), phased array and photonics-assisted radar systems . In this framework, and in order to expand the potentiality and flexibility of such a system, the development of a subsystem in the optical layer for optical generation of millimeter-wave (mm-wave) signals through optical mixing is crucial -. There are three fundamental characteristics of an optical mixer: the nonlinear medium that is exploited for the implementation of the optical mixer, the physical phenomenon used for the frequency conversion and the device that performs the function of mixing. The fused silica in a Highly Nonlinear Dispersion Shifted Fibers (HNL-DSF) can be used for optical mixing exploiting either the Cross-Phase Modulation (XPM) or the Four-Wave Mixing (FWM) phenomena . The main restriction of HNL is the need of large fiber length and high power. High performance Mach-Zehnder modulators (MZM) with Lithium-Niobate material (LiNbO3) that exploit Pockels electro-optic effect have been extensively used for the purpose of frequency conversion . Another possibility is the Electro- Absorption Modulator utilizing Cross-Absorption Modulation (XAM) phenomenon in a semiconductor material . Finally, photodiodes and lately UniTravelling Carrier PhotoDiodes (UTC-PD) have also been employed by exploiting the nonlinear current response when the incident power is high enough and the reverse bias of photodiode is low enough . Semiconductor Optical Amplifiers (SOA) exploiting the nonlinear phenomena of XGM (Cross-Gain Modulation) and XPM - can be equally used for mixing in the form of a stand-alone device or embedded in an interferometric arrangement such as a Semiconductor Optical Amplifier-Mach- Zehnder Interferometer (SOA-MZI). Lately, SOA-MZI-based frequency mixer was successfully used to generate a 100 GHz signal through up-conversion of 1 GHz signal . SOA and SOA-MZI exhibit all the advantages mentioned in the previous paragraph while being an all-optical solution. In addition, because they both are active modules, they also provide a Group, Democritus University of Thrace, 67100 Xanthi, Greece (e-mail: dimitrios.kastritsis@enib.fr). T. Rampone and A. Sharaiha are with Lab-STICC UMR CNRS 6285, École Nationale d’Ingénieurs de Brest, Brest, France (e-mail: thierry.rampone@enib.fr; ammar.sharaiha@enib.fr). K. E. Zoiros is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lightwave Communications Research Group, Democritus University of Thrace, 67100 Xanthi, Greece (e-mail: kzoiros@ee.duth.gr). Modulation and Switching Architecture Performances for Frequency Up-conversion of Complex-Modulated Data Signals based on a SOA-MZI Photonic Sampling Mixer Dimitrios Kastritsis, Thierry Rampone, Kyriakos E. Zoiros, Ammar Sharaiha R This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 2 Conversion Gain (CG) as opposed to the conversion loss suffered by the previously reported passive photonic mixers . The main disadvantage of XGM-based mixing techniques is the limited extinction ratio of the converted signal. By comparison, a SOA-MZI provides large extinction ratio while lowering the required optical input power due to its interferometric structure -. A comprehensive comparative analysis of alternative up-conversion configurations employed in RoF systems is made in . All-optical mixing using a SOA-MZI has been experimentally demonstrated in , where frequency up- conversion from 2.5 GHz to 32.5 GHz was demonstrated with a high conversion gain of 6 dB. A SOA-MZI combined with a mode-locked laser’s pulse train, instead of a two-tone signal produced either by an electro-optic modulator, as in , or an MZM, as in , provides increased flexibility as it can be used to up- or down-convert a signal at multiple target frequencies simultaneously -. Recently, a similar SOA-MZI-based system reported CG for multiple target frequencies. Specifically, a signal at 0.5 GHz was up-converted simultaneously at frequencies between 8.3 GHz, which was adjacent to the 1st harmonic of the mode- locked laser, and 30.5 GHz, which was adjacent to the 4th harmonic of the mode-locked laser. The conversion gain achieved in this range of frequencies was reduced from 15.5 dB to -9.5 dB. In our recent works -, we have experimentally demonstrated a new Modulation architecture and we have compared its performance in terms of the CG against the established Switching architecture, both based on the SOA- MZI photonic sampler. In , a very high CG up to 22 dB was achieved, where a 1 GHz was up-converted to 9 GHz, which was adjacent to the 1st harmonic of the mode-locked laser. In this paper, we extend the comparison by presenting a small-signal analysis for the SOA-MZI photonic sampling mixer. In this context, we derive an analytical expression for the CG and provide a qualitative insight into the trends of CG results for the two architectures. The performance in terms of CG is evaluated and the analytical expression is validated by comparison to measured CG values. The highest, to our knowledge, CG, is achieved with the Modulation architecture of the SOA-MZI photonic mixer for up-conversion of a signal from 1 GHz to 39 GHz, which is adjacent to the 4th harmonic of the mode locked laser. Moreover, we evaluate the performance of up-conversion using QPSK and 16-QAM complex modulated signals which is done, to the best of our knowledge, for the first time for the Modulation architecture. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe the principle of operation for Switching and Modulation architectures. In Section III, we provide a small-signal analysis of the SOA-MZI sampling mixer. In Section IV, we define the conditions of the conducted experiments and give static and CG experimental results. In Section V, we present results for the frequency up-conversion of complex-modulated data by comparing the two architectures against the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM). Finally, Section VI contains the conclusions reached from this work. II. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION OF SOA-MZI SAMPLING MIXER The SOA-MZI is an optically controlled device, in which a SOA is placed at each arm of a MZI. In the generic case there are two inputs, Pctrl at λctrl and Pin at λin, and two output signals, PI and PJ, where ‘P’ denotes power. Pctrl governs through XPM the SOA-MZI behavior by defining the fraction of the amplified input signal that exits from the upper and lower output ports. Fig. 1 demonstrates the SOA-MZI’s photonic sampling mixer principle of operation for the Switching and the Modulation architectures. We inject two signals at the SOA- MZI input: the sampling pulse train signal, which consists of ultra-short continuous (clock) pulses with repetition frequency fck, and the signal to be sampled, which consists of a sinusoidal signal at frequency fdat superimposed on a Continuous Wave (CW) signal. Fig.1 (a) illustrates the Switching architecture, in which the signal to be sampled is switched on and off by the sampling pulse train as follows. The signal to be sampled is divided at the SOA-MZI middle input port into two identical copies by a 3 dB optical coupler. At time instants at which no sampling pulse is present, the signal to be sampled is amplified by the two SOAs and exits from the upper output port. At time instants at which a sampling pulse is present, a phase shift is induced in the upper copy of the input signal due to XPM phenomenon and a portion of the signal to be sampled appears amplified at lower output port, thus resulting in the sampling of the sinusoidal signal. Provided that the peak power of the pulses causes a differential phase shift of π, the entire signal to be sampled emerges amplified at the lower output port. The two phase shifters Φ01 and Φ02 introduce a static phase shift between the two arms in order to compensate for asymmetries in the couplers or between the two SOAs. The idea for realizing a sampling mixer is to exploit the frequency response of the sampling process to achieve frequency conversion -. As we can see from the power spectrum of the sampled signal obtained after optical filtering centered at λin, the frequency content of the signal to be sampled is replicated from fdat to fcki ± fdat, where fcki ≡ ifck, i ∈ N+. Fig.1(b) demonstrates the principle of operation for the Modulation architecture in which the sampling pulse train is modulated by the sinusoidal signal to be sampled. More specifically, it is now the sampling pulsed signal that is divided into two identical copies by the 3 dB optical coupler at the middle input port. In this case, the signal to be sampled causes a phase shift in the upper copy of the sampling pulse train. This results in a continuous variation of the portion of the amplified sampling signal that appears at the upper and lower output, i.e. in a modulation of the sampling pulse train by the signal to be sampled. Again the frequency content of the signal power to be sampled after the optical filtering at λin is replicated from fdat to ifck ± fdat. This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 3 Fig. 1. SOA-MZI (a) Switching and (b) Modulation architectures. III. SMALL-SIGNAL ANALYSIS OF SOA-MZI SAMPLING MIXER A small-signal analysis of the SOA-MZI sampling mixer is formulated by expressing each time-dependent parameter as the sum of a steady state term X̅ and a first-order perturbation term δx at one or more angular frequencies -: In our case one input is a sampling pulse train that is modeled as an infinite sum of harmonics. A. Modeling in presence of a sampling pulse train Using the notation (1) and the index a ∈ {s, m} to discriminate between the (s)witching and (m)odulation architectures, the power of the sampling signal can be written as the sum of the average power P̅ck,a and the perturbation term δpcki,a, which represents the sinusoidal variation of the ith harmonic at angular frequency ωcki: Likewise, the input power of the signal to be sampled, Pdat,a, is the sum of an average power P̅dat,a and a sinusoidal variation δpdat,a at the angular frequency ωdat: Pdat,a = P̅dat,a + δpdat,a = P̅dat,a + 1 2 (pdat,aejωdatt + pdat,a ∗ e−jωdatt) (3) Fig. 2. SOA-MZI layout of CIP 40G-2R2-ORP device. Fig.2 depicts the layout of the SOA-MZI (CIP, model 40G- 2R2-ORP) used in the experiments. With reference to the input and output powers which have been defined in the previous section, Pin and Pctrl enter the interferometric module from port C and A, while PI and PJ emerge from ports I and J, respectively. Ports B and D have not been used in this work. At SOA-MZI input port C, the incoming power is decomposed as: Pin = P̅in + δpin (4) Similarly, introducing the index k ∈ {1, 2} to discriminate between SOA1 and SOA2, we get the following equation for the carrier density, Nk (the SOA is modelled as a one section device): Nk = N̅k + δnk = N̅k + 1 2 ∑(nk,ωFejωFt + nk,ωF ∗ e−jωFt) F (5) where ωF represents the linear combination of the angular frequency components of all optical signals traversing SOAk. In case of SOA1, these include the sampling signal and the X(t) = X̅ + δx (1) Pck,a = P̅ck,a + δpcki,a = P̅ck,a + 1 2 ∑ (pcki,aejωckit + pcki,a ∗ e−jωckit) i∈N+ (2) This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 4 signal to be sampled. In case of SOA2, only one of the two optical signals passes through, i.e. either the signal to be sampled, thus ωF = ωdat for the Switching architecture, or the sampling signal, thus ωF = ωcki for the Modulation architecture. The SOAs time-dependent gain and phase properties can be developed as follows: Gk = G̅k + δgk = G̅k + δnk ∂Gk ∂N (6) Φk = Φ̅k + δφk = Φ̅k + δnk ∂Φk ∂N (7) At SOA-MZI output port J the optical power is given by : PJ = 1 8 Pin (G1 + G2 − 2√G1G2cos(Φ1 − Φ2 + Φ0)) (8) where Φ0 = Φ01 − Φ02. The static phase shift Φ0 introduced by the optical phase shifters will be considered equal to 0 in our operating conditions. The factor 1/4 in is modified to 1/8 because of the additional 3 dB coupler used to inject the signal at the upper and the lower SOA-MZI arms. Now applying to (8) a first-order Taylor series approximation around [δg1, δg2, δφ1, δφ2] = and introducing, (6) and (7), we get (9). Developing (9), we get the average output power P̅J and variation power δpJ: P̅J = 1 8 P̅in (G̅1 + G̅2 − 2√G̅1G̅2cos(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2)) (10) δpJ = δpin P̅J P̅in + P̅inδgφ + δpinδgφ (11) where δgφ is given by: B. Up-converted small-signal terms We are going to develop (11) for the Modulation and Switching architectures in the following way. We are interested only in the combination of terms in (11) that are generating intermodulation products at frequencies fcki ± fdat, while eliminating all other terms. For this purpose, firstly we eliminate the first term of (11) since we notice that it contains no intermodulation products but only the frequencies of the input signal at port C. Secondly, we eliminate δg2 and δφ2 perturbation terms induced by SOA2 as we observe that they do not participate in the generation of fcki ± fdat intermodulation frequencies. More analytically, for the Switching architecture, the only signal traversing SOA2 is Pdat, therefore δg2 and δφ2 variations are induced at frequency fdat. As a result, for the second term of (11), the product of δg2 and P̅in as well as the product of δφ2 and P̅in correspond to variations at frequency fdat. For the third term of (11), the product of δg2 and δpin as well as the product of δφ2 and δpin correspond to variations at frequency 2fdat. Similarly, for the Modulation architecture, the only signal that passes through SOA2 is Pck, therefore δg2 and δφ2 variations are induced at frequencies fcki. As a result, for the second term of (11), the product of δg 2 and P̅in as well as the product of δφ2 and P̅in correspond to variations at frequencies fcki. For the third term of (11), the product of δg2 and δpin as well as the product of δφ2 and δpin correspond to variations at frequencies 2fcki. Therefore, based on (11) and the previous analysis we can write for the intermodulation products at frequencies fcki ± fdat: δpJ,cki±dat,a = 1 8 (P̅in δgφ1 + δpinδgφ1) (13) where δgφ1 is given by: δgφ1 = δg1 − √G̅1G̅2 G̅1 cos(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2)δg1 + 2√G̅1G̅2 sin(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2) δφ1 (14) Substituting δg1, δφ1 from (6) and (7) and δnk from (5), while taking into account that Pin = Pdat for Switching and Pin = Pck for Modulation architectures, the optical powers at the up-conversion frequency fcki−dat are given by: pJ,cki−dat,s = COPs 16 [pdat,s ∗ n1,ωcki,s + P̅dat,s2n1,ωcki−dat,s] (15) pJ,cki−dat,m = COPm 16 [pcki,mn1,ωdat,m ∗ + P̅ck,m2n1,ωcki−dat,m] (16) δgφ = 1 8 ( δg1 + δg2 −√G̅1G̅2 (δg1 G̅1 + δg2 G̅2 ) cos(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2) +2√G̅1G̅2(δφ1 − δφ2) sin(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2)) (12) P̅J + δpJ = 1 G̅2 √G̅1G̅2 cos(Φ̅1 − Φ̅2)) δg1 + (1 − G̅1 √G̅1G̅2 (9) This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 5 where n1,ωcki−dat,s is given by expression (32) in the Appendix and COPa is a constant at a given operating point defined by: COPa = ∂G1,a ∂N − 1 G̅1,a ∂G1,a ∂N √G̅1,aG̅2,a cos(Φ̅1,a − Φ̅2,a) + ∂Φ1,a ∂N 2√G̅1,aG̅2,a sin(Φ̅1,a − Φ̅2,a) (17) Equations (15) and (16) can be further simplified given that both SOAs are not operating in the high saturation region. In this case, the first term in the brackets is the most significant one, similar to , since n1,ωcki−dat,a is a second-order perturbation term of the carrier density variation . pJ,cki−dat,s = COPs 16 n1,ωcki,spdat,s ∗ (18) pJ,cki−dat,m = COPm 16 n1,ωdat,m ∗ pcki,m (19) By replacing in (18) and (19) n1,ωcki,s and n1,ωdat,m ∗ by their expressions (37) and (38) given in the Appendix, we get: pJ,cki−dat,s = −Ks pdat,s ∗ pcki,sG̅1,sτd 1 + jωckiτd (20) pJ,cki−dat,m = −Km pdat,m ∗ pcki,mG̅1,mτd 1 − jωdatτd (21) where constant Ka depends both on the SOAs structural parameters and the operating point of the SOA-MZI according to (40) in the Appendix and τd is the SOAs differential carrier lifetime. IV. CONVERSION GAIN RESULTS A. Experimental conditions This section describes the experimental conditions of this work and presents the static experimental results. The setting of the SOA-MZI operating point, which is defined by the bias current ISOAk of SOAs, the center wavelength λck of the sampling signal, the wavelength λdat of the signal to be sampled and the average input powers Pctrl and Pin, is very critical for both architectures. Firstly, the current ISOAk is chosen to be the same for both SOAs, i.e. 360 mA. This value is somewhat lower than that used previously , since it helps to better control the temperature and consequently obtain a more stable response of the SOA-MZI. Furthermore, the wavelength of the signals at the SOA-MZI inputs is selected to be the same for both architectures, so as to ensure a fair comparison between them. Therefore, the signal injected at SOA-MZI input port A and the one injected at input port C are chosen and kept fixed: λctrl at 1550 nm and λin at 1557.4 nm, respectively. Finally, the mean power of the signal at port C is -15 dBm. An Optical Pulse Clock (OPC) source, which is an active mode-locked laser (Pritel model UOC-E-05-20), is driven by an RF generator at a frequency fck equal to 10 GHz and provides an optical pulse train of 2 ps full-width at half-maximum pulses. The center frequency of the Optical Band-Pass Filter (OBPF) placed at each SOA-MZI output is tuned at 1557.4 nm to select the sampled signal produced by the interferometer, while removing the optical signal centered at 1550 nm. The OBPF bandwidth is chosen to be 0.7 nm in order to filter the Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE) noise while permitting the harmonics needed for the 39 GHz up-conversion to pass. The phase-shifters Φ01 and Φ02 in the two arms of the SOA- MZI and the polarization controller (PC2) placed in the path of port C are adjusted so that the optical power at output port J is minimum for both architectures when there is no power at input port A. Secondly, in order to find the Pctrl power that provides the highest possible linearity, a quasi-static characterization with pulses is performed for both architectures. The procedure is similar to the pump- probe static characterization in with the difference that we inject an OPC signal at the appropriate port of SOA-MZI instead of a CW signal. This type of characterization incorporates the dynamics and the behavioral changes caused to the SOA-MZI response by the utilization of pulses compared to the static case. For the Switching architecture, the electrical power recorded in an Electrical Spectrum Analyzer (ESA) is measured at 10 GHz while changing the power of the optical carrier, Pctrl, at λck,s = λctrl (1550 nm) at the input port A. A CW laser source provides a constant signal at the optical carrier λdat,s = λin (1557.4 nm), whose power is set by an optical attenuator at Pin = -15 dBm at SOA-MZI input port C. Afterwards, the second derivative (SD) of the optical modulation power (OMP) of the signal at 10 GHz at SOA-MZI output ports I and J is calculated from a 5th order polynomial data fitting in function of the average optical power, Pctrl, as shown in Fig. 3. When the second derivative is zero, the first derivative is in turn constant and so the SOA-MZI response is linear. The linearity of the operating point is important as it is associated to lower distortion of the sampled signal and therefore of the up-converted signal. Τhe Pctrl power used for conducting the measurements that follow is chosen close to the curves’ intersection point in Fig. 3 and amounts to 0.114 mW (~ - 9.5 dBm). For the Modulation architecture, the power of the CW optical carrier at λdat,m = λctrl (1550 nm) launched at SOA-MZI input port A is controlled while being measured in a power meter. The OPC source generates a signal at λck,m = λin (1557.4 nm), whose average power is adjusted by an attenuator at Pin = -15 dBm at SOA-MZI input port C. According to Fig. 4, the point at which the SD of the SOA- MZI output power at port J crosses zero occurs at 0.04 mW (-14 dBm), which hence is chosen as the Pctrl power for the measurements taken below with the Modulation architecture. This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 6 Fig. 3. Optical Modulation Power (OMP) (right) and its Second Derivative (SD) (left) at 10 GHz at SOA-MZI output ports I and J as a function of the optical power at input port A. Fig. 4. Optical power (right) and its Second Derivative (SD) at SOA-MZI output ports I and J as a function of the optical power at input port A. B. Conversion Gain In order to quantify the performances of the photonic microwave mixer, we have evaluated the electrical conversion gain, CGcki−dat,a. The use of electrical conversion gain instead of optical one permits us to easily compare the small-signal analysis results with the experimental ones. The conversion gain is defined as the squared modulus of the ratio between pJ,cki−dat,a, i.e. the optical output modulation power at frequency fcki−dat of the optical carrier at wavelength λin, and pdat,a ∗ , i.e. the optical input modulation power at frequency fdat. CGcki−dat,a = |pJ,cki−dat,a pdat,a ∗ | 2 (22) Applying (20) and (21) to (22), the electrical conversion gain for the Switching and Modulation architectures is given by (23) and (24), respectively: CGcki−dat,s = |−Ks pcki,sG̅1,sτd 1 + jωckiτd | 2 (23) CGcki−dat,m = |−Km pcki,mG̅1,mτd 1 − jωdatτd | 2 (24) Fig. 5. CG measurement setup for Switching architecture. The inset depicts the output optical spectrum at the 10 % output port of the 10-90 coupler. Att: Attenuator. MZM: Mach-Zehnder Modulator. PC: Polarization Controller. OBPF: Optical Band-Pass Filter (bandwidth 0.7 nm). AMP1: RF Amplifier. OSA: Optical Spectrum Analyzer. RF1, RF2: Radio Frequency generators. ESA: Electrical Spectrum Analyzer, OPC: Optical Pulse Clock source. (1) denotes the direction of transmission from SOA-MZI output ports I and J alternately to the ESA. Eq. (23) and (24) indicate that the CGs exhibit a low-pass filter response, whose cut-off frequency occurs at fc = 1 2πτd . In case where ωck1 is much higher than ωc = 2πfc, while ωdat is lower than ωc, we can make the projection that for the Switching architecture, as the order ‘i’ of ωcki increases, the CG will decrease rapidly following the low-pass filter response of the carrier density. On the other hand, for the Modulation architecture, as ‘i’ increases, the CG is not subject to this drop. The derived small-signal equations show the advantage of the Modulation architecture for frequency up- conversion around higher harmonics of the sampling signal compared to the Switching one. The CG has been calculated using the above small-signal equations and subsequently measured for the frequency up- conversions from fdat = 1 GHz to fck − fdat = 9 GHz (CG9GHz) and to 4fck − fdat = 39 GHz (CG39GHz). The experimental setup used to measure the CG is shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 for the Switching and Modulation architectures, respectively. In both figures, the output spectrum of the sampled signal is given (inset) at the 10% output port of the 10-90 coupler. The signal to be up-converted is produced for both architectures by a CW laser source that is intensity modulated by a MZM, which is driven by an RF generator RF2 at fdat = 1 GHz. This optically carried RF signal is then frequency converted around fcki frequencies. The optical signal emerging from the SOA-MZI I and J outputs is optically filtered by the previously mentioned OBPF. The filtered optical signal is monitored in an Optical Spectrum Analyzer (OSA) using the 10% port of a 90/10 coupler. 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0 2 4 6 8 -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 OMP at 10 GHz (mW) SD of OΜP at 10 GHz Pctrl (mW) SD port I SD port J OMP port I OMP port J Switching Pctrl power 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 -60 -30 0 30 60 Optical power (mW) SD of optical power Pctrl (mW) SD port I SD port J OP port I OP port J Modulation Pctrl power This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 7 From the 90% port of the coupler, the signal is subsequently photodetected by a 75 GHz PIN photodiode whose responsivity is 0.71 A/W. The combined optical loss of the OBPF and the coupler (90% output) is 7.5 dB. The electrical output signal is then amplified by a 33 dB low noise amplifier (AMP 1). The CG is defined as the difference between the electrical power in dBm referenced at the SOA-MZI output at fcki − fdat, and the electrical power in dBm referenced at the SOA-MZI input at fdat. In Fig. 7 we display the measured CG for various modulation index values of the sinusoidal signal to be sampled. Moreover, we show in dash-dot lines the theoretically predicted conversion gain derived using (23) and (24) and the involved parameters values quoted in Table I in the Appendix. For the Modulation architecture the only parameter that changes in (24) between the different up-converted signals is the power of the sampling signal harmonics, pcki,m. Fig. 6. CG measurement setup for Modulation architecture. The inset depicts the optical spectrum of the filtered sampled signal at the 10 % output port of the 10-90 coupler. The rest acronyms are defined as in Fig. 5. (1) denotes the direction of transmission from SOA-MZI output ports I and J alternately to the ESA. There are two reasons behind the CG difference between the two architectures. The first reason is that the operating point is different between the Switching and Modulation architectures as Pctrl is -9.5 dBm for the former and -14 dBm for the latter. The second reason stems from the fact that we have interchanged the sinusoidal signal to be sampled with the mode- locked sampling signal at the input of the SOA-MZI so that the frequency components that participate in the fdat = 1 GHz to fck1−dat = 9 GHz frequency conversion are lightly filtered by the SOA-MZI for the Switching architecture as fck at 10 GHz lies outside the XPM bandwidth (fc = 6 GHz, given in the Appendix), whereas they are not filtered for the Modulation architecture as fdat at 1 GHz lies inside the XPM bandwidth. At fck4−dat = 39 GHz the frequency components that participate in the fdat = 1 GHz to fck4−dat = 39 GHz frequency conversion are strongly filtered by the SOA-MZI for the Switching architecture as 4fck at 40 GHz lies outside the XPM bandwidth, whereas they are not filtered for the Modulation architecture as fdat = 1 GHz lies inside the XPM bandwidth. This explains the increased robustness of the Modulation scheme against the Switching scheme with respect to CG as the up-conversion frequency increases. Fig. 7 shows a good agreement between measured and theoretically calculated CG curves, which confirms the validity and accuracy of the theoretical approach and of its outcomes. Furthermore, it highlights the usability of (23) and (24) in the design, characterization and optimization of the SOA-MZI photonic mixer. The difference in CG between the frequency conversion to 9 GHz and 39 GHz is smaller for the Modulation architecture than for the Switching one. Therefore, although CG is higher for the frequency conversion to 9 GHz when employing the Switching architecture, it is more advantageous to employ the Modulation architecture for the frequency conversion to 39 GHz. Fig. 7. Comparison between CG of the Switching and Modulation architectures: Measured (solid lines) and theoretically calculated (dash-dot lines) CG values for frequency up-conversion at 9 GHz and 39 GHz as a function of the modulation index of Pdat. Moreover, the CG attained by the SOA-MZI photonic mixer does not change significantly with the modulation index variation. Eq. (23) and (24) support this fact as CG is not a function of pdat,a, which in turn is proportional to the modulation index, i.e. pdat,a = mdat,aP̅dat,a, where mdat,a is the modulation index of the sinusoidal signal. Furthermore with respect to the SOA-MZI parameters influence on CG, from Eq. (23), Eq.(24) and Eq. (40) we observe that the electrical CG is inversely proportional to the square of the saturation power, Psat, and to the carrier lifetime τ, both of which depend on the SOA physical properties . Additionally, we remark, considering the other parameters constant (including the ratio G̅1,a G̅2,a), that G̅1,ais proportional to the 4th power of CG (in the electrical domain). Nevertheless, for a given SOA-MZI, G̅1,a, τd, Ka, pcki,a, Psatand τ are interdependent and associated to its operating condition. Therefore the effect of each critical SOA-MZI parameter depends in any case on the exact operating point of the SOA- MZI. 0 5 10 15 20 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 CG (dB) Modulation index of sinusoidal signal Switching 9 GHz Modulation 9 GHz Modulation 39 GHz Switching 39 GHz This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 8 It should be emphasized that in the case where either the input sampling signal or the output sampled signal has to be transmitted over a long distance through an optical fiber, the problem of fiber chromatic distortion must be addressed. One possible solution to compensate for the chromatic dispersion and overcome the associated problem is through using a Dispersion Compensating Fiber (DCF) of appropriate length just before the electro-optic conversion stage. In addition, it is worth noting that this system could be applicable to CWDM and DWDM systems provided that ifck ± fdat is smaller than the channel spacing of the corresponding grid. V. UP-CONVERSION OF COMPLEX-MODULATED DATA EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS The experimental setup of the SOA-MZI photonic frequency up-converter using complex modulation formats is shown in Fig. 8 for the Switching architecture and in Fig. 9 for the Modulation architecture. QPSK and 16-QAM signals are generated by an Arbitrary Waveform Generator (AWG) at a carrier frequency fc = 0.750 GHz. The electrical signal from the AWG modulates an optical carrier, via a MZM, which is injected at the SOA-MZI. In the same way as in the CG experimental setups, the sampled output signal at ports I and J is filtered by the OBPF, photodetected and amplified by the low noise amplifier (AMP 1). Due to the Digital Sampling Oscilloscope (DSO) limited bandwidth (about 1.5 GHz), the up-converted RF signals at 9.250 GHz and 39.250 GHz at the SOA-MZI output are down- converted to IF signals at 450 MHz by an electrical mixer. The electrical power of the local oscillator signal at fRF2 is 13 dBm. The electrical mixer is characterized by a 10 dB conversion loss. Before the DSO, the up-converted signal is filtered by a 1 GHz electrical filter and amplified by a 40 dB electrical amplifier (AMP 2). Fig. 8. Complex modulation measurement setup for Switching architecture. AWG: Arbitrary Waveform Generator. AMP1, AMP2: RF Amplifiers. DSO: Digital Sampling Oscilloscope. The rest acronyms are defined as in Fig. 5. (1) denotes the direction of transmission from SOA-MZI output ports I and J alternatively to the DSO. The quality of the up-converted signals is assessed by measuring the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) via a Vector Signal Analyzer software. This metric is related to the Bit Error Rate (BER), and the acceptable limit is defined as the value that provides an equivalent BER of 3.8 · 10-3, which guarantees error-free performance after applying Forward Error Correction (FEC) techniques . This limit is different for QPSK and 16- QAM modulation formats as indicated by a dashed line in Figs. 10 and 11. These figures show that the up-converted signals at 9.25 GHz and 39.25 GHz using the Modulation architecture have very similar quality in terms of EVM, in contrast to significant differences observed when using the Switching architecture. This is explained by the small-signal equation analysis presented in Section III and stems from the different principle of operation of the two architectures. Using the Modulation architecture, we can perform up-conversion even at high harmonics without significant degradation of the up- converted signal quality. Fig. 9. Complex modulation measurement setup for Modulation architecture. PM: Power Meter. The rest acronyms are defined as in Fig. 5. (1) denotes the direction of transmission from SOA-MZI output ports I and J alternatively to the DSO. In Fig.10, for QPSK-modulated data, a baud rate of 512 MBaud is achieved for frequency conversions from 0.75 GHz to 9.25 GHz and from 0.75 GHz to 39.25 GHz under the FEC limit of 3.8 · 10-3 when employing the Modulation architecture. On the other hand, the Switching architecture performance deteriorates rapidly as the baud rate increases, reaching the limit of EVM ~ 35% for the conversion towards 39.25 GHz and approximating EVM = 25% for the conversion towards 9.25 GHz at a baud rate of 256 MBaud. Measurements at a baud rate of 512 MBaud for the Switching architecture for the conversion to 39.25 GHz and even to 9.25 GHz have resulted in significantly distorted constellation diagrams and EVM values higher than 37%, and therefore they have not been included in Fig.10. Comparing the inset constellation diagrams in Fig.10 it can be deduced that the QPSK signal for the Switching architecture between 9.25 GHz and 39.25 GHz is significantly deteriorated even for a lower baud rate, whereas comparing the inset constellation diagrams for the Modulation architecture it can be inferred that the QPSK signal for the Modulation architecture between 9.25 GHz and 39.25 GHz remains almost unchanged and clear. This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 9 Fig. 10. EVM vs. baud rate comparison between Switching and Modulation architectures for frequency up-conversion of QPSK-modulated data at 9.25 GHz and 39.25 GHz. The EVM of the input signal at 0.75 GHz to be up- converted is plotted as a reference. The insets depict constellation diagrams at specific points. EVM acceptable limit is indicated by the horizontal dashed line. Fig. 11. EVM vs. baud rate comparison between Switching and Modulation architectures for frequency up-conversion of 16-QAM modulated data at 9.25 GHz and 39.25 GHz. The EVM of the input signal at 0.75 GHz to be up- converted is plotted as a reference The insets depict constellation diagrams at specific points. EVM acceptable limit is indicated by the horizontal dashed line. In Fig. 11, a baud rate of 128 Mbaud is achieved for 16-QAM modulated data with the Modulation architecture for frequency conversions from 0.75 GHz to 9.25 GHz and from 0.75 GHz to 39.25 GHz under the FEC limit of 3.8 · 10-3. The same holds for the Switching architecture for frequency conversions from 0.75 GHz to 9.25 GHz. Conversely, for frequency conversions from 0.75 GHz to 39.25 GHz only a baud rate up to 32 Mbaud is acceptable. It is worth noting that if we observe more closely the 16-QAM constellation diagrams in Fig. 11, we realize that their shape is not perfectly squared and that the demodulated symbols corresponding to the four diagonal outer points are misplaced towards the center, thus giving the impression that the constellation diagrams are compressed to the center of the constellation. This is rather a sign of amplitude distortion than of phase distortion. 16-QAM modulation is more demanding as the Euclidean distance between symbols in the constellation diagram is smaller . Thus, the highest acceptable baud rate for QPSK is 512 MBaud (bit rate equal to 1 Gb/s), while it is 128 MBaud (bit rate equal to 512 Mb/s) for 16-QAM. VI. CONCLUSION We have presented a theoretical and experimental analysis of the performance differences between Switching and Modulation architectures of a SOA-MZI photonic mixer used for frequency up-conversion purposes. In the theoretical part, a closed-form expression has been derived for the conversion gain, which provides qualitative insight into this metric of the two architectures as higher harmonics of the sampling signal participate in the frequency conversion. In the experimental part, a conversion gain equal to 16 dB is achieved for the 1 GHz to 9 GHz conversion when employing the Switching architecture, while a conversion gain equal to 9 dB is achieved for the 1 GHz to 39 GHz conversion when employing the Modulation architecture. The matching between the experimental and theoretical results for the conversion gain is very good. The conversion of complex-modulated data signals has also been realized by the photonic microwave mixer. We have thus obtained a sufficiently low EVM for QPSK and 16- QAM modulations when employing the Modulation architecture for both 0.75 GHz to 9.25 GHz and 0.75 GHz to 39.25 GHz frequency conversion. This allows to support a data bit rate equal to 1 Gbps and 512 Mbps for QPSK and 16-QAM, respectively. APPENDIX A. Carrier Density Variation The gain of SOAk as well as the partial derivative of the gain with respect to carrier density are given by the following equations : Gk(Nk) = eΓak(Nk−N0)L+aintL (25) ∂Gk ∂Nk = ΓakLG̅k (26) with L the active region length, Γ the optical confinement factor in the active area, ak the peak-gain coefficient, N0 the carrier density at transparency, and aint the internal losses, of the SOAs. The phase shift of the optical signal induced by SOAk as well as its partial derivative with respect to the carrier density are given by : 0 10 20 30 40 0 128 256 384 512 EVM (%) Baud rate (MBaud) Switching 9.25 GHz Switching 39.25 GHz Modulation 9.25 GHz Modulation 39.25 GHz Input 0.75 GHz BER = 3.8·10-3 4 8 12 16 0 32 64 96 128 EVM (%) Baud rate (MBaud) Switching 9.25 GHz Switching 39.25 GHz Modulation 9.25 GHz Modulation 39.25 GHz Input 0.75 GHz BER = 3.8·10-3 This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 10 Φk = − αΗ 2 ln(Gk) = − αΗ 2 [Γak(Nk − N0)L + aintL] (27) ∂Φk ∂Nk = − αΗ 2 ΓakL (28) where αΗ is the linewidth enhancement factor (Henry's factor). Taking into account (27) and assuming identical αΗ and aint values for both SOAs, the differential phase shift between the two arms of the SOA-MZI equals: Φ̅1,a − Φ̅2,a = − αΗ 2 ln (G̅1,a G̅2,a ) (29) Assuming for simplicity that the differential carrier lifetime τd is approximately the same for SOA1 between Switching and Modulation architectures, the first-order variation imposed on the carrier density is given by : n1,ωcki,a = − pcki,a ∂R1,cki,a ∂P1,cki,a τd ηa(1 + jωckiτd) (30) n1,ωdat,a ∗ = − pdat,a ∗ ∂R1,dat,a ∂P1,dat,a τd κa(1 − jωdatτd) (31) where ηa and κa are the attenuation coefficients of pcki,a and pdat,a ∗ because of the intermediate couplers between the SOA- MZI input ports and SOA1 input according to Fig.2. The second-order density variation of the carrier density is given by : n1,ωcki−dat,a = − (n1,ωcki,a pdat,a ∗ κa ∂2R1,dat,a ∂N1∂P1,dat,a + n1,ωdat,a ∗ pcki,a ηa ∂2R1,cki,a ∂N1∂P1,cki,a ) × τd 2(1 + j(ωcki − ωdat)τd) (32) R1,cki,a and R1,dat,a are the recombination rates due to the amplification of the optical carriers at angular frequencies ωcki and ωdat, respectively, and are given by the following equations : R1,cki,a = P1,cki,aλcki,a hc Γgm,cki,a gn,cki,a G̅1,a − 1 wdL (33) R1,dat,a = P1,dat,aλdat,a hc Γgm,dat,a gn,dat,a G̅1,a − 1 wdL (34) where h is Plank’s constant, c is the speed of light in vacuum, gm,cki,a and gn,cki,a are the SOAs material gain and net gain at wavelength λcki,a, gm,dat,a and gn,dat,a are the SOAs material gain and net gain at wavelength λdat,a, and w and d are the SOAs width and height of the active area, respectively. Using the approximations Γgm,cki,a ≈ gn,cki,a, Γgm,dat,a ≈ gn,dat,a, G1,a − 1 ≈ G1,a and λ ≈ λck,s ≈ λdat,s as in , we obtain: ∂R1,cki,a ∂P1,cki,a = ∂R1,dat,a ∂P1,dat,a = KG̅1,a(N1) (35) where K is a constant defined by: K = λ hcwdL (36) Applying (35) to (30) and (31), we obtain: n1,ωcki,a = − pcki,aKG̅1,a(N1)τd ηa(1 + jωckiτd) (37) n1,ωdat,a ∗ = − pdat,a ∗ KG̅1,a(N1)τd κa(1 − jωdatτd) (38) B. Saturation power The saturation power Psat of SOA1 is defined in : Psat = hcwd λΓa1τ (39) where τ is the carrier lifetime. Finally, Ka is a constant defined by: Ka = KCOPa 32 ⇒ Ka = G̅1,a 32Psatτ [1 − √G̅2,a G̅1,a [cos (− αΗ 2 ln (G̅1,a G̅2,a )) + αΗ sin (− αΗ 2 ln (G̅1,a G̅2,a (40) C. SOA-MZI model parameters The differential carrier lifetime τd is estimated by measuring the SOA-MZI bandwidth using a pump-probe technique and taking into account that the measured cut-off frequency of 6 GHz equals 1 2πτd . The optical power, pcki,a, required for the small-signal analysis calculations is derived from RF spectra for the Switching and Modulation architectures. These spectra were taken after photodetection and amplification of the OPC signal at the average power and center wavelength specified in Section IV. We know that the photodetected current is defined as: Iph = pcki,ar (41) This is the author's version of an article that has been published in this journal. Changes were made to this version by the publisher prior to publication. The final version of record is available at http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JLT.2020.3011577 Copyright (c) 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted. For any other purposes, permission must be obtained from the IEEE by emailing pubs-permissions@ieee.org. 11 where r (0.71 A/W) is the responsitivity of the PIN photodiode. The electrical power for harmonic ‘i’ measured at the ESA is equal to: peli,a = GampIrms 2 Z = Gamp Iph 2 2 Z (42) where Gamp (33 dB) is the gain of the RF amplifier, Irms is the root mean square value of the photodetected currect and Z (50 Ω) is the load resistance of the photodetector. Therefore, applying (41) to (42) and solving for the optical power pcki,a we obtain: pcki,a = 1 r √ 2peli,a GampZ (43) model used for the CG calculation.