The origin of strain-induced stabilisation of superconductivity in the lanthanum cuprates Christopher Keegan,1 Mark S. Senn,2 Nicholas C. Bristowe,3 and Arash A. Mostofi1, ∗ 1Departments of Physics and Materials, and the Thomas Young Centre, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom 2Department of Chemistry, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill, Coventry, CV4 7AL, United Kingdom 3Centre for Materials Physics, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, United Kingdom (Dated: March 7, 2023) Abstract Suppression of superconductivity in favour of a striped phase, and its coincidence with a structural transition from a low- temperature orthorhombic (LTO) to a low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) phase, is a ubiquitous feature of hole-doped lanthanum cuprates. We study the effect of anisotropic strain on this transition using density-functional theory on both La2CuO4 and the recently-synthesised surrogate La2MgO4 to decouple electronic and structural effects. Strikingly, we find that compressive strain applied diagonally to the in-plane metal-oxygen bonds dramatically stabilises the LTO phase. Given the mutual exclusivity of 3D superconductivity and long-range static stripe order, we thereby suggest a structural mechanism for understanding experimentally-observed trends in the superconducting Tc under uniaxial pressure, and suggest principles for tuning it. I. INTRODUCTION Since the discovery of a superconducting transition temperature of Tc = 27 K in La2–xBaxCuO4 (LBCO) , the lanthanum cuprates have become the paradig- matic class of materials for studying high-Tc cuprates. Lanthanum cuprates undergo a second-order struc- tural phase transition from a high-temperature tetrag- onal (HTT) I4/mmm phase, to a low-temperature or- thorhombic (LTO) Bmab phase in which the CuO6 octahedra tilt along an axis at 45° to the in-plane Cu–O bonds, as shown in Fig. 1a. In the case of La2–xAxCuO4 (A = Ba, Nd/Sr or Eu/Sr) and x ≃ 1/8, there is an additional phase tran- sition from LTO to a low-temperature tetragonal (LTT) P42/ncm phase [3–5]. The LTT phase features an octa- hedral tilt along the Cu–O bonds (Fig. 1b), which alter- nates between the HTT and HTT directions in adjacent layers . In LBCO, for example, the LTO- LTT phase transition coincides with a dramatic drop in Tc , which is attributed to the stabilisation of charge- stripe order that competes with 3D superconduc- tivity . Experiments have shown that both hydro- static and anisotropic pressure influence Tc and stripe- order in the lanthanum cuprates [11–20]. Tc increases with the application of uniaxial pressure in the CuO2 plane , and the enhancement is more substantial when pressure is applied at 45° to the Cu–O bond axis as compared to parallel to it . This effect has been attributed to the destabilisation of static stripe order , a reduction of the CuO6 octahedral tilt angle in the LTT phase , and a suppression of the LTO- LTT phase transition temperature . These ∗ a.mostofi@imperial.ac.uk HTT HTT HTT HTT HTT a) b) c) LTO LTT a-b) Layering-axis view of the CuO2 planes in the a) low-temperature orthorhombic (LTO) and b) low- temperature tetragonal (LTT) phases of La2CuO4. The black arrows indicate the displacement of the apical oxygen associ- ated with the octahedral tilt, which is at 45° to and along the Cu–O bond in the LTO and LTT phases, respectively. c) High-temperature tetragonal (HTT) phase with untilted CuO6 octahedra. The HTT, HTT and HTT di- rections, along which we apply uniaxial strain, are indicated. interpretations are consistent with recent X-ray scatter- ing experiments that have measured marked reductions in the temperatures associated with the LTO-LTT phase transition and onset of static stripe order when uniaxial pressure is applied along HTT . From the perspective of theory, the importance of strong electron correlations in the lanthanum cuprates poses significant challenges for understanding the physics of these systems and, of particular relevance to this work, the underlying mechanisms behind the experimental ob- servations described above. Recently, to circumnavigate this problem, we synthe- sised and studied a novel structural surrogate of the lan- thanum cuprates, namely La2MgO4 . La2MgO4 is an insulator that does not exhibit anti-ferromagnetic order, Jahn-Teller distortions, or the charge-transfer band gap associated with strongly correlated electronic phases in 1 arXiv:2302.09588v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Mar 2023 the lanthanum cuprates. Conveniently, Mg2+ (0.73 ̊A) and Cu2+ (0.72 ̊A) have almost identical ionic radii , and La2MgO4 exhibits the same series of structural phase transitions (HTT-LTO-LTT) as the lanthanum cuprates . This indicates that the LTO-LTT phase transition can present itself independently of any electronic or mag- netic order, and provides an opportunity to investigate the mechanism underlying this phase transition in a sys- tem in which strong electron correlation is absent. In this work, we investigate the effect of uniaxial strain on the structural phase stability of La2MgO4 and La2CuO4 using first-principles calculations based on density-functional theory (DFT). We show that uniaxial compressive strain in the MgO2 plane energetically sta- bilises the LTO phase relative to the LTT phase. This effect is enhanced when the strain direction is at 45° to the Mg–O bond directions (HTT) as compared to when it is parallel (HTT). This contrasts with uni- axial strain along the layering axis (HTT), which has the opposite effect. We find that La2CuO4 exhibits qual- itatively the same behaviour. We compare our calculated stabilisation energies to experimental measurements of Tc in a lanthanum cuprate under different uniaxial pressure conditions and show that there is a remarkable cor- relation. We suggest that the mechanism underlying this correlation may be due to phase coexistence of LTO and LTT in experiments, whereby the phase fraction of LTO increases with increasing in-plane uniaxial pressure and, hence, enables the development of 3D superconductivity in the sample. II. METHODS A. Total energy calculations We calculate the ground-state atomic and electronic structures of La2BO4 (B = Mg, Cu) within density- functional theory as implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO plane-wave pseudopotential software pack- age . We use the PBEsol generalised gradient approximation (GGA) to describe exchange and corre- lation, and ultrasoft pseudopotentials from the GBRV library . We apply a Hubbard U of 9 eV to Cu 3d orbitals and of 4 eV to La 4f orbitals. We use a 60 Ry energy cutoff for the plane-wave basis expansion of the Kohn-Sham eigenstates, with an eight-times higher cut- off energy to represent the electronic charge density and augmentation regions associated with the ultrasoft pseu- dopotentials. For LTO and LTT, we use √ 2 × √ 2 × 1 real-space supercells of the HTT parent conventional unit cell. In the case of LTO and LTT, we sample the Bril- louin zone with a regular Monkhorst-Pack mesh of dimen- sions 5 × 5 × 2 for La2MgO4 and 8 × 8 × 4 for La2CuO4. For HTT, we use 8 × 8 × 4 and 10 × 10 × 4, respec- tively. All atomic positions and lattice vectors are fully relaxed, with total energies converged to within 10−9 Ry, ionic forces to within 10−5 Ry a−1 0 and stresses to within 5 MPa. We apply uniaxial strain by varying the relevant lattice parameter, and constraining it while allowing all other degrees of freedom to relax. We define strain, ε, as ε = ξ − ξ0 ξ0 , (1) where ξ is the relevant lattice parameter, and ξ0 = 1 2(aLTO 0 + bLTO 0 ) or cLTO 0 is the average of the in-plane, or the c-axis, lattice parameters of the fully-relaxed LTO phase. Further details of the computational methods can be found in Sec. S1 of the Supplementary Information . B. Symmetry analysis We describe the relationship of the low-symmetry LTO and LTT phases relative to the parent HTT phase using a two-dimensional order parameter (OP) transforming as the X+ 3 (a;b) irreducible representation (irrep). The OP corresponds to the octahedral BO6 tilt. The OP mag- nitude is the norm of the X+ 3 (a;b) irrep, and the OP direction is defined as the angle φ = arctan(b/a). OP directions of 0° (X+ 3 (a;0)) or 90° (X+ 3 (0;a)) correspond to the LTO phase, and an OP direction of 45° (X+ 3 (a;a)) corresponds to the LTT phase. Intermediate OP direc- tions correspond to a structure consistent with space- group symmetry of the Pccn subgroup. We determined space-group symmetry using FINDSYM , and irreps associated with the OP using ISODISTORT from the ISOTROPY software suite. We visualised crystal struc- tures in CIF format using the VESTA 3D visualisation program and used it to create the images in Fig. 1. III. RESULTS A. Ground state structure and energetics of La2BO4 (B = Cu, Mg) For both La2MgO4 and La2CuO4, our calculated lat- tice parameters, unit cell volumes, B–O and La–O bond lengths are in good agreement with experimental values measured at 10 K (within 1.5%, 1.8% and 2%, respec- tively) . La2MgO4 exhibits a 4.4% contraction of the layering axis, and a 7.8% contraction in the axial oc- tahedral bond length as compared to La2CuO4. Further, we compute the magnitude of the Jahn-Teller Q3 modes as Q3 = 2(l − s) √ 2 , (2) where l and s are the axial and equatorial octahedral bond lengths, respectively. We find that the Q3 mode in La2CuO4 (LTO) is 0.71 ̊A as compared to 0.35 ̊A in La2MgO4 (LTT). These values match corresponding Q3 2 modes in experimental I4/mmm structures for La2CuO4 (ICSD ref. 41643 : Q3 = 0.74 ̊A) and La2MgO4 (Tidey et al. 900 K structure : Q3 = 0.43 ̊A). This demonstrates the ability of our calculations to capture the Jahn-Teller distortion in La2CuO4. We find that in both La2MgO4 and La2CuO4 the lowest-energy phase is LTT, followed by LTO and then HTT. In La2MgO4 the energy difference between the LTO and LTT phases is 11.7 meV per formula unit (f.u.), whereas in La2CuO4 it is much smaller at 2.4 meV/(f.u.), as also reported previ- ously . Related DFT calculations on La2CuO4 using the SCAN meta-GGA functional for exchange and corre- lation have similarly found a very small energy difference between the LTT and LTO phases of 1.2 meV/(f.u.) and less than 0.5 meV/(f.u.) . Although the lowest energy structure in these previous calculations is the LTO phase, the very similar energies of LTO and LTT suggests that these phases are closely competing. B. Effect of uniaxial strain on the ground-state structure of La2MgO4 (black), LTT (red) and LTO (blue) phases of La2MgO4 as a function of compressive uniaxial strain along the HTT, HTT and HTT axes. In the case of strain along the HTT axis (Figure 2a), there are two curves for the LTO phase, which correspond to strain applied along the largest and smallest in-plane axis; the opaque blue curve highlights the lowest energy LTO phase at each given strain. Further details of the im- plementation of the strained total-energy calculations is given in Sec. S1 of the Supplementary Information . It can be seen that compressive strain in the out-of-plane di- rection (i.e., along HTT) further destabilises the LTO phase relative to LTT. Conversely, compressive uniaxial in-plane strain (i.e., along HTT and HTT) has the opposite effect and stabilises the LTO phase. tion as a function of compressive strain for the LTT and LTO phases. Angles of 0° and 90° correspond to the LTO phase, and 45° corresponds to the LTT phase. It can be seen that only strain along HTT causes the OP di- rection of the LTT phase to change, which happens pro- gressively until it converges to 0° (90°) under compressive (tensile) strain. In this strain regime, the space-group symmetry of the LTT phase changes to Pccn, which al- lows the OP to rotate continuously towards the LTO phase. Strain along either HTT or HTT does not change the OP direction of either the LTO or LTT phase. The background shading in Figure 2 indicates the lowest energy phase for each given value of strain. In Figure 3, we compare the regions of stability of the HTT, LTT and LTO phases of La2MgO4 and La2CuO4 under the three uniaxial strain regimes. We find that the behaviour of La2CuO4 is qualitatively very similar to that of La2MgO4, highlighting the similar response 0 50 100 150 200 E (meV/(f.u.)) a) HTT b) HTT c) HTT 8 4 0 4 8 0° 15° 30° 45° 60° 75° 90° OP direction d) LTO LTT HTT 8 4 0 4 8 Compressive strain (%) e) 8 4 0 4 8 f) LTO LTT LTO a-c) Total energy, relative to the relaxed LTT phase, of the LTO, LTT and HTT phases of La2MgO4 as a function of uniaxial compressive strain along the a) HTT, b) HTT and c) HTT axes. d-f) Order parameter (OP) direction as a function of uniaxial compressive strain along the d) HTT, e) HTT and f) HTT axes. OP directions of 0° and 90° correspond to the LTO phase, and of 45° to the LTT phase. The shading indicates the lowest energy phase at each strain, either LTT (red) or LTO (blue). La2MgO4 HTT HTT HTT -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 La2CuO4 -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 Compressive strain (%) -12 -8 -4 0 4 8 12 LTT LTO Regions of stability of the LTT (red) and LTO (blue) phases of La2BO4 (B = Cu, Mg) as a function of uniaxial compressive strain along the HTT, HTT and HTT axes. The data underlying the La2CuO4 phase dia- gram is shown in Figure S1 in the Supplementary Information . to strain in both systems, and thus the ability of the La2MgO4 to serve as a useful structural surrogate to the lanthanum cuprates. The magnitude of the strain at which the LTO phase is stabilised in La2CuO4 is smaller than in La2MgO4, and this can be understood from the much smaller energy difference between the LTO and LTT phases in unstrained La2CuO4 as compared to un- strained La2MgO4. Fig. 4a shows the change in relative stability of 3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 Compressive strain (%) 1 0 1 2 3 (ELTT ELTO) (meV/(f.u.)) a) La2CuO4 La2MgO4 0 1 2 3 4 Pressure (kbar) 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 Tc (K) b) HTT HTT HTT a) The change in the energy difference between the LTT and LTO phases as a function of compressive strain in La2BO4 (B = Cu, Mg) for uniaxial strain applied along the HTT, HTT and HTT axes. b) Variation in superconducting Tc as a function of uniaxial pressure ap- plied along the HTT, HTT and HTT axes in La1.64Eu0.2Sr0.16CuO4. Data replotted from . the LTT and LTO phases for La2MgO4 (blue lines) and La2CuO4 (red lines) as a function of compressive uniaxial strain along the HTT (dot-dashed lines), HTT (solid lines) and HTT (dashed lines) axes. It can be seen that out-of-plane uniaxial compressive strain destabilises the LTO phase relative to the LTT phase. Conversely, however, in-plane uniaxial compres- sive strain stabilises the LTO phase and the effect is more significant for strain along the HTT direction than for the HTT direction. We compare these trends to measurements of the superconducting Tc in La1.64Eu0.2Sr0.16CuO4 as a function of compressive pres- sure along the same three axes, conducted by Takeshita et al. and reproduced in Fig. 4b, noting that 4 kbar corresponds approximately to 0.24% compressive strain in these systems. There is an evident correlation be- tween the change in relative stability of the LTT and LTO phases as a function of compressive strain and the evolution of Tc. A natural question arises: what is the origin of this correspondence? Takeshita et al. , assuming their sample to be en- tirely composed of the LTT phase, interpreted their result as the manifestation of strong coupling between uniax- ial strain and stripe order. They reasoned that stripes, which form along the Cu–O bond direction, with a 90° rotation of the stripe direction in adjacent CuO2 planes, are more effectively destabilised by uniaxial pressure at 45° to the stripe direction (i.e., along HTT) than along it (i.e., HTT), since the latter is more commen- surate with local stripe symmetry. The destabilisation of stripe order renders it less effective at competing with the superconducting state for the ground state, hence the observed increase in Tc, particularly when pressure is applied along HTT. Very recently, however, we have shown that in both LBCO (x = 0.125) and LESCO (x = 0.125, y = 0.12), significant phase coexistence per- sists between LTT and LTO (or Pccn) domains down to temperatures as low as 10 K. It is likely, therefore, that the sample studied by Takeshita et al. also exhibited significant phase coexistence. Indeed, it is not unreason- able to expect a significant LTO phase fraction for the sample to exhibit the reported 3D superconductivity, and H ̈ucker et al. also suggested that the sample studied by Takeshita et al. may have undergone a phase transi- tion from LTT to LTO. In light of these observations, we suggest an alternative explanation for the enhancement of Tc under uniaxial pressure that is based on phase coex- istence, and is consistent with our calculated energetics of the LTT and LTO phases as a function of uniaxial strain. We assume a sample that has coexisting LTT and LTO grains, and that 3D superconductivity arises as a result of phase coherence developing between patches of LTO phase . It has been found that 2D superconductivity arises at the onset temperature of static spin-stripe or- der , but that the phase coherence of the interlayer Josephson coupling is frustrated due to the alternating stripe direction in the LTT phase . This prevents 3D superconductivity from evolving in the latter phase. When in-plane uniaxial compressive strain is applied, the LTO phase is stabilised with respect to LTT and, hence, the equilibrium phase fraction of LTO should be expected to increase. As the phase fraction of LTO phase increases, the average separation of the LTO regions decreases and, hence, superconducting phase coherence develops more easily, which manifests itself as an observed increase in Tc. This scenario is consistent with recent results that demonstrate a significant decrease in the LTO-LTT phase transition temperature for a La1.48Nd0.4Sr0.12CuO4 sam- ple , and an increase in 3D superconducting Tc when uniaxial stress is applied. Tranquada consid- ered a similar scenario to explain the occurrence of su- perconductivity in LBCO (x = 1/8) at low temperatures. Tranquada considered that coherence could develop be- tween dilute patches of uniform d-wave order, giving rise to 3D superconductivity. In Tranquada’s scenario, the di- lute patches are ascribed to doping inhomogeneity . In our scenario, we view these dilute patches as being re- lated to the LTO and LTT phase coexistence and domain structure. It is of course entirely possible that LTO/LTT domains nucleate preferentially around areas of charge in- homogeneity, meaning these scenarios are not mutually exclusive. In conclusion, we have investigated the effect of uniax- ial strain on the structural phase stability of La2MgO4 and La2CuO4 using first-principles density-functional theory calculations. Our results show clearly that com- pressive uniaxial strain applied in the BO2 (B = Mg, Cu) plane stabilises the LTO phase relative to LTT, and that the effect is most dramatic when the strain is applied at 45° to the B–O bonds. Strikingly, we find a strong positive correlation between our calculated stabilisation of the LTO phase and previous experimental measure- ments of superconducting Tc in the lanthanum cuprates under uniaxial pressure. We have proposed a mechanism to explain this correlation that is based upon phase co- herence developing between patches of superconducting LTO phase that are in coexistence with the LTT phase. 4 In-plane compressive uniaxial strain stabilises the LTO phase, increases its volume phase fraction, and thereby permits 3D superconductivity to persist to higher tem- peratures. Our results point to a general strategy for tuning superconductivity in this class of materials. C. Note on strain-pressure conversion We justify the comparison of uniaxial pressure and compressive strain in Fig. 4 by noting that the in-plane Young’s modulus of La2CuO4 at 44 K is ∼167 GPa . Assuming linear elasticity, a uniaxial stress of 4 kbar (0.4 GPa) would then induce a compressive strain of ap- proximately 0.24%. DATA AVAILABILITY Input and output files for all calculations used in this work, or support our findings have been made available in a figshare repository and can be accessed using the dig- ital object identifier: doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare. J. G. Bednorz and K. A. M ̈uller, ‘Possible high-T super- conductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system,’ Zeitschrift f ̈ur Physik B – Condensed Matter 64, 189–193 (1986). D. M. Paul, G. Balakrishnan, N. R. Bernhoeft, W. I. F. David, and W. T. A. Harrison, ‘Anomalous Struc- tural Behavior of the Superconducting Compound La1.85Ba0.15CuO4,’ Physical Review Letters 58, 1976– J. D. Axe, A. H. Moudden, D. Hohlwein, D. E. Cox, K. M. Mohanty, A. R. Moodenbaugh, and Youwen Xu, ‘Structural phase transformations and superconductivity in La2−xBaxCuO4,’ Physical Review Letters 62, 2751– D. E. Cox, P. Zolliker, J. D. Axe, A. H. Moudden, A. R. Moodenbaugh, and Y. Xu, ‘Structural Studies of La2−xBaxCuO4 Between 11–293 K,’ MRS Proceedings M. K. Crawford, R. L. Harlow, E. M. McCarron, W. E. Farneth, J. D. Axe, H. Chou, and Q. Huang, ‘Lattice instabilities and the effect of copper-oxygen-sheet distor- tions on superconductivity in doped La2CuO4,’ Physical Review B 44, 7749–7752 (1991). Takashi Suzuki and Toshizo Fujita, ‘Anomalous Change in Crystalline Structure of (La1−xBax)2CuO4−δ,’ Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 58, 1883–1886 (1989). A. R. Moodenbaugh, Youwen Xu, M. Suenaga, T. J. Folkerts, and R. N. Shelton, ‘Superconducting properties of La2−xBaxCuO4,’ Physical Review B 38, 4596–4600 M H ̈ucker, M V Zimmermann, G D Gu, Z J Xu, J S Wen, Guangyong Xu, H J Kang, A Zheludev, and J M Tran- quada, ‘Stripe order in superconducting La2−xBaxCuO4 (0.095 ≤ x ≤ 0.155),’ Physical Review B 83, 104506 M. H ̈ucker, ‘Structural aspects of materials with static stripe order,’ Physica C: Superconductivity 481, 3–14 J. D. Axe and M. K. Crawford, ‘Structural instabilities in lanthanum cuprate superconductors,’ Journal of Low Temperature Physics 95, 271–284 (1994). Chizuko Murayama, Tsuyoshi Tamegai, Yasuhiro Iye, Nobuo Mˆori, Isamu Oguro, Shusuke Yomo, Hideroni Tak- agi, Shinichi Uchida, and Yoshinori Tokura, ‘Pressure effect on the transport properties in the low tempera- ture phase of La1.875Ba0.125CuO4,’ Physica B: Physics of Condensed Matter 169, 639–640 (1991). N. Yamada and M. Ido, ‘Pressure effects on superconduc- tivity and structural phase transitions in La2−xMxCuO4 (M = Ba, Sr),’ Physica C: Superconductivity and its ap- plications 203, 240–246 (1992). Susumu Katano, Satoru Funahashi, Nobuo Mˆori, Yutaka Ueda, and Jaime A. Fernandez-Baca, ‘Pressure effects on the structural phase transitions and superconductivity of La2−xBaxCuO4 (x = 0.125),’ Physical Review B 48, S. Arumugam, N. Mˆori, N. Takeshita, H. Takashima, T. Noda, H. Eisaki, and S. Uchida, ‘Competi- tion of Static Stripe and Superconducting Phases in La1.48Nd0.4Sr0.12CuO4 Controlled by Pressure,’ Physical Review Letters 88, 4 (2002). S Arumugam, K Mydeen, N Manivannan, N Mori, M Ohashi, T Mori, N Takeshita, T Noda, H Eisaki, and S Uchida, ‘Hydrostatic and uniaxial pressure effect on la1.45sr0.15nd0.4cuo4 single crystal,’ Physica C: Super- conductivity 378-381, 192–194 (2002). Nao Takeshita, Takao Sasagawa, Takenari Sugioka, Yoshinori Tokura, and Hidenori Takagi, ‘Gigantic anisotropic uniaxial pressure effect on superconductivity within the CuO2 plane of La1.64Eu0.2Sr0.16CuO4: Strain control of stripe criticality,’ Journal of the Physical Soci- ety of Japan 73, 1123–1126 (2004). M. H ̈ucker, M. V. Zimmermann, M. Debessai, J. S. Schilling, J. M. Tranquada, and G. D. Gu, ‘Spontaneous symmetry breaking by charge stripes in the high pressure phase of superconducting La1.875Ba0.125CuO4,’ Physical Review Letters 104, 057004 (2010). Z. Guguchia, D. Das, C. N. Wang, T. Adachi, N. Ki- tajima, M. Elender, F. Br ̈uckner, S. Ghosh, V. Gri- nenko, T. Shiroka, M. M ̈uller, C. Mudry, C. Baines, M. Bartkowiak, Y. Koike, A. Amato, J. M. Tranquada, H. H. Klauss, C. W. Hicks, and H. Luetkens, ‘Using Uni- axial Stress to Probe the Relationship between Compet- ing Superconducting States in a Cuprate with Spin-stripe Order,’ Physical Review Letters 125, 97005 (2020). T. J. Boyle, M. Walker, A. Ruiz, E. Schierle, Z. Zhao, F. Boschini, R. Sutarto, T. D. Boyko, W. Moore, N. Tamura, F. He, E. Weschke, A. Gozar, W. Peng, A. C. Komarek, A. Damascelli, C. Sch ̈ußler-Langeheine, A. Frano, E. H. Da Silva Neto, and S. Blanco-Canosa, ‘Large response of charge stripes to uniaxial stress in La1.475Nd0.4Sr0.125CuO4,’ Physical Review Research 3, 5 Z. Guguchia, D. Das, G. Simutis, T. Adachi, J. K ̈uspert, N. Kitajima, M. Elender, V. Grinenko, O. Ivashko, M. v. Zimmermann, M. M ̈uller, C. Mielke, F. Hotz, C. Mudry, C. Baines, M. Bartkowiak, T. Shiroka, Y. Koike, A. Am- ato, C. W. Hicks, G. D. Gu, J. M. Tranquada, H. H. Klauss, J. J. Chang, M. Janoschek, and H. Luetkens, ‘Designing the stripe-ordered cuprate phase diagram through uniaxial-stress,’ (2023). J. M. Tranquada, ‘Cuprate superconductors as viewed through a striped lens,’ Advances in Physics 69, 437–509 Jeremiah P. Tidey, Christopher Keegan, Nicholas C. Bristowe, Arash A. Mostofi, Zih-Mei Hong, Bo-Hao Chen, Yu-Chun Chuang, Wei-Tin Chen, and Mark S. Senn, ‘Structural origins of the low-temperature or- thorhombic to low-temperature tetragonal phase transi- tion in high-Tc cuprates,’ Physical Review B 106, 1–6 R. D. Shannon, ‘Revised effective ionic radii and sys- tematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides,’ Acta Crystallographica Section A 32, P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ- cioni, I. Dabo, A. Dal Corso, S. de Gironcoli, S. Fabris, G. Fratesi, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, C. Gougoussis, A. Kokalj, M. Lazzeri, L. Martin-Samos, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, R. Mazzarello, S. Paolini, A. Pasquarello, L. Paulatto, C. Sbraccia, S. Scandolo, G. Sclauzero, A. P. Seitsonen, A. Smogunov, P. Umari, and R. M. Wentz- covitch, ‘Quantum espresso: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simulations of materials,’ Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, 395502 (19pp) P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D Ceresoli, M Cococcioni, N Colonna, I. Carnimeo, A. D. Corso, S. de Gironcoli, P. Delugas, R. A. Jr. DiStasio, A. Ferretti, A. Floris, G. Fratesi, G. Fugallo, R. Gebauer, U. Gerstmann, F. Giustino, T. Gorni, J. Jia, M. Kawa- mura, H.-Y. Ko, A. Kokalj, E. K ̈u ̧c ̈ukbenli, M. Lazzeri, M. Marsili, N. Marzari, F. Mauri, N. L. Nguyen, H.- V. Nguyen, A. Otero de-la Roza, L. Paulatto, S. Ponc ́e, D. Rocca, R. Sabatini, B. Santra, M. Schlipf, A. P. Seitso- nen, A. Smogunov, I. Timrov, T. Thonhauser, P. Umari, N. Vast, X. Wu, and S. Baroni, ‘Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with quantum espresso,’ Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 465901 (2017). J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou, and K. Burke, ‘Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces,’ Physical Review Letters 100, 136406 Kevin F. Garrity, Joseph W. Bennett, Karin M. Rabe, and David Vanderbilt, ‘Pseudopotentials for high- throughput dft calculations,’ Computational Materials Science 81, 446–452 (2014). C. Keegan, M. S. Senn, N. C. Bristowe, and A. A. Mostofi, ‘Supplementary Information,’ (2022). Harold T Stokes and Dorian M Hatch, ‘Findsym: pro- gram for identifying the space-group symmetry of a crys- tal,’ J. Appl. Cryst 38, 237–238 (2005). B. J. Campbell, H. T. Stokes, D. E. Tanner, and D. M. Hatch, ‘ISODISPLACE : a web-based tool for explor- ing structural distortions,’ J. Appl. Cryst 39, 607–614 Koichi Momma and Fujio Izumi, ‘VESTA3 for three- dimensional visualization of crystal, volumetric and mor- phology data,’ Journal of Applied Crystallography 44, P. G. Radaelli, D. G. Hinks, A. W. Mitchell, B. A. Hunter, J. L. Wagner, B. Dabrowski, K. G. Vandervoort, H. K. Viswanathan, and J. D. Jorgensen, ‘Structural and superconducting properties of La2−xSrxCuO4 as a func- tion of Sr content,’ Physical Review B 49, 4163–4175 X. Zhang, C.R.A. Catlow, S.C. Parker, and A. Wall, ‘Simulation study of pressure-induced structural changes in la2cuo4 and in la1.83sr0.17cuo4,’ Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 53, 761–770 (1992). J. W. Furness, Y. Zhang, C. Lane, I. G. Buda, B. Bar- biellini, R. S. Markiewicz, A. Bansil, and J. Sun, ‘An accurate first-principles treatment of doping-dependent electronic structure of high-temperature cuprate super- conductors,’ Communications Physics 1, 11 (2018). Kanun Pokharel, Christopher Lane, James W. Fur- ness, Ruiqi Zhang, Jinliang Ning, Bernardo Barbiellini, Robert S. Markiewicz, Yubo Zhang, Arun Bansil, and Jianwei Sun, ‘Sensitivity of the electronic and mag- netic structures of cuprate superconductors to density functional approximations,’ npj Computational Materi- als 2022 8:1 8, 1–11 (2022). Jeremiah P. Tidey, En Pei Liu, Yen Chung Lai, Yu Chun Chuang, Wei Tin Chen, Lauren J. Cane, Chris Lester, Alexander N.D. Petsch, Anna Herlihy, Arkadiy Simonov, Stephen M. Hayden, and Mark Senn, ‘Pronounced inter- play between intrinsic phase-coexistence and octahedral tilt magnitude in hole-doped lanthanum cuprates,’ Sci- entific Reports 12, 1–13 (2022). J. M. Tranquada, G. D. Gu, M. H ̈ucker, Q. Jie, H.-J. Kang, R. Klingeler, Q. Li, N. Tristan, J. S. Wen, G. Y. Xu, Z. J. Xu, J. Zhou, and M. v. Zimmermann, ‘Evidence for unusual superconducting correlations coexisting with stripe order in La2−xBaxCuO4,’ Physical Review B 78 S. Tajima, T. Noda, H. Eisaki, and S. Uchida, ‘c-Axis Optical Response in the Static Stripe Ordered Phase of the Cuprates,’ Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 500–503 (2001). A. Migliori, William M. Visscher, S. E. Brown, Z. Fisk, S.-W. Cheong, B. Alten, E. T. Ahrens, K. A. Kubat- Martin, J. D. Maynard, Y. Huang, D. R. Kirk, K. A. Gillis, H. K. Kim, and M. H. W. Chan, ‘Elastic con- stants and specific-heat measurements on single crystals of la2cuo4,’ Phys. Rev. B 41, 2098–2102 (1990). ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS M.S.S. acknowledges the Royal Society for a University Research Fellowship (UF160265). C.K. was supported through a studentship in the Centre for Doctoral Train- ing on Theory and Simulation of Materials at Imperial College London funded by the EPSRC (EP/S515085/1 and EP/L015579/1). We acknowledge support from the Thomas Young Centre under Grant No. TYC-101. We are grateful to the UK Materials and Molecular Mod- 6 elling Hub for computational resources, which is partially funded by EPSRC (EP/P020194/1 and EP/T022213/1). We acknowledge the Imperial College London Research Computing Service (DOI:10.14469/hpc/2232) for the computational resources used in carrying out this work. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS The work was carried out by C.K. under the supervi- sion of M.S.S., N.C.B. and A.A.M. The paper was drafted by C.K. with all authors contributing to its revision. COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no competing interests. 7