Top-down fabrication of bulk-insulating topological insulator nanowires for quantum devices Matthias R ̈oßler,† Dingxun Fan,† Felix M ̈unning,† Henry F. Legg,‡ Andrea Bliesener,† Gertjan Lippertz,†,¶ Anjana Uday,† Roozbeh Yazdanpanah,† Junya Feng,† Alexey A. Taskin,† and Yoichi Ando∗,† †University of Cologne, Physics Institute II, Z ̈ulpicher Str. 77, 50937 K ̈oln, Germany ‡Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland ¶KU Leuven, Quantum Solid State Physics, Celestijnenlaan 200 D, 3001 Leuven, Belgium E-mail: ando@ph2.uni-koeln.de Abstract In a nanowire (NW) of a three-dimensional topological insulator (TI), the quantum- confinement of topological surface states leads to a peculiar subband structure that is useful for generating Majorana bound states. Top-down fabrication of TINWs from a high-quality thin film would be a scalable technology with great design flexibility, but there has been no report on top-down-fabricated TINWs where the chemical potential can be tuned to the charge neutrality point (CNP). Here we present a top-down fab- rication process for bulk-insulating TINWs etched from high-quality (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 thin films without degradation. We show that the chemical potential can be gate-tuned to the CNP and the resistance of the NW presents characteristic oscillations as func- tions of the gate voltage and the parallel magnetic field, manifesting the TI-subband 1 arXiv:2302.01209v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 2 Feb 2023 physics. We further demonstrate the superconducting proximity effect in these TINWs, preparing the groundwork for future devices to investigate Majorana bound states. In the two-dimensional (2D) Dirac surface states of a three-dimensional (3D) topological insulator (TI), the electron spin axis is dictated by the momentum of the electron, a property called spin-momentum locking.1 This feature is useful not only for spintronics2 but also for generating non-Abelian Majorana bound states3 by using the superconducting (SC) proxim- ity effect,4 which may open the door for fault-tolerant topological quantum computing.5 For the creation of Majorana bound states, reducing the dimensions of a 3D TI into a nanowire (NW) is useful.6 The quantum confinement of the 2D surface states into a NW leads to the appearance of a series of one-dimensional (1D) subbands, offering an interesting platform for various quantum devices.2 To utilize the unique characteristics of these subbands for quan- tum devices, it is often important to tune the chemical potential to the charge neutrality point (CNP) of the Dirac dispersion.7–9 This means that a TINW should be bulk-insulating to become useful. In the past, TINWs have been fabricated by various techniques: Vapour-Liquid-Solid (VLS) growth,10–14 exfoliation of a bulk single crystal,15,16 sandwiching between different materials,17 selective-area-growth (SAG),18,19 and top-down etching of a 2D film.20,21 Among them, the SAG and top-down etching techniques offer a large design flexibility, including the possibility to fabricate curved or branched NWs and NW-circuits, and hence they are particularly appealing as the NW-fabrication techniques for quantum devices. However, there has been no report of a successful tuning of the chemical potential to the CNP in NWs fabricated with these methods. In the case of SAG, it is difficult to selectively grow a TI material, for example (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 (BST),22 in the bulk-insulating composition,18,19 while the top-down etching has been applied only to the TI material HgTe,20,21 in which the CNP is buried in the bulk valence band. In this paper, we report successful fabrication of bulk-insulating TINWs with a top-down etching of BST thin films, and we show that the chemical potential in such NWs can successfully be tuned to the CNP by electrostatic 2 gating. We further demonstrate that these NWs exhibit the peculiar TI-subband physics and can be used for superconducting devices to search for Majorana bound states. The etched TINW devices have been prepared from bulk-insulating (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 (BST) thin films grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE), because BST films are suitable for surface-transport studies.22–28 Since air-exposure and heating tend to alter the properties of BST,29–31 our films are ex-situ capped with Al2O3 in an atomic-layer-deposition (ALD) machine immediately after the growth (the film is briefly exposed to air during the transfer) and the process temperatures during the device fabrication are limited to ⩽ 120 ◦C. with electron-beam (EB) lithography, dry-etching with Ar plasma is performed first to re- move unnecessary parts of the BST/Al2O3 film. Subsequently, a chemical wet-etching with diluted H2O2/H2SO4 is carried out to remove damaged edges of the remaining BST to obtain NWs with a smooth edge. Next, the contact areas are exposed by employing EB lithography and removing the Al2O3 capping layer in heated Transene Type-D etchant; the exposed BST surface is then cleaned in diluted HCl and further by low-power Ar plasma in the metalliza- tion machine. The electrodes (either Pt/Au or Nb) are sputter-deposited in UHV. For our top-gate devices, we deposited a 50-nm-thick Al2O3-dielectric in the ALD machine and then fabricated the top-gate electrode with Pt/Au. Further details are described in the Methods section. An atomic-force-microscopy (AFM) image of the surface of a typical pristine BST thin film used in our work is shown in Figure 1b. The well-developed terraces with the step height of ∼1 nm are a signature of high-quality epitaxial growth. As shown in Figure 1c, etched NWs can have arbitrary channel lengths with only small fluctuations in the width; the NW pictured here had the width w ≃ 120 ± 20 nm and the thickness t ≃ 15 ± 2 nm. With such dimensions, the quasi-1D subbands in the NW have an energy spacing of several meV.2,13,32 Figure 1d showcases that this approach allows to fabricate advanced geometries and arbitrary complex networks of bulk-insulting TINWs. 3 (b) (d) (a) (e) (c) (f) (g) a, Schematics of the fabrication process: an MBE-grown BST thin film capped with Al2O3 is patterned with EB lithography and physically etched with Ar plasma into nanoribbons; consecutive chemical wet-etching is carried out to obtain NWs with a smooth edge; after ex- and in-situ contact cleaning, Pt/Au or Nb electrodes are sputter-deposited. Some devices are encapsulated by an Al2O3 dielectric and a Pt/Au top gate is fabricated. b, AFM image of the surface of a BST grown on sapphire with characteristic quintuple-layer terrace steps. Scale bar 1 μm. c, SEM image of a long NW with a width of 120 ± 20 nm and a thickness of 15 ± 2 nm. Scale bar 1 μm. d, SEM image of a NW-network. Scale bar 10 μm. e, VG-dependence of the sheet resistance R□ at 2 K of a 500-nm-wide Hall bar prepared with the aforementioned fabrication process. f, B-dependencies of Ryx of the same Hall bar at different VG values that are color-highlighted in panel e; inset shows the carrier density nHall calculated from the Hall coefficient, with which a mobility of ∼600 cm2/Vs can be estimated, confirming the absence of degradation in the fabrication process. g, VG-dependence of the four-terminal resistance R in Device 1 measured between contacts 4–5 (see Supplementary thick black line shows their average. Inset shows the R(VG) behavior near the CNP; dashed vertical lines mark the peak positions expected from theory (blue line) for a gate capacitance CG = 55 pF obtained from a simple electrostatic model. To characterize the properties of the BST film after the NW-fabrication process, we fab- ricated a relatively wide “ribbon” with a width w = 500 nm, for which the Hall measurement 4 is possible (note, in contrast, the Hall voltage would not appear in a strictly 1D system, and hence the interpretation of the Hall measurement is difficult in a quasi-1D system). The sheet-resistance R□ of such a ribbon sample at 2 K is shown in Figure 1e as a function of the gate voltage VG, and Figure 1f shows the magnetic-field dependence of the Hall resistance Ryx of this ribbon sample for three VG values. The peak in R□(VG) corroborated with a sign change in Ryx gives clear evidence for the CNP-crossing and the bulk-insulating nature of the ribbon after the NW-fabrication process. The R□ and Ryx data for VG = 0 V give the hole density p = 1.8 × 1012 cm−2 and the mobility μ = 600 cm2/Vs, which are close to the values of the pristine material (Supplementary Figure S2). These results demonstrate that our NW-fabrication process causes little degradation in bulk-insulating BST. Once the width of the ribbon is reduced to the “nanowire” regime, which is typically realized for w ≲ 250 nm, the subband physics starts to show up.2,13 One characteristic feature is the VG-dependent oscillation of the NW resistance R. Such a behavior observed in a w ≃ 150 nm NW (the device picture is shown in Supplementary Figure S4) is presented in black line shows their average. One can see that the pattern of the oscillations is disordered but is essentially reproducible. As shown in the inset of Figure 1g for a smaller VG range near the CNP, reproducible maxima and minima with a characteristic quadratic spacing can be identified. This feature has been elucidated in VLS-grown NWs13 to stem from the regular change in the density of states that occurs when the chemical potential crosses the edge of the quantum-confined subbands. The expected positions of the maxima in R(VG) can be calculated by using the gate capacitance CG = 55 pF/m estimated from a simple electrostatic model (see Supporting Information), and the theoretically expected positions are in reasonable agreement with the experimentally observed peaks near the CNP. For this NW, we have also estimated the mobility μ from the R(VG) data and found no evidence for degradation (see Supporting Information). It is well known10–12,15,19,20,33,34 that the quantum-confined subbands in TINWs also give 5 of VG and the parallel magnetic field B, presenting occasional π-phase shifts in the AB oscillations. Lower panel shows the R(VG) behavior at B = 0 in the same VG range, with dashed lines indicating the positions of individual magnetic-field sweeps. b, AB oscillations at various temperatures from 0.3 to 8.3 K measured near the CNP at VG = 3.46 V. c, Fourier transform (FT) of the ∆R(B) data shown in b. Dotted vertical lines indicate the frequencies corresponding to Φ0 = h/e and Φ0/2. d, Exponential decay of the FT amplitude Amax with T obtained from the data in c. rise to oscillations of R in parallel magnetic fields with the period of the flux quantum Φ0 = h/e. This phenomenon is called Aharonov-Bohm (AB) oscillations, because it stems from the AB phase affecting the quantized angular momentum of the subbands.35,36 Since the application of VG leads to oscillations in R as well, the AB oscillations in TINWs are known to present VG-dependent π-phase shifts.12,15,34,37 To observe this interplay between VG and B, we applied a magnetic field B parallel to the NW at various VG values changed with small steps, and traced the dependence of R on B and VG. Figure 2a (upper panel) shows a color mapping of ∆R in the plane of B vs VG, where ∆R ≡ R(B) − f(B) with f(B) a smooth background; the lower panel presents the R(VG) behavior at B = 0 T for the same gating range, showing that several subband crossings are occurring in this VG range. Although the periodicity in B is often distorted in Figure 2a, the approximate period of the B-dependent oscillations, ∼1.3 T, is consistent with Φ0 for the cross-section of this NW 6 (150 × 30 nm2). One can see that sudden π-phase shifts occur at several VG values, and the occurrence of the sudden phase shifts seen in the upper panel is roughly correlated with the peak-dip features in the lower panel (see Supplementary Figure S6 for additional plots). Ideally, a regular checker-board pattern (Supplementary Figure S5) is expected in the plane of B vs VG; however, experimentally the pattern is always distorted12,15,20,34 which may stem from orbital effects, subband splitting due to gating,9 or disorder.37 In our NW, the decay of the AB oscillations with increasing temperature is exponen- tial12,34,38 rather than a power law,10 suggesting an approximate phase coherence around the perimeter of the NW.12,34,38 Figure 2b shows ∆R(B) measured in the temperature range of 0.3–8.3 K near CNP at VG = 3.46 V, and the Fourier transform (FT) of these data are shown in Figure 2c. One can see that the dominant oscillation frequency corresponds to the AB oscillations with the period Φ0 = h/e, and the Altshuler-Aronov-Spivak (AAS) oscilla- tions39 with period h/2e is essentially absent,10 which is typical for a short TINW.34 Figure 2d demonstrates that the decay of the maximum FT amplitude Amax with temperature is well described by an exponential behavior, Amax ∼ exp(−bT), which has been interpreted to originate from the disorder-induced thermal length LT that changes as ∼ T −1.38 By putting = 0.68 K−1 obtained in our analysis corresponds to LT ≈ 0.53 μm at 1 K, which is shorter than that in VLS-grown TINWs.12,34,38 To see if our top-down fabricated TINWs can be a viable platform to search for Majorana bound states,6,7 we have fabricated Josephson junctions (JJs) consisting of Nb electrodes contacting the NW with a small separation (< 100 nm). To ensure bulk-insulation in the NW, BST films with a particularly low carrier concentration were chosen for the NW-fabrication (Supplementary Figures S7 and S8). The JJ devices, schematically depicted in Figure 3a, are measured in a quasi-four-terminal configuration and can be exposed to rf radiation to study their Shapiro response. 7 dV /dI as a function of dc current Idc at various temperatures for Junction 1 made on a 400-nm-wide TI ribbon. c, Color mapping of dV /dI in the Idc-vs-B plane for Junction 1 at 20 mK, presenting a Fraunhofer pattern; dashed black line shows the theoretically expected pattern for a conventional junction. Inset shows a false-color SEM-image of Junction 1 with TI (red) and Nb (yellow) on sapphire. d, Similar mapping of dV /dI in the Idc-vs-B plane for Junction 2 made on a 80-nm-wide TINW, showing the absence of a Fraunhofer pattern. Inset shows a false-color SEM-image of Junction 2. Scale bars indicate 500 nm. SEM-image in Figure 3c inset), a well-developed critical current Ic is observed at 20 mK but Ic diminishes at ∼1 K, and at 1.8 K there is almost no sign of superconductivity. The temperature dependence of Ic allows for an estimate of the interface transparency of the JJ, as was done in similar JJs,17,40 which gives a relatively low transparency T of ∼0.5 (see Supporting Information). A different method of estimating the interface transparency based on the excess current observed in the I-V curve41 also gives T ≈ 0.5 (see Supporting Information). Hence, there is room for improving the JJ properties by preparing a more transparent interface, which we leave for future works. When a perpendicular magnetic field B is applied to a usual JJ, the creation of Josephson vortices in the junction leads to the appearance of a Fraunhofer pattern in the B-dependence of Ic.42 Hence, the Fraunhofer pattern is an indication of the phase winding along the width of the junction, which is not expected when the JJ is formed on a NW having no degree of freedom along the width of the junction. Indeed, whereas the Junction 1 made on a 400-nm- wide ribbon shows a Fraunhofer pattern (Figure 3c), the Junction 2 made on a 80-nm-wide NW just presents a monotonic decay of Ic with B (Figure 3d). To the best of our knowledge, our Junction 2 is the first successful JJ made on a TINW having such a narrow width of 80 8 Color mappings of the differential conductance dI/dV at 20 mK in 0 T as a function of rf power P and dc bias Vdc to visualize the Shapiro steps. The data on Junction 1 (w = 400 nm) for f = 2.25 GHz and 4 GHz are shown in a and b, respectively; the n = 1 Shapiro step is missing in a, while it is present in b. The data on Junction 3 (w = 250 nm) at f = 3.5 GHz is shown in c, where the n = 1 Shapiro step is visible. The data on Junction 2 (w = 80 nm) at f = 1.8 GHz is shown in d, where no Shapiro step is visible. nm. For Junction 1, the effective area Aeff = 2.3 × 1013 m2 indicated by the periodicity of the Fraunhofer pattern (9 mT) is consistent with the geometrical area considering the flux focusing effect.43,44 We have also studied the behavior of the Shapiro steps in our JJs under rf irradiation. as a function of the rf power P and the applied dc bias Vdc normalized by hf 2e with f the rf frequency; in this type of plots, the horizontal lines appearing at Vdc = n hf 2e correspond to Shapiro steps with index n. Figures 4a and 4b show the Shapiro response of Junction 1 (made on a 400-nm-wide TI ribbon) at 20 mK for 2.25 and 4 GHz, respectively. The 2.25-GHz 9 data lack the n = 1 step, while the 4-GHz data present all integer steps. At an intermediate frequency of 3 GHz, the 1st Shapiro step was partially observed (Supplementary Figure S11). The missing 1st Shapiro step has been reported before for TI-based JJs21,40,44–48 and was interpreted to be possible evidence for Majorana bound states which endow 4π-periodicity to the JJ.49 However, the Shapiro response alone can never give conclusive evidence for Majorana bound states because other mechanisms of nontopological origin can also cause the 1st Shapiro step to become missing.21,50–52 Hence, our observation just demonstrates that our top-down fabrication process does not adversely affect the SC proximity effect in TIs and can be useful for future studies of Majorana bound states. If one interprets the missing 1st Shapiro step to be due to a 4π-periodic component in the Josephson response,53 the characteristic crossover frequency f4π for the appearance of the 1st Shapiro step can be linked to the amplitude of the 4π-periodic current I4π via f4π = 2eRNI4π/h with RN the normal-state resistance of the junction.45 For our Junction 1, we infer f4π ≈ 3 GHz, which gives I4π ≈ 26 nA and I4π/Ic ≈ 0.36. Of particular interest is how such a Shapiro response changes when the TI-part is nar- rowed into the NW regime,21,44,54,55 but our Shapiro-measurement setup was not good enough for this purpose. For our Junction 3 (w = 250 nm), 3.5 GHz was the lowest f at which we could observe Shapiro steps, and the n = 1 step was present (Figure 4c). In Junction 2 which had the narrowest NW (w = 80 nm), we detected no Shapiro response at any fre- quency (Figure 4d). This result tells us that the electromagnetic coupling between the TINW and the microwave antenna should be improved, which is beyond the scope of this study. Once a stronger coupling is achieved, it would be interesting to clarify the effect of parallel magnetic fields on the TINW-based JJ to detect the possible generation of Majorana bound states.6,21 Trying to detect the microwave emission from a voltage-biased JJ56,57 would also be a promising future direction for proximitized TINWs. In conclusion, we established a top-down fabrication process for bulk-insulating TINWs that are etched from MBE-grown (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 thin films while maintaining the pristine 10 material’s properties. In normal-state transport experiments, characteristic resistance oscil- lations as a function of both gate voltage and parallel magnetic field are observed, giving evidence that the characteristic TI-subband physics manifests itself in our NWs. We further demonstrate that it is possible to study the superconducting proximity effect in these TINWs by fabricating Josephson junctions with ex-situ prepared Nb contacts, providing the founda- tion for future devices to investigate Majorana bound states. The process established here is based on widely available clean-room technologies, benefits from the well-controlled prop- erties of high-quality MBE-grown thin films, and enables flexible design of NW geometries. Hence, the results presented here will widen the opportunities for research using mesoscopic topological devices. Methods Material growth and device fabrication The (Bi1−xSbx)2Te3 thin films were grown on sapphire (0001) substrates by co-evaporation of high-purity Bi, Sb, and Te in an ultra-high-vacuum MBE chamber. The flux of Bi and Sb was optimized to obtain the most bulk-insulating films which was achieved with a ratio of 1:6.8. The average thicknesses of the thin films, measured with AFM, were nominally in the range of 15–30 nm. Within minutes after taking the films out of the MBE chamber, they were capped with a 3-nm-thick Al2O3 layer grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 80 oC using a Ultratec Savannah S200. The carrier density and the mobility of the pristine films were extracted from Hall measurements performed at 2 K using a Quantum Design PPMS. Gate-tunable multi-terminal NW devices were fabricated using the top-down process, the outline of which was described in the main text. After defining the nanowire shape with EB lithography, the film was first dry-etched using low-power Ar plasma. This process can degrade the TI-side-surfaces and can leave residual hard-to-remove resist patches behind. Therefore, a (H2SO4:H2O2):H2O (1:3):8 aqueous solution was used to remove the 11 residual resist as well as the damaged material from the sidewalls of the NWs. To ensure a more controlled etch, the etchant and DI water were cooled to ∼8 ◦C. A second step of EB lithography was employed to form two kinds of contacts. Normal-state measurements were made with metal contacts that connect to the remaining BST-leads next to the NW to have an enlarged contact area and to avoid unintentional contact-doping in the NW. On the other hand, superconducting contacts were placed in a regular Josephson junction layout directly on top of the NW. In the contact areas, the Al2O3 capping layer was removed by aluminum etchant (Transene Type-D) heated to 50 ◦ C. After ex-situ and in-situ contact cleaning in diluted HCl:H2O (1:10) and low-power Ar-plasma in the sputtering machine just before metallization, 5/45 nm Pt/Au contacts or 45/5 nm Nb/Au contacts were deposited by UHV- sputtering. Non-superconducting devices were capped with a 50-nm-thick Al2O3 dielectric grown by ALD at 80 ◦C, after which a 5/40 nm Pt/Au top gate was sputter-deposited. In devices with superconducting contacts, the quality of the induced gap was very sensitive to the interface conditions, and for that reason, all the steps between the removal of the Al2O3 capping layer and the contact deposition were carried out in a N2-atmosphere using a Sigma-Aldrich Atmosbag to minimize oxide formation from exposure to air.31 The final dimensions of the devices were determined with scanning electron microscopy. Transport measurements Non-superconducting transport measurements were performed in a 3He cryostat (Oxford Instrument Heliox VL), a system that can be operated in a temperature range from 0.25 K to ∼30 K and in magnetic fields up to 13 T. A top-mounted RC-filter box is used to reduce the electromagnetic noise. Superconducting transport measurements are carried out in a dry dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments TRITON 300) equipped with a 3-axis vector magnet. In this system, low temperature electronic filtering includes microwave filters, low- pass resistor-capacitor filters and copper-powder filters to reduce electron heating by high- frequency noise. Voltages were measured in a standard four-terminal configuration with a 12 low-frequency lock-in technique with ∼13.37 Hz using lock-in amplifiers (NF Corporation LI5645, Stanford Research Systems SR530 and SR830). To apply dc gate voltages or dc bias currents, a Keithley 2450 in combination with a 1-GΩ resistor was used. For dV/dI measurements, a small ac bias current was generated by using the output voltage of a lock-in amplifier in combination with a 10-MΩ resistor and added on top of a larger dc current bias. The resulting differential voltage is measured with a lock-in technique. Author Information ORCID Matthias R ̈oßler: 0000-0001-9911-2835 Felix M ̈unning: 0000-0003-0193-3542 Alexey A. Taskin: 0000-0002-2731-761X Gertjan Lippertz: 0000-0002-4061-7027 Anjana Uday: 0000-0002-9719-0458 Henry F. Legg: 0000-0003-0400-5370 Yoichi Ando: 0000-0002-3553-3355 Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. Acknowledgement We are grateful for valuable discussions and support at various stages of this work from A. Rosch, E. Bocquillon, D. Rosenbach, O. Breunig, J. Feng, J. Schluck, N. Zapata, L. Hamdan and T. Zent. This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant 13 agreement No 741121 [Y.A.]. It was also funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under CRC 1238 - 277146847 (Subprojects A04 and B01) [Y.A., A.T.] as well as under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - Cluster of Excellence Matter and Light for Quantum Computing (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1 - 390534769 [Y.A.]. This work was also supported by the Georg H. Endress Foundation [H.F.L.]. G.L. acknowledges the support by the KU Leuven BOF and Research Foundation Flanders (FWO, Belgium), file No. 27531 and No. 52751. Supporting Information Available The Supporting Information is available free of charge at .... Properties of BST before and after the NW-fabrication process, Gate-tunable nanowire device image and wiring, Gate-voltage dependent resistance oscillations in TINW, Estimation of the mobility μ in nanowires, π-phase shift in the Aharonov-Bohm oscillations, Properties of the pristine BST films used for the Josephson junction devices, Temperature dependence of the critical current in Junction 1, Characteristic parameters of the Josephson-junction devices, Shapiro step data for Junction 1 at f = 3 GHz. TOC image: 14