1 Dilemma in All-optical Characterization of Single-layer NiI2 Multiferroics Yucheng Jiang1,2,3, Yangliu Wu4, Jinlei Zhang2, Jingxuan Wei1, Bo Peng4,* and Cheng-Wei Qiu1,* 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, 4 Engineering Drive 3, Singapore 117583, Singapore 2Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Micro and Nano Heat Fluid Flow Technology and Energy Application, School of Physical Science and Technology, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou, 215009, China 3Science, Mathematics and Technology (SMT), Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), 8 Somapah Road, Singapore 487372, Singapore 4National Engineering Research Center of Electromagnetic Radiation Control Materials, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China *e-mail: bo_peng@uestc.edu.cn and chengwei.qiu@nus.edu.sg The search for two-dimensional multiferroic materials is an exciting yet challenging endeavor. Recently, Song et al. reported the exciting discovery of type-II multiferroic order in an antiferromagnetic (AFM) NiI2 single layer, and concluded the ferroelectric (FE) polarization induced by a helical magnetic order1. Their finding was presented from all-optical experimental evidence, based on the methods of second harmonic generation (SHG) and linear dichroism (LD). However, the all-optical characterizations alone cannot serve as unanimous evidence of the “FE” existence, particularly in conjunction with magnetic orders in a single-layer multiferroic. A main argument is that their observed SHG and LD signals may just be manifested from the magnetic-order induced breaking of spatial-inversion or time-reversal symmetry instead of FE order, and thus cannot endorse the finding of a single-layer multiferroic. Accurate measurements of magnetic and electric orders are very essential to make a reliable judgement of a multiferroic. With the device’s thickness approaching atomic scale, its magnetic or electrical signals will become too weak to be collected by traditional measurements2. Therefore, advanced all-optical probing methods have been 2 deployed to characterize the magnetism and ferroelectricity, especially for a single layer, such as magneto-optical Kerr effect, reflective magnetic circular dichroism (RMCD), SHG and LD 2,3. Among them, SHG and LD represent two typical optical approaches to investigate the domain structure and phase transition of ferroelectrics4,5. As indirect characterizations of ferroelectricity, their signals were thought to reflect the breaking of lattice inversion symmetry. To date, for a single ferroic, optical methods have made great success in the exploration of ferromagnetism or ferroelectricity in two- dimensional systems2,4,6. However, all-optical methods are unreliable to make a judgement of single-layer multiferroics, especially for the antiferromagnets7-9. In this case, the SHG and LD responses are not necessarily associated with FE polarization, but reflect the magnetic-order induced breaking of inversion symmetry. Without electric and magnetic fields applied, the all-optical methods cannot scrutinize the origin of optical signals. In the original paper,1 the SHG and LD data were interpreted as solid evidence for ferroelectricity in the NiI2 single layer, in conjunction with the observation of helical magnetic (TN,2) phase transition. It was an important experimental basis to identify the single-layer NiI2 as a Type-II multiferroic. However, several previous works have revealed the inconvenient truth that the magnetic order can also lead to SHG and LD signals directly by breaking an inversion symmetry (see Extended Data Fig. 1)7,8, without the need of inducing an FE polarization. For example, an AFM CrI3 bilayer exhibits a giant electric-dipole SHG, despite its centrosymmetric crystal structure7. The observed SHG domains tally with AFM domains, both of which show synchronous responses to the external magnetic field (see Figs. 1 f-g in ). That means the SHG actually reflects the information of magnetic structure instead of electric structure. SHG signals originates from the AFM-order induced breaking of spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetries. Another typical example is shown in (see Extended Data Fig. 1c). In the FePS3 crystal, a sharp onset in LD signature is observed at 118 K, at which AFM phase transition occurs too. It is justified that the SHG and LD data cannot sufficiently prove the existence of ferroelectricity, particularly in the presence of antiferromagnetism. For the NiI2 single layer, the authors provided the data of polarization domains and phase transition through all-optical methods and conventional theoretical analysis1. But, magnetic orders not only break the inversion symmetry, but also induce rotation of polarization plane due to Faraday effect. Strictly, LD, SHG and polarized microscopy images cannot sufficiently validate FE polarization in the presence of magnetic orders. The coexistence of FE and magnetic orders complicates the situation, causing that it is impossible to distinguish FE polarization from magnetic orders through all-optical results. In Fig. 1a, we analyze the effect of magnetic order on the symmetry of NiI2. After 3 an operation of spatial-inversion (r → −r) operation or a time-reversal (t → −t), NiI2 is converted to a different magnetic state. The helical magnetic structures along the propagation vector Qx break both spatial-inversion and time-reversal symmetries. In this case, one cannot exclude the possibility that the magnetic order causes SHG and LD signals. The resulting optical domains may correspond to the magnetic domains instead of FE domains in NiI2. To compare magnetic domains with optical domains, we performed the RMCD and LD measurements in few-layer NiI2 with different magnetic fields applied as shown in Figs. 1 b and c. It is well known that the RMCD map can detect the magnetic domains. Good consistency has been shown between RMCD and LD maps. With an external magnetic field applied, the LD domains change synchronously with the switching of magnetic domains. Therefore, the observed LD signals are more likely to originate from the magnetic structure, similar to the cases of CrI3 bilayer and few-layer FePS3. In general, SHG and LD can be widely captured in a variety of materials with drastically different origins (see Table 1)4,10-13. For non-ferroic and FE materials, SHG and LD can be attributed to non-centrosymmetric lattice structures. For centrosymmetric AFM materials, they result from breaking inversion symmetry induced by AFM order. Without electric or magnetic fields applied, it is difficult to clarify the origin of optical signals only by using all-optical methods. In our opinion, the NiI2 single layer may be a candidate as a two-dimensional multiferroic, but requires more direct evidence apart from those all-optical results. The given experimental data are not sufficient to support the authors’ conclusion1. It calls for more direct magnetic and electric measurements to confirm the multiferroic properties of NiI2 single layer. The original paper lacks the magnetic- and electric-field control of SHG or LD domains, making it impossible to determine whether optical signals result from FE polarization or magnetic order. Next, the authors should probe the FE domains by using a direct electrical method like piezoresponse force microscopy. If possible, it would be better if they compare the FE domains with SHG domains directly by mapping the experimental data. It is therefore believed that the discovery of multiferroic single layer is questionable based on the current evidence. 4 Fig. 1| Magnetic order and optical domains of NiI2. a, Schematic of the helical magnetic structure of NiI2, showing a spatial-inversion (r → −r) or time-reversal (t → −t) operation. b, RMCD and LD intensity images of few-layer NiI2 under different magnetic fields at 11 K for comparison. The scale bar is 1 μm. c, Schematic of RMCD and LD measurements for a NiI2 flake (see Methods). Non ferroic Single ferroic Multiferroic Type Non FE or AFM FE AFM FE+AFM Breaking of inversion symmetry or SHG α-SiO24 BaTiO310 CrI3 bilayer7 MnWO412 LD Black phosphorus11 In2Se35 FePS38 Pb(TiO)Cu4(PO4)413 5 Methods A 532 nm laser was coupled to the Witec Raman system with closed cycle superconducting magnet and He optical cryostat. The light of ~0.6 μW was modulated by photoelastic modulator and focused onto samples by a long working distance objective (50×, NA = 0.45). The reflected beams were collected by the same objective, passed through a non-polarizing beamsplitter cube into a photodetector (see Fig. 1c). For RMCD measurements, the retardance is λ/4 and PEM frequency is 50 kHz. For LD measurements, the retardance and PEM frequency is doubled. The detailed experimental and measurements by magneto-optical-electric joint-measurement scanning imaging system (MOEJSI) are shown in the following parts. Data availability All data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.