High-throughput identification of spin-photon interfaces in silicon Yihuang Xiong,1 C ́eline Bourgois,2, 1 Natalya Sheremetyeva,1 Wei Chen,2 Diana Dahliah,2 Hanbin Song,3 Sin ́ead M. Griffin,4, 5 Alp Sipahigil,3, 6, 4 and Geoffroy Hautier1 1Thayer School of Engineering, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA 2Institute of Condensed Matter and Nanosciences (IMCN), Universit ́e Catholique de Louvain, Chemin des ́Etoiles 8, B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium 3Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 4Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 5Molecular Foundry Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 6Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA (Dated: March 6, 2023) Color centers in host semiconductors are prime candidates for spin-photon interfaces that would enable numerous quantum applications. The discovery of an optimal spin-photon interface in sil- icon would move quantum information technologies towards a mature semiconductor technology. However, the space of possible charged defects in a host is very large, making the identification of promising quantum defects from experiments only extremely challenging. Here, we use high- throughput first principles computational screening to identify spin-photon interfaces among more than 1000 substitutional and interstitial charged defects in silicon. We evaluate the most promising defects by considering their optical properties, spin multiplicity, and formation energies. The use of a single-shot hybrid functional approach is critical in enabling the screening of a large number of defects with a reasonable accuracy in the calculated optical and electronic properties. We identify three new promising spin-photon interface as potential bright emitters in the telecom band: Ti+ i , Fe0 i , and Ru0 i . These candidates are excited through defect-bound excitons, stressing the importance of considering these type of defects in silicon if operations in the telecom band is targeted. Our work paves the way to further large scale computational screening for quantum defects in silicon and other hosts. INTRODUCTION Point defects have become central to many quantum technologies from sensing to communication and com- puting. A color center in a semiconducting host can act as an artificial atom and be used to harness quan- tum effects [1–3]. For instance, these quantum defects can be used as spin-photon interfaces where their elec- tronic spin are initialized, controlled and read by pho- tons. Important spin-photon interfaces have been stud- ied in diamond such as the NV center or the silicon di- vacancy and can constitute multi-qubit quantum regis- ters based on electron and nuclear spins that are opti- cally initialized, measured and entangled over long dis- tances [4–8]. Finding a perfect spin-photon interface is challenging as the color center needs to exhibit a series of properties from a bright emission in an adequate wave- length, to spin multiplicity and optical as well as spin coherence . While most of the work on quantum de- fects has been performed using wide band gap hosts such as diamond and silicon carbide, moving to silicon would have many advantages for integration and nanofabrica- tion. Despite silicon’s smaller bandgap, recent promising results using carbon-based complex defects produced by ion-implantation such as the T or G centers have opened up silicon as a promising defect host [2, 10–16]. These color centers were discovered serendipitously before the advent of quantum information science when studying ion-implantation of typical contaminants in silicon. How- ever, since the chemical space of possible defects is very large, it has led to speculation whether a yet-to-be dis- covered quantum defect could act as high performance spin-photon interface in silicon. First principles techniques are commonly used to understand and propose new quantum defects [17– 21]. These atomistic modeling techniques have matured enough that they can now be used on a large scale to search for materials with specific properties in a high- throughput fashion [22–24]. However, screening efforts have so far mainly focused on bulk properties with only a few attempts at point defect related properties [25–31]. Recent developments in the automation of charged de- fect computations offer the opportunity to fill this gap but large-scale defect computations still face important challenges, especially balancing accuracy with computa- tional cost [32–35]. The least computationally expensive approach, the semilocal density functional theory (DFT), often fails to provide reliable opto-electronic properties, while more accurate approaches such as hybrid function- als are more computationally demanding and can only be used on small sets of possible defects limiting the screening space . Additionally, most of the efforts in predicting new quantum defects have focused on mimicking the NV center in diamond and assumed that only defects presenting at least two single-particle energy levels well within the band gap are of interest arXiv:2303.01594v1 [quant-ph] 2 Mar 2023 2 . This might not be a viable approach in silicon where color centers are commonly excited through the formation of defect-bound excitons and thus involve delocalized band-like states . In fact, the most studied spin-photon interface candidates in silicon (i.e., T center and Se+ Si) do form defect-bound excitons, highlighting the need to consider them in high-throughput screening ap- proaches . Here, we report on a high-throughput computational search of quantum defects for high performance spin- photon interfaces in silicon. Searching for point defects made of an unique foreign element addition (among 56 elements) in silicon either as substitutional or interstitial defect, we generate a computational database of around a thousand charged defects. We identify unique color cen- ters combining spin multiplicity and a bright emission in the short wave infrared (SWIR) or telecom-band. We use a combination of techniques based on semilocal DFT and hybrid functionals that balance predictive accuracy with computational cost. Importantly, we refrain from updat- ing the semilocal DFT wavefunctions in the hybrid func- tional calculations. This single-shot hybrid functional greatly reduces the computational cost while retaining the overall accuracy of the fully self-consistent version for single-particle energies. We perform our search allow- ing optical transitions involving host-like states through defect-bound excitons and find that this is essential for defect candidates active in the near-infrared in silicon. After presenting our spin-photon interface candidates, we provide the fundamental chemical and structural reasons for their emergence from our screening and discuss inher- ent challenges for quantum defects in silicon. RESULTS A spin-photon interface is a color center where the spin state can be controlled, initialized, and read out by light. We focus here on a minimal set of necessary requirements for such a quantum defect. First, the defect ground state needs to have a non-zero total electronic spin (i.e., a spin multiplicity different than one). This electronic spin state is controlled by light excitation and emission through photoluminescence. This requires the defect to have ex- cited states accessible optically in a technologically rele- vant wavelength. Here, we target the SWIR wavelength compatible with silicon photonics of at most 1700 nm (i.e., at least 700 meV or 5646 cm−1), amenable to fiber- optic transmission and standard infrared detectors. Op- tical emissions need to be allowed and bright implying that the radiative lifetime of the excited state should be short. Additional requirements are for the defect emis- sion to occur mainly through the zero-phonon line (ZPL) peak and to have a minimal amount of phonon-sideband emission (i.e., a low Huang-Rhys factor). Note that these requirements are necessary but not sufficient. For exam- ZPL, Huang-Rhys Excitation energies, Transition dipole moment Spin Stability New spin-photon interface quantum defect candidates DFT Single-shot HSE HSE Stability E εf 0 2- Interstitial Substitution Tetrahedral (Td) Hexagonal (D3d) Ion-implantable Workflow for screening quantum defects in silicon for spin-photon interface. Three types of simple defects were considered in this work, including substitutional, tetrahedral interstitial (Td), and hexagonal interstitial (D3d). ple, the optical and spin coherence and the ease of control and nanofabrication are also important, but the primary requirements we have outlined rely on properties which can be assessed on a large scale by first-principles com- putations. Notably, the results we will present here show that our limited screening criteria are already quite re- strictive in selecting defect candidates. We consider three ‘simple’ defects (in contrast to com- plex defects) possible in silicon: substitutional, tetrahe- dral interstitial, and hexagonal interstitial defects (see Fig. 1) using a set of 56 elements identified as easily ion-implantable (see Methods). Our approach relies on a tiered screening approach outlined in Fig. 1 to detect de- fects with high brightness, appropriate ZPL energy, and low Huang-Rhys factor. We compute these three types of defects in a range of charge states (based on common oxidation states of the elements) at the DFT level. This leads to a total of 1042 defect computations performed entirely automatically. Certain charged defects are not stable for any Fermi level, we do not expect these to be achievable in experiments even using non-equilibrium techniques such as ion-implantation. Our first screening is to only consider defects that are stable for any range of Fermi level (617 charged defects remain). For each of these stable charged defects, we use the single-particle Kohn-Sham (KS) eigenvalues to identify the possible op- tical transitions between occupied and unoccupied states within a spin channel. However, neither the band gap nor the single-particle defect energy level is properly de- scribed by semilocal DFT . Higher levels of the- ory, such as hybrid functionals (e.g., the Heyd-Scuseria- Ernzheroff (HSE) functional ) and the GW Approxi- mation, can provide more accurate single-particle energy 3 levels but at a significantly higher computational cost. Here, we use the ‘single-shot hybrid functional’ approach (HSE0 hereafter) where the DFT wavefunctions are ap- plied to the HSE Hamiltonian without further iteration (see methods). This single-shot HSE approach provides a significant improvement to DFT single-particle ener- gies for only a marginal increase of computational cost (around 5% of computational overhead from DFT). The technique is closely related to the single-shot GW ap- proach (i.e., G0W0) for which the quasi-particle energies are computed on top of the DFT wavefunctions. The HSE0 approach offers an excellent compromise between accuracy and computational cost as outlined in SI (see Fig. S1) and has been used successfully in the past on defects but never in a high-throughput context . In addition, for each optical transition between an occupied and an unoccupied single-particle energy level, we com- pute the transition dipole moment (TDM) μ ∝ ⟨ψi|r|ψf⟩ at the DFT level to assess the radiative lifetime of the ex- cited state. A high transition dipole moment is an impor- tant requirement which indicates strong emission bright- ness. We also used the HSE0 corrected single-particle en- ergies to assess the total spin of the defect and we focus on defects in a non-singlet state (total spin S ̸= 0). This first screening identifies promising defects that we follow up with full ionic and electronic relaxation at the HSE level to obtain the ZPL and Huang-Rhys factors. More details on the high-throughput screening are available in the methods section. Fig. 2(a) plots the TDM versus the lowest optical tran- sition energy for all stable non-singlet charged defects in our database computed at the HSE0 level. The size and color of the data points relate to their charge stability (the extent of the Fermi level within the band gap where the charge state is stable) and the stability of the defect structure (interstitial versus substitutional), respectively. The plots including singlet (S = 0) charged defects are available in Fig. S2. For comparison, we highlight in Fig. 2 two defects previously considered as spin-photon interfaces in silicon: the T center and the Se+ Si defect. The T center is not in our dataset as it is a complex defect made of carbon and hydrogen. The Se+ Si and T center show attractive TDMs (1.75 and 3 D at the DFT level, respectively). Se+ Si operates however at a low ex- citation energy (0.59 eV) while the T center is closer to our target (1.024 eV). Our results agree with the exper- imental knowledge on these defects . A general anticorrelation is observed between TDM and transition energy as larger excitation energies lead to lower TDMs and hence dimmer optical transitions. Defects combin- ing a high TDM and a large emission energy are therefore rare. Setting a threshold of 700 meV excitation energy and a TDM of at least 2 D, we find 19 defects among our 617 stable charged defects (see Table S1). As an il- lustration of the type of defects selected, Fig. 2b shows the single-particle energies for three selected defects: K0 Si, Fe0 i , and Nb− Si. It is envisaged from the single-particle en- ergies that the transition can take place from a localized defect state within the gap to a delocalized host-like state in the form of a bound exciton. In fact, the vast majority of the 19 defects candidates are excited as defect-bound excitons. For these 19 candidates, we refine our screening and run full ionic and electronic relaxations with the fully self-consistent HSE calculations. The single-particle lev- els with respect to the band edges are plotted in Fig. S3. Only 7 defects combine a high TDM and a high tran- sition energy (i.e., single-particle transition energy over 800 meV): Fe0 i , Ti+ i , Zr+ i , Ru0 i , Nb− Si, Ni− Si, and Na0 Si. We note that these transition energies do not take into ac- count electronic and ionic relaxation of the excited state and tend to overestimate the ZPL (typically by at least 100 meV). For many other defects, the electronic structure ob- tained with HSE0 is close to the full HSE results but the excitation energies remain too low (< 800 meV) to make them likely to offer an appealing ZPL: Mn0 i hex, Co2− Si , Cu2− Si , I2+ Si , K0 Si, Rb0 Si, Pd0 Si, Pd− Si, Ta− Si. Importantly, we find that a reorganization of energy level happens when full HSE is performed for a few defects: Co+ i , Mn0 Si and N− i . This stresses the importance of using a tiered screen- ing approach and validating our single-shot HSE compu- tation with further full HSE computations. We compute the ZPL and formation energy versus Fermi level for the 7 best candidates identified above. The ZPL was computed by relaxing the structure and imposing the occupation of the lowest unoccupied state following the constrained-HSE approach (see Methods). The results are presented in Table I and Fig. S4. All the ZPLs are higher than 700 meV except for Zr+ i which sits at 666 meV. The full HSE computations confirm that these defects are all excited through an electronic transition between a localized state and a host-like state forming a defect-bound exciton. The excited electron is promoted either from a localized defect state to a conduction-band state (donor-bound exciton) or from a valence-band state to a localized defect state (acceptor- bound exciton). For instance, the Fe0 i donor-bound exci- ton is formed by a delocalized electron attracted by the potential induced by a Fe+ i charged defect. When considering defects excited through bound exci- tons, we need to keep in mind a competing process that could destabilize the exciton. The electron or hole in the bound exciton perturbed host-like state could be re- leased and freed as a free electron or hole. This corre- sponds to the breaking of the exciton. For instance, in the case of iron, the bound exciton composed of an elec- tron bound to Fe+ i could break and lead to Fe+ i and a free electron. How favorable this ionization process is can be computed comparing the ZPL to the relevant charge transition level (obtained from defect formation energy plots). This provides an estimate of the exciton binding 4 VB CB VB CB Ru0 i Ta− Si K0 Si Mn0 Si Rb0 Si Nb− Si Ti+ i T center Na0 Si Mn+ i hex N− i Pd− Si Pd0 Si Cu2− Si I2+ Si Se+ Si Fe0 i Ni− Si 1.0E-4 1.0E-3 1.0E-2 1.0E-1 1.0E+1 1.0E+0 VB CB (a) (b) Zr+ i K0 Si S = 3/2 Nb− Si S = 3/2 Fe0 Si S = 1 defects with non-singlet spin multiplicity. The color of the circles indicates how stable the structure of the defect is as an interstitial defect relative to a substitutional one, while the size represents the stability window of the charged defect within the band gap. The isolines mark the radiative lifetime in μs. For comparison, we highlight the T center (star) and Se+ Si (diamond). Co2− Si is removed from the figure due to nonphysically large shift of the KS levels from DFT to HSE0. (b) Single-particle excitation energies at the HSE0 level of theory for a series of candidates: K0 Si, Nb– Si, Fe0 i . The defect levels are shown in red. transition level (CTL) with respect to EVBM, bound exciton stability (BES), and the nature of excitation of the 7 best simple defect candidates that were screened. All reported values are computed in 512-atoms cell and at HSE level. Defect ∆KS (eV) Total spin ZPL (meV) TDM (Debye) CTL (eV) BES (meV) Nature of excitation Ti+ i 1.04 3/2 939 1.86 0.130 (+2/+1) 45 Donor Zr+ i 0.81 3/2 666 3.01 0.263 (+2/+1) 666 Donor Fe0 i 0.98 3/2 903 1.59 0.291 (+2/0) 211 Donor Ru0 i 1.10 1 791 1.15 1.10 (0/−1) 311 Acceptor Na0 Si 1.03 3/2 973 0.93 0.363 (+1/0) −222 Donor Nb– Si 0.97 1 908 1.09 0.642 (−1/−2) −436 Donor Ni− Si 0.92 3/2 870 1.01 0.592 (−1/−2) −348 Donor energy. We have computed the exciton binding energy for our 7 defects candidates as reported in Table I. For all defects but Nb− Si, Ni− Si and Na0 Si the exciton is stable (at low temperature) given the positive binding energy. The instability of the negatively charged donor bound exciton (i.e., Nb− Si and Ni− Si) is not surprising. Here, the exciton would be formed by an electron bound to a neu- tral defect (Nb0 Si or Ni0 Si). The absence of electrostatic energy binding the electron to the neutral defect explains the instability of the exciton. By contrast, neutral defects such as Fe0 i or positive defects such as Ti+ i can stabilize a donor bound exciton through the attractive Coulomb in- teraction between the bound electron and the positively charged defect (either +1 or +2). After this extensive screening we have found three de- fect candidates of interest for spin-photon interface: Ru0 i , Fe0 i , and Ti+ i . Fig. 3 shows the formation energy vs Fermi level and the single-particle levels for all our candidates. The defect-bound exciton nature of the excited state of these defects is again noticeable. The range of stability of the required charged state within the Fermi level is large for all defects indicating that they should be relatively easily formed in the right charged state. The Ti+ i will be favored in insulating silicon avoiding highly n- or p-type doped host. Ru0 i and Fe0 i will form in either insulating or n-type doped silicon. 5 level diagrams, and the charge density for the relevant bands for Ti+ i , Fe0 i , Ru0 i . For simplicity, we only plot the defect levels in the gap. The localization of the defect levels are represented by the inverse participation ratio. The charge density for the localized orbitals are shown with an isocontour value of 0.0005 ̊A–3, and the delocalized orbitals are shown with a value of 0.00008 ̊A–3. The TDM of these defects is technologically attractive from 1.86 to 1.15 D, higher than that of the T center (0.43 D with the same level of theory). The radiative lifetime estimated from these TDM are between 0.40 and 0.89 μ, which are lower than the T center (5 μs) but still not as low as that of the NV center in diamond (around a few nanoseconds) . The Ti+ i , Fe0 i interstitial defects are energetically fa- vored versus their substitutional counterparts and should be relatively easy to form (see Fig. S5). For ruthenium, while the interstitial defect is of interest, the substitu- tional configuration is energetically favored. This defect could however potentially be made interstitial through ion-implantation which is known to be able to produce non-equilibrium defect configurations. We have also computed the full PL spectra including phonon side-bands and the Huang-Rhys factor for Ti+ i , Fe0 i and Ru0 i (see Fig. S6a). The phonon side-bands are remarkably weak for all defects. The Huang-Rhys factor measures the average number of phonons partici- pating to the emission, and is computed to be 0.18, 0.32 and 0.36 respectively. These are much lower than the computed Huang-Rhys factor for the NV center which is 3.76 . A lower Huang-Rhys factor will lead to lower losses through the phonon sideband during emis- sion and is advantageous technologically. We hypothesize that simple interstitial or substitutional defects might have lower Huang-Rhys factors than complex defects due to their lower number of internal degrees of freedom. This might be an inherent advantage of simple defects versus complex defects. The previously known Se+ Si substitu- tional quantum defect shows a calculated Huang-Rhys factor of about 0.70, see Fig. S6b. When comparing our results to experimental litera- ture, we note that it is not always straightforward to link a measured line or signal in PL or deep level tran- sient spectroscopy (DLTS) to a specific defect. These measurements are typically made on an ensemble of de- fects and might include uncontrolled complexes. More- over, optical data (PL or absorption) is sparser than elec- tronic data on silicon defects. Titanium and iron show DLTS data in agreement with our charge transition level computations. For iron, the computed charge transition levels within HSE are for the +2/0 level at 0.29 eV above the valence-band maximum (VBM) while DLTS exper- iments report a transition level at 0.38 eV . This is within the range of error seen in HSE. Optical data points out to an optical transition related to the exci- tation of electrons in the +2/0 to the conduction band around 750 and 780 meV . This is in fair agreement with our computed ZPL at 903 meV and is consistent with the 100 meV difference between HSE and exper- iment for the +2/0 charge transition level. Moreover, the bound excitonic nature of this optical transition has been reported experimentally and agrees with our com- putations . Remarkably, the PL lines exhibit a Zee- man effect in agreement with our theoretical prediction of a non-singlet ground state and confirming the poten- tial for Fe0 i as a spin-photon interface . We note that there are some discussions in the literature about the assignment of this line to Fe interstitial in view of iso- tope shift data . For titanium, we have a +2/+1 level at 0.13 eV according to HSE which compares rea- sonably well to the electronic transition measured at 0.28 eV experimentally . We however did not find reliable experimental optical absorption or PL data for titanium. For both iron and titanium defects, we see that despite being common transition metals the optical properties of these defects are not always clear. Many of these previ- ous experimental results have important uncertainty that we hope the recent experimental developments in high 6 resolution spectroscopy using potentially 28Si enriched samples and measurement of individual defects in silicon could clarify [10, 12, 14, 55–57]. A direct comparison between experiment and our results on ruthenium inter- stitial is more difficult as we expect the substitutional defect RuSi to be the most stable (see Fig. S5). We note that the limited DLTS data on ruthenium in silicon is even not consistent with our computations for the sub- stitutional defect. Our HSE0 computations do not show any defect level in the band gap while the DLTS results indicate a series of deep levels (see SI, Fig. S7(c)) . These experimentally measured defect levels are likely due to complexes. We note that in SiC, a PL signature attributed to interstitial ruthenium has been observed despite its higher formation energy compared to the sub- stitutional configuration as in silicon . This suggests that the ruthenium interstitial defect could be produced despite its energetic preference for a substitutional posi- tion. The number of defect candidate is strikingly limited, i.e., only 3 from a pool of 1024 charged defects. This stresses the challenge in discovering high performance spin-photon interfaces in silicon and motivates the use of computational screening techniques. Our work calls for experimental efforts towards the realization of these three defect candidates especially Fe0 i and Ti1+ i . Addi- tionally, further computational efforts using techniques that are not yet high-throughput would further clarify the properties of these promising defects [59–62]. DISCUSSION Using high-throughput computational screening, we identified a series of potential spin-photon interface can- didates in silicon. Beyond the discovery of specific new quantum defects, our dataset can be used to discuss the general trends and limits in properties for simple defects in silicon and to further understand the inherent chem- ical and structural reasons leading to high performance spin-photon interfaces. The symmetry of the point defect has important impli- cations on its spectral properties. The absence of an elec- tric dipole in centrosymmetric defects reduces their cou- pling to electric fields, making them immune to spectral diffusion. This is an important technological advantage that motivated the interest in the silicon divacancy in di- amond . Among the three types of simple defects considered in our study, both the interstitial tetrahedral and the substitutional defect have a Td point group which is non-centrosymmetric. The hexagonal interstitial on the other hand has a centrosymmetric D3d point group. Unfortunately, we only identified one hexagonal defect Mn0 i,hex combining attractive optical properties and spin multiplicity. However, the excitation energy for Mn0 i,hex is rather small (560 meV) with a transition dipole moment of 2.6 D (see SI Fig. S3). This defect is comparable to the Se+ Si defect but with the advantage of centrosymme- try that would increase its optical coherence. Our study indicates that the hexagonal defect configuration is rare with only 60 hexagonal interstitial charged defects in our database. For the majority of the elements and charged states, a defect initialized in an hexagonal position re- laxes to a tetrahedral interstitial position. Even when the relaxation keeps the defect hexagonal, the tetrahe- dral site is still lower in energy for most of the defects (including Mn0 i,hex) indicating that the hexagonal config- uration is metastable with an energy barrier preventing the relaxation to the tetrahedral site. Only Ni, Ir and B show charged states in which the hexagonal configuration is the ground state interstitial configuration. Our work shows that designing a centrosymmetric defect in silicon emitting in the SWIR would require to turn to complex defects. A high radiative rate (small radiative lifetime) is also an important technological requirement for a spin-photon interface. Known spin-photon interface candidates in sil- icon have longer radiative lifetime than their counter- parts in diamond. The T center and Se+ Si show respec- tively a reported experimental radiative lifetime of 0.94 and 0.9 μs in agreement with theoretical results obtained with HSE . These values are much larger than the radiative lifetime for the NV center in diamond which is in the order of the nanoseconds. Our best defect candidates show also longer radiative lifetime in par with the T center and Se+ Si. This raises the question of how fundamental this higher radiative lifetime is in silicon. The radiative lifetime (τ) depends not only on the TDM (μ) but also on the frequency of the optical transition (ν) and the refractive index (nr): τ −1 = nr(2π)3ν3|μ|2 3ε0hc3 , where ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, h the Planck constant, and c the speed of light. Diamond is the most common host for QIS with the NV center being by far the most studied quantum defect. Moving from diamond with a refractive index of 2.4 to silicon with a refractive index of 3.8 increases radiative rate and lowers lifetime. However moving from an optical transition in the visible such as 1.96 eV in NV in diamond to the SWIR around 900 meV increases the lifetime (i.e., reduces radiative rate). Both effects taken together increase the radiative lifetime by a factor of 6 for silicon versus diamond for two defects with the same TDM. This is an inherent drawback to working in the SWIR and with silicon. However, a higher TDM could in principle make up for that inherent difference be- tween silicon and diamond. Fig. 4 plots an histogram of the TDM in our database. Very few defects show TDMs higher than the 5 to 6 D of the NV center or silicon divacancy in diamond. A transition dipole moment of around 11 D would be needed to make up for the adverse frequency effect to working in the SWIR and reach ra- diative rates comparable to the NV center. Fig. 4 shows 7 moments of the excitations for all the stable, non-singlet de- fects. We classified the bound-excitonic and intra-defect tran- sitions using the inverse participation ratio, were the bound- excitonic defects. that it is very unlikely to attain such a large TDM with simple defects in silicon. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 2a the anticorrelation between optical transition energy and TDM indicates that these high TDM defects are in fact far from being in the SWIR. We hypothesize that the rel- atively low TDMs are related to the defect-bound exciton nature of many excited states in our dataset. Excitations through bound excitons involve wavefunctions of very dif- ferent character (localized versus delocalized) leading to low overlap in general . Fig. 4 supports this analy- sis by showing a clear difference in TDM distribution for excitation identified as bound exciton. While our data is limited to simple defects, this suggests that defects in sili- con might be inherently dimmer than in diamond. While not insurmountable as shown by the recently developed defects in silicon , this finding has important technological implications. While bound excitons lead to lower TDMs and longer radiative lifetime, our study stresses their importance for quantum defects in silicon. All our spin-photon interface candidates are excited through bound excitons when we require optical transitions in the SWIR. The only de- fect candidate which shows transitions between localized states in the gap is the iodine substitutional I2+ Si . This defect shows a large transition dipole moment of 5 D but its optical transition at 690 meV is slightly too low to be technologically appealing (see Fig. S3 in SI). The dif- ficulty in finding defects optically active using only lo- calized defect states without involving host-like states in silicon can be easily rationalized by its small band gap . We note that work from Lee et al. surveying cer- tain transition metals in silicon for quantum defects only identified defects with vertical optical excitations lower than 600 meV . Our work identifies a series of can- didates with higher ZPL energy (from 791 to 939 meV) and longer SWIR wavelength for emission. The discrep- ancy between the two studies comes from the different criteria used. We included defect candidates that are not triplet (e.g., doublet) and more importantly, we allowed for defects which would be excited through defect-bound excitons. This indicates that relaxing our criteria on the nature of defect states in hosts band gap might be crucial to the discovery of quantum defects in silicon . Turning on to the type of chemistry leading to attrac- tive quantum defects, we find that interstitial transition metals are amongst the most interesting with Ti+ i , Fe0 i , Ru0 i within our top candidates. We can wonder why among all the possibilities, these transition metals and these charge states lead to exceptional properties. Inter- stitial tetrahedral defects are more favorable energetically than substitutional defects for most of the 3d transition metals except Zn, as shown in Fig. S5. Both substitu- tional and interstitial defects are in a Td point group and form e and t2 defect levels [67–69]. The single-particle energy levels for the series of 3d transition metals inter- stitial defects from Ni to Ti are plotted in Fig. 5 at the single-shot HSE level for the neutral charge state. The raw data is available in Fig. S7a of SI. A molecular dia- gram suggested by Beeler et al. is also plotted in Fig. 5 indicating that the d states from the transition metal mixes with the e and t2 state from the silicon host . This simplified molecular diagram does not include spin- splitting. The highest atomic number Z element of the series Ni has entirely filled t2 and e states that are all below the silicon valence band preventing optical activ- ity. As we go to the left of the periodic table (from Ni to Ti) and the atomic number Z decreases, electrons are re- moved and the atomic d states get higher in energy. The increase in energy of the d states moves the t2 and e lev- els up and make the e levels move within the band gap. While nickel does not show any possible optical transi- tion to defect levels, cobalt with its e level within the gap can be a potentially optically active defect. When more electrons are removed reaching to Fe0 i , the e state shifts further and reaches the conduction band while the t2 state moves up in the gap above the valence band. For Fe0 i , the t2 to e transition is relatively high in en- ergy leading to a technologically attractive ZPL within the near-IR. Moving to Mn and Cr moves the t2 states closer to the middle of the band gap shifting the optical transition to higher wavelength with less appeal for ap- plications. A strong change in total spin happens when moving to V which becomes low spin but still shows ex- 8 citation energies (i.e., t2 to conduction band) that are on the low side. Finally, Ti leads to the t2 states moving further to the middle of the gap making the lowest en- ergy excitation again too small to be of interest. We can see that for neutral 3d transition metal interstitials, Fe is in the “sweet spot” where the e and t2 levels are close to the valence and conduction bands leading to an opti- cal transition of high energy. While our analysis is based on neutral defects for the sake of simplicity, we can use it to suggest charged defects with appealing electronic structures. Notably, Ti+ i which is another of our candi- dates brings exactly the same filled t2 to e transition as in Fe0 i if one electron is removed from the Ti0 i defect (see Fig. 5). Along the same line, other charged defects can be proposed such as V2+ i as shown in Fig. S9. However, V is unstable in the +2 charge state and was therefore excluded in our screening. To summarize, we rationalize the interest of the Fe0 and Ti+ i interstitial defects as they offer among all 3d transition metals a unique position of their e and t2 states leading to high excitation energy and SWIR emission. A similar analysis can be performed for the 4d series (Pd to Zr) as illustrated in Fig. 6 (cf. Fig. S7b for the raw data). There, we see that the e to conduction band tran- sition suggested for cobalt in Co+ i can be mimicked for Ru0 i . The t2 to e transition found in Fe0 i is on the other hand present in the neutral Mo0 i . Mo0 i ground state is a singlet (S = 0) but shows an attractive excitation en- ergy (0.99 eV) with a bright emission (1.92D) at the HSE level (Fig. S8d). This defect could still be of use as single- photon emitter but not as spin-photon interface. While not the focus of the present study, Mo0 i is probably worth experimental investigation as it shows properties in par with the G center, one of the most interesting singlet quantum defect in silicon . As in the 3d se- ries, the removal of electrons in neutral 4d defects can lead to charged defects with the same t2 to e transition found in Fe0 i or Ti0 i – not surprisingly we find this is the case for one of our candidates Zr+ i , however its ZPL is on the low side (666 meV). This would also be the case for a hypothetical Nb2+ i which similar to V2+ i shows a very attractive electronic structure but is unstable (see SI, Fig. S8a). When considering 5d elements, we find a similar electronic structure for Hf+ i as Zr+ i but with even lower optical transition energies. For the later 5d transi- tion metals in our data set (i.e., Os and Ir), the presence of a 6s state in the band gap prevents attractive first ex- citation as the d to s transition are forbidden (Fig. S8d of SI). The second excitation is however allowed and in an interesting energy range. For instance, Os0 i shows a second excitation at 0.93 eV just above the dipole for- bidden 0.82 eV excitation at the full HSE level. So, this emitter could operate but with a dark state that might be detrimental to efficiency. Additionally, as for Mo0 i in the singlet 4ds, W0 i is an attractive singlet in the 5ds e t2 e t2 d e t2 Vi S=1/2 Z=23 Tii S=1 Z=22 e t2 Nii S=0 Z=28 Coi S=1/2 Z=27 Mni S=3/2 Z=25 Cri S=2 Z=24 Fei S=1 Z=26 CB VB HSE (HSE0) level for 3d transition metal series in the tetra- hedral interstitial configuration for the neutral charge state. The defect levels are represented by the t2 and e symmetry due to the Td point group. (Fig. S8d of SI). The substitutional transition metals can be similarly analyzed. The substitutional defects are also in a tetra- hedral Td point group forming t2 and e states but con- trary to the interstitial case, the e state is lower in energy than the t2 state [67–69]. The t2 state comes from mixing between the t2 d states from the transition metals and the t2 from the vacancy. The e state is not as bonding as in the interstitial case . We report the electronic structures in the substitutional state for 3d metals in sili- con in the SI (Fig. S7c of SI). Contrary to the interstitial, the t2 states are present in the band gap in Ni. As we move towards Ti, the number of electrons decreases and Z increases, moving the t2 states higher in energy. Re- markably the e states are never in the gap and are either below the valence band or above the conduction band ex- cept for Mn. Only the higher atomic number transition metals such as Ni and Co (more specifically Ni− Si and Co2− Si ) offer possibilities for optical transitions between 9 e Pdi S=0 Z=46 CB Rhi S=1/2 Z=45 Rui S=1 Z=44 Moi S=0 Z=43 Nbi S=1/2 Z=42 Zri S=1 Z=41 t2 VB Single-particle levels that are computed at single- shot HSE (HSE0) level for 4d transition metal series in the tetrahedral interstitial configuration with neutral charges. the t2 state and conduction band-like states. Any substi- tutional 3d transition metal beyond Co (from Fe to Ti) does not show any single-energy particle state within the band gap making them not attractive for optical emis- sion except Mn0 Si. It is only when we move to 4d and 5d defects that we see earlier transition metals such as Nb− Si and Ta− Si becoming potentially optically active in the SWIR. For instance, compared to V which is the 3d in the same column, the higher energy of the 4d and 5d orbitals in Nb and Ta, lead to a higher e states that is now in the gap and can lead to potential excitonic tran- sitions (see Fig. S7). Remarkably, while the substitu- tional transition metals can have attractive energy levels well positioned with the gap, they appear for negatively charged defects that are unstable as donor bound exci- tons. The electron count in the interstitial case on the contrary can lead to adequate excitation in neutral or positive charge states which favor stability of the donor bound exciton. The only non-transition metal selected in our shortlist of 7 potential candidates is the Na0 Si (see transition between 3 degenerate defect states to the con- duction band as shown in Fig. S3. The unstable bound exciton excluded this defect for further consideration but it is remarkable that these 3 defect states are not related to any the alkali levels. The closest alkali levels are just below the valence band. The three defect states are lo- calized on the silicon neighbors to the sodium substitu- tional. We relate these defect states to the strain induced by the alkali. This effect is observed with potassium and rubidium as well (see Fig. S3 of SI). Remarkably, we did not find any interesting quantum defect candidates from main group elements. We recov- ered the previously studied Se+ Si but it was excluded in our screening because of its inappropriate emission wave- length . Here, the selenium substitutional defect can be seen as a Se6+ substituting on Si4+ with one elec- tron left. We note that Abraham et al. suggested that reproducing this electronic configuration could be consid- ered using interstitial alkali-earth that have a +2 oxida- tion state and could be made in a multiplet +1 charged state . The experimental study of from Abraham et al. on Mg interstitials in silicon however did not show any PL. Our database indicates that the alkali-earth se- ries Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, Ba in interstitial position do not show levels that are adequately positioned with respect to the band edges (see Fig. S9 of SI). The best contender is Be+ Si but it does not show strong TDM (much lower than Se+ Si) and a transition energy that is still too far in the infra-red. This last example on alkali-earth inter- stitial illustrates how access to a database of computed defect properties can help identify or rule out proposed defects following certain design guidelines. CONCLUSION While silicon has become an emerging host for opti- cally controlled quantum defects, an optimal color cen- ter to use as a spin-photon interface is still under active search. We have used high-throughput computational screening to identify a handful defect candidates among a database of more than 1000 simple charged defects in silicon. The emergence of specific tetrahedral interstitial transition metals (i.e., Fe0 i , Ru0 i , Ti+ i ) was rationalized through the positions of their defect induced t2 and e states. The use of a single-shot HSE0 approach was crit- ical in scaling up our screening to thousands of charged defects without compromising the overall accuracy. We found that the defects offering strong optical emission at a technologically relevant wavelength are rare and in- volve states close to the band edges forming defect-bound excitons. The excitonic nature of these defects and our dataset suggest that silicon defects might be intrinsically dimmer than defects in diamond. Our work motivates further experimental and theoretical investigations of the unique identified defect candidates and outlines an ef- fective high-throughput approach to future screening for quantum defects including complexes in silicon and other hosts. METHODS We considered 56 elements that are ion-implantable, as highlighted in the periodic table in Fig. S5. This 10 collection covers the majority of the elements except the rare-earth, the noble gas, and some of the 5d ele- ments. All defect computations at DFT level were per- formed using the automatic workflows that are imple- mented in atomate software package . The DFT calculations were performed using Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package (VASP) and the projector- augmented wave (PAW) method with the Perdew- Burke-Erzhenhoff (PBE) functional. To simulate charged defects, we applied the spin-polarized computations and used a supercell size of 216 atoms. 520 eV cutoff en- ergies were used for the plane-wave basis and only the Γ point was used to sample the Brillouin zone. The defect structures were optimized at a fixed volume un- til the forces on the ions are smaller than 0.01 eV/ ̊A. After these DFT computations, we applied the Heyd- Scuseria-Ernzerhoff (HSE) hybrid-functional calcula- tions but in a “single-shot” fashion (HSE0) to all the de- fects in the database for improved descriptions of single- particle levels at a significantly reduced computational cost compare to the full HSE. Using the defect structures in 216 atoms that are optimized at DFT level, we car- ried out the perturbative single-shot approach in which the single-particle eigenvalues are calculated using the PBE wavefunctions. We used the standard 25% Fock ex- change in these single-shot calculations. We note that the HSE0 band gap of Si is 1.18 eV, in good agreement with full HSE results. Here we report the relevant IN- CAR tags to perform the single-shot HSE0 calculation: ALGO = Eigenval, LHFCALC = True, HFSCREEN = 0.2, AEXX = 0.25, ICHARG = 1, NELM = 1. For the 19 screened quantum defect candidates, we ap- plied the fully self-consistent HSE hybrid functional with 25% exact exchange. We further increased the super- cell size to 512 atoms, with a reduced plane-wave basis cutoff energies of 400 eV and a Γ only k-point. We per- formed the relaxations using a force criteria of 0.01 eV/ ̊A. The HSE functional provides an accurate band gap of 1.114 eV for silicon, which is in excellent agreement with the measured band gap of 1.17 eV at 0 K. For all defect computations symmetry was not imposed. The defect formation energies were analyzed using Py- CDT . We computed the formation energy of each charged-defect state as a function of the Fermi level Ef : Eform[Xq] = Etot[Xq]−Ebulk tot − � niμi+qEf+Ecorr (1) where Etot[Xq] and Ebulk tot are the total energies of the defect-containing supercell (for a given defect X in the charge state q) and the bulk, respectively. The third term represents the energy needed to exchange atoms with thermodynamic reservoirs where ni indicates the number of atoms of species i removed or added to create the defect, and μi their corresponding chemical poten- tial. The fourth term represents the energy to exchange electrons with the host material through the electronic chemical potential given by the Fermi level. Finally, the last term is the finite-size correction accounting for the spurious Coulomb interactions under periodic boundary conditions . The zero-phonon line (ZPL) energy is defined as the difference between the energy of the excited state and that of the ground state. We obtained the total energy of the excited states for the relaxed defects through the constrained-HSE method that forces the occupation of the unoccupied single-particle states. This methodology has been shown to give ZPLs within 100 meV from ex- periment for defects in diamond and silicon . When searching for most relevant excited states, we con- sider the transitions that gives the smallest energy dif- ference, while also allowing an energy window of up to 100 meV to take into account the errors and band degen- eracy. For all the possible transitions that identified in the described process, we further compute the transition dipole moment, and the pair of initial and final bands that give the largest transition dipole moment (TDM) are identified as the most relevant defects. The TDM measures the tendency of the transition between the ini- tial and final states, and it was calculated using using the wavefunctions from VASP and analyzed by the Py- Vaspwfc package . For a single k point, the TDM is defined as: μk = iħ (εf,k − εi,k) m ⟨ψf,k|p|ψi,k⟩ , (2) where εi,k and εf,k stands for the eigenvalues of the ini- tial and final states, m is electron mass, ψi and ψi stands for the initial and final wavefunctions, and p is the mo- mentum operator. We note that the optical transition dipole moment can also be computed through from the derivative of the wavefucntions which is provided in the vasp optical calculations. We carefully examine few sys- tems and compared the results of pyvaspwfc and from WAVEDER from vasp. The results show excellent corre- spondence between these methods. The detailed bench- mark is given in Fig. S10 of SI. PL spectra were computed following the procedure of Alkauskas et al. with a mixed GGA+HSE approach. In this mixed approach, the ground and excited state structures are fully relaxed at the HSE level, while the phonons are calculated within GGA for a carefully op- timized GGA groundstate structure. This approach has been successfully used for the NV center providing excel- lent agreement between the computed and experimental Huang-Rhys factor . Using only GGA for both struc- ture relaxations and phonon calculations has been shown to underestimate the experimental Huang-Rhys factor of the NV center by about 20% . Here, we found that the values for the Huang-Rhys factors with GGA only are similar to those of the mixed GGA+HSE approach 11 reported in the Results section. Namely, the GGA only Huang-Rhys factors are 0.15, 0.12, and 0.27 for Ti+ i , Fe0 i , and Ru0 i , respectively. The defect structures were sim- ulated in a 512-atoms cell. This supercell size has been demonstrated to yield good convergence of the Huang- Rhys factor of the NV center . The phonons of the ground and excited states were assumed to be identi- cal within the so-called equal-mode approximation . The phonons (phonon-frequencies and eigenvectors) were calculated within the finite-displacement method in the harmonic approximation using the Phonopy package . To this end, the ground state structure was first carefully relaxed with GGA until forces were smaller than 0.001 eV/ ̊A. The atoms in the relaxed structure were then sys- tematically displaced (atomic displacement magnitude was set to 0.01 ̊A) and the restoring forces were com- puted with VASP. The calculated forces determine the atomic force constants from which the dynamical (Hes- sian) matrix is formed. Diagonalizing the dynamical ma- trix yields the phonon eigenfrequencies and eigenvectors that are key ingredients to calculating the phonon side- bands of the PL spectra . A Gaussian broadening of 2 meV was used for the PL spectra plots in Fig. S6. The ZPL positions were set to the values reported in table I. COMPETING INTERESTS The authors declare no competing financial interest. CONTRIBUTIONS Y. X. and D. D. developed the high-throughput work- flow and performed the computations. Y. X. and C. B. performed the HSE computations. N. S. performed the PL computations. Y. X., C. B., W. C., G.H., A. S., S. M. G. and H. S. analyzed the data. S. M. G., A. S., and G. H. supervised and designed the project. The manuscript was drafted and edited by all the authors at each stage of its preparation. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences in Quantum Information Science under Award Number DE- This research used resources of the Na- tional Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Of- fice of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 using NERSC award BES-ERCAP0020966. G. Wolfowicz, F. J. Heremans, C. P. Anderson, S. Kanai, H. Seo, A. Gali, G. Galli, and D. D. Awschalom, Quan- tum guidelines for solid-state spin defects, Nature Re- views Materials 6, 906 (2021), arXiv:2010.16395. X. Yan, S. Gitt, B. Lin, D. Witt, M. Abdolahi, A. Afifi, A. Azem, A. Darcie, J. Wu, K. Awan, M. Mitchell, A. Pfenning, L. Chrostowski, and J. F. Young, Sili- con photonic quantum computing with spin qubits, APL Photonics 6, 10.1063/5.0049372 (2021). G. Zhang, Y. Cheng, J. P. Chou, and A. Gali, Material platforms for defect qubits and single-photon emitters, Applied Physics Reviews 7, 10.1063/5.0006075 (2020), B. Hensen, H. Bernien, A. E. Dr ́eau, A. Reiserer, N. Kalb, M. S. Blok, J. Ruitenberg, R. F. L. Vermeulen, R. N. Schouten, C. Abell ́an, W. Amaya, V. Pruneri, M. W. Mitchell, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, D. Elkouss, S. Wehner, T. H. Taminiau, and R. Hanson, Loophole- free bell inequality violation using electron spins sepa- rated by 1.3 kilometres, Nature 526, 682 (2015). C. E. Bradley, J. Randall, M. H. Abobeih, R. C. Berrevoets, M. J. Degen, M. A. Bakker, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, and T. H. Taminiau, A ten-qubit solid- state spin register with quantum memory up to one minute, Phys. Rev. X 9, 031045 (2019). P.-J. Stas, Y. Q. Huan, B. Machielse, E. N. Knall, A. Suleymanzade, B. Pingault, M. Sutula, S. W. Ding, C. M. Knaut, D. R. Assumpcao, Y.-C. Wei, M. K. Bhaskar, R. Riedinger, D. D. Sukachev, H. Park, M. Lonˇcar, D. S. Levonian, and M. D. Lukin, Robust multi-qubit quantum network node with integrated error detection, Science 378, 557 (2022), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.add9771. D. M. Lukin, M. A. Guidry, and J. Vuˇckovi ́c, Inte- grated Quantum Photonics with Silicon Carbide: Chal- lenges and Prospects, PRX Quantum 1, 1 (2020), M. Atat ̈ure, D. Englund, N. Vamivakas, S. Y. Lee, and J. Wrachtrup, Material platforms for spin-based photonic quantum technologies, Nature Reviews Materials 3, 38 L. C. Bassett, A. Alkauskas, A. L. Exarhos, and K. M. C. Fu, Quantum defects by design, Nanophotonics 8, 1867 L. Bergeron, C. Chartrand, A. T. K. Kurkjian, K. J. Morse, H. Riemann, N. V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.- J. Pohl, M. L. W. Thewalt, and S. Simmons, Silicon- Integrated Telecommunications Photon-Spin Interface, PRX Quantum 1, 20301 (2020). E. MacQuarrie, C. Chartrand, D. Higginbottom, K. Morse, V. Karasyuk, S. Roorda, and S. Simmons, Generating T centres in photonic silicon-on-insulator material by ion implantation, New Journal of Physics W. Redjem, A. Durand, T. Herzig, A. Benali, S. Pezza- gna, J. Meijer, A. Yu. Kuznetsov, H. S. Nguyen, S. Cu- eff, J.-M. G ́erard, I. Robert-Philip, B. Gil, D. Caliste, P. Pochet, M. Abbarchi, V. Jacques, A. Dr ́eau, and G. Cassabois, Single artificial atoms in silicon emitting at telecom wavelengths, Nature Electronics 3, 738 (2020). 12 A. Durand, Y. Baron, W. Redjem, T. Herzig, A. Benali, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, A. Y. Kuznetsov, J.-M. G ́erard, I. Robert-Philip, M. Abbarchi, V. Jacques, G. Cassabois, and A. Dr ́eau, Broad Diversity of Near-Infrared Single- Photon Emitters in Silicon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 83602 Y. Baron, A. Durand, P. Udvarhelyi, T. Herzig, M. Khoury, S. Pezzagna, J. Meijer, I. Robert-Philip, M. Abbarchi, J.-M. Hartmann, V. Mazzocchi, J.-M. G ́erard, A. Gali, V. Jacques, G. Cassabois, and A. Dr ́eau, Detection of Single W-Centers in Silicon, ACS Photonics K. J. Morse, R. J. Abraham, A. DeAbreu, C. Bowness, T. S. Richards, H. Riemann, N. V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H. J. Pohl, M. L. Thewalt, and S. Simmons, A pho- tonic platform for donor spin qubits in silicon, Science Advances 3, 1 (2017), arXiv:1606.03488. L. Komza, P. Samutpraphoot, M. Odeh, Y.-L. Tang, M. Mathew, J. Chang, H. Song, M.-K. Kim, Y. Xiong, G. Hautier, and A. Sipahigil, Indistinguishable photons from an artificial atom in silicon photonics (2022). C. E. Dreyer, A. Alkauskas, J. L. Lyons, A. Janotti, and C. G. Van de Walle, First-Principles Calculations of Point Defects for Quantum Technologies, Annual Review of Materials Research 48, 1 (2018). A. Alkauskas, M. D. McCluskey, and C. G. Van De Walle, Tutorial: Defects in semiconductors - Combining ex- periment and theory, Journal of Applied Physics 119, T. J. Smart, K. Li, J. Xu, and Y. Ping, Intersystem cross- ing and exciton–defect coupling of spin defects in hexag- onal boron nitride, npj Computational Materials 7, 59 ́A. Gali, Ab initio theory of the nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond, Nanophotonics 8, 1907 J. Y. Tsai, J. Pan, H. Lin, A. Bansil, and Q. Yan, Antisite defect qubits in monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides, Nature Communications 13, 1 (2022), A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, and G. Ceder, Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials in- novation, APL materials 1, 11002 (2013). S. Curtarolo, G. L. W. Hart, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo, S. Sanvito, and O. Levy, The high-throughput highway to computational materials design., Nature materials 12, G. Brunin, F. Ricci, V.-A. Ha, G.-M. Rignanese, and G. Hautier, Transparent conducting materials discovery using high-throughput computing, npj Computational Materials 5, 63 (2019). F. Bertoldo, S. Ali, S. Manti, and K. S. Thygesen, Quan- tum point defects in 2D materials - the QPOD database, npj Computational Materials 8, 10.1038/s41524-022- A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, X. Xiang, L. Jacoby, R. Bie- gaj, S. T. Dunham, D. R. Gamelin, and M. K. Chan, Universal machine learning framework for defect pre- dictions in zinc blende semiconductors, Patterns 3, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi and M. K. Chan, Data-driven design of novel halide perovskite alloys, Energy and En- vironmental Science , 1930 (2022), arXiv:2109.10798. D. Dahliah, G. Brunin, J. George, V. A. Ha, G. M. Rignanese, and G. Hautier, High-throughput computa- tional search for high carrier lifetime, defect-tolerant so- lar absorbers, Energy and Environmental Science 14, A. A. Emery and C. Wolverton, High-throughput DFT calculations of formation energy, stability and oxygen va- cancy formation energy of ABO3 perovskites, Scientific Data 4, 170153 (2017). Y. Kumagai, N. Tsunoda, A. Takahashi, and F. Oba, Insights into oxygen vacancies from high-throughput first-principles calculations, Physical Review Materials 5, J. Davidsson, R. Babar, D. Shafizadeh, I. G. Ivanov, V. Iv ́ady, R. Armiento, and I. A. Abrikosov, Exhaus- tive characterization of modified si vacancies in 4h-sic, Nanophotonics 11, 4565 (2022). D. Broberg, B. Medasani, N. E. Zimmermann, G. Yu, A. Canning, M. Haranczyk, M. Asta, and G. Hautier, Pycdt: A python toolkit for modeling point defects in semiconductors and insulators, Computer Physics Com- munications 226, 165 (2018). A. Goyal, P. Gorai, E. S. Toberer, and V. Stevanovi ́c, First-principles calculation of intrinsic defect chemistry and self-doping in pbte, npj Computational Materials 3, M. Huang, Z. Zheng, Z. Dai, X. Guo, S. Wang, L. Jiang, J. Wei, and S. Chen, Dasp: Defect and dopant ab- initio simulation package, Journal of Semiconductors 43, J. Davidsson, V. Iv ́ady, R. Armiento, and I. A. Abrikosov, Adaq: Automatic workflows for magneto-optical proper- ties of point defects in semiconductors, Computer Physics Communications 269, 108091 (2021). C.-W. Lee, M. Singh, A. C. Tamboli, and V. Stevanovi ́c, Transition metal impurities in silicon: computational search for a semiconductor qubit, npj Computational Ma- terials 8, 172 (2022), arXiv:2105.05927. D. Broberg, K. Bystrom, D. Dahliah, A. D. B. Williamson, L. Weston, O. D. Scanlon, G. Rignanese, S. Dwaraknath, J. Varley, K. Persson, M. Asta, and G. Hautier, High-throughput calculations of charged point defect properties with semi-local density functional theory -performance benchmarks for materials screening applications (2023), accepted. J. B. Varley, A. Janotti, and C. G. Van de Walle, De- fects in AlN as candidates for solid-state qubits, Physical Review B 93, 161201 (2016). Y. Xiong, M. Mathew, S. M. Griffin, A. Sipahigil, and G. Hautier, Midgap state requirements for opti- cally active quantum defects, arXiv preprint G. Davies, The optical properties of luminescence centres in silicon, Physics Reports 176, 83 (1989). D. Dhaliah, Y. Xiong, A. Sipahigil, S. M. Griffin, and G. Hautier, First-principles study of the t center in sili- con, Phys. Rev. Materials 6, L053201 (2022). J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Self-interaction correction to density-functional approximations for many-electron systems, Phys. Rev. B 23, 5048 (1981). 13 A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-S ́anchez, and W. Yang, Insights into current limitations of density functional theory, Science 321, 792 https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1158722. J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria, and M. Ernzerhof, Hybrid functionals based on a screened coulomb potential, The Journal of Chemical Physics 118, 8207 (2003), https://doi.org/10.1063/1.1564060. A. Alkauskas and A. Pasquarello, Effect of improved band-gap description in density functional theory on de- fect energy levels in -quartz, Physica B: Condensed Mat- A. Batalov, C. Zierl, T. Gaebel, P. Neumann, I.-Y. Chan, G. Balasubramanian, P. R. Hemmer, F. Jelezko, and J. Wrachtrup, Temporal coherence of photons emitted by single nitrogen-vacancy defect centers in diamond us- ing optical rabi-oscillations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 077401 M. L. Goldman, A. Sipahigil, M. W. Doherty, N. Y. Yao, S. D. Bennett, M. Markham, D. J. Twitchen, N. B. Man- son, A. Kubanek, and M. D. Lukin, Phonon-induced pop- ulation dynamics and intersystem crossing in nitrogen- vacancy centers, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 145502 (2015). L. Razinkovas, M. W. Doherty, N. B. Manson, C. G. Van de Walle, and A. Alkauskas, Vibrational and vibronic structure of isolated point defects: The nitrogen-vacancy center in diamond, Phys. Rev. B 104, 045303 (2021). A. Alkauskas, B. B. Buckley, D. D. Awschalom, and C. G. V. de Walle, First-principles theory of the lumi- nescence lineshape for the triplet transition in diamond nv centres, New Journal of Physics 16, 073026 (2014). K. Graff, Metal Impurities in Silicon-Device Fabrication (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000). A. A. Istratov, H. Hieslmair, and E. R. Weber, Iron and its complexes in silicon, Applied Physics A: Materials Science and Processing 69, 13 (1999). A. Thilderkvist, G. Grossmann, M. Kleverman, and H. G. Grimmeiss, The Excited 5T1 State of the Fei0- Center in Silicon, Materials Science Forum 143-147, 165 A. L. Thilderkvist, G. Grossmann, M. Kleverman, and H. G. Grimmeiss, Neutral interstitial iron center in sil- icon studied by Zeeman spectroscopy, Physical Review B - Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 58, 7723 T. E. Schlesinger, R. J. Hauenstein, R. M. Feenstra, and T. C. McGill, Isotope shifts for the P, Q, R lines in indium-doped silicon, Solid State Communications 46, J. Zhou, J. A. Wu, L. W. Lu, and Z. Y. Han, Physi- cal behavior of ruthenium in silicon, Journal of Applied Physics 69, 2746 (1991). J. W. Chen and A. G. Milnes, Energy levels in sili- con, Annual Review of Materials Science 10, 157 (1980), https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ms.10.080180.001105. M. Steger, A. Yang, T. Sekiguchi, K. Saeedi, M. L. The- walt, M. O. Henry, K. Johnston, H. Riemann, N. V. Abrosimov, M. F. Churbanov, A. V. Gusev, A. K. Kali- teevskii, O. N. Godisov, P. Becker, and H. J. Pohl, Photo- luminescence of deep defects involving transition metals in Si: New insights from highly enriched 28Si, Journal of Applied Physics 110, 10.1063/1.3651774 (2011). J. W. Kleppinger, Y. Pershin, Z. Rak, and K. C. Mandal, Investigation on origin of Ru-induced deep-level defects in 4H-SiC epilayer based Schottky diodes by DLTS and theoretical calculations, in Hard X-Ray, Gamma-Ray, and Neutron Detector Physics XXI , September 2019, edited by A. Burger, R. B. James, and S. A. Payne (SPIE, 2019) p. 30. M. Onizhuk and G. Galli, PyCCE: A Python Package for Cluster Correlation Expansion Simulations of Spin Qubit Dynamics, Advanced Theory and Simulations 4, 2100254 B. Huang, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Simulating the elec- tronic structure of spin defects on quantum computers, PRX Quantum 3, 010339 (2022). H. Ma, N. Sheng, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Quantum embedding theory for strongly correlated states in mate- rials, Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation 17, Y. Jin, M. Govoni, and G. Galli, Vibrationally resolved optical excitations of the nitrogen-vacancy center in dia- mond, npj Computational Materials 8, 238 (2022). P. Udvarhelyi, R. Nagy, F. Kaiser, S. Y. Lee, J. Wrachtrup, and A. Gali, Spectrally Stable Defect Qubits with no Inversion Symmetry for Robust Spin-To- Photon Interface, Physical Review Applied 11, 1 (2019), K. D. Jahnke, A. Sipahigil, J. M. Binder, M. W. Doherty, M. Metsch, L. J. Rogers, N. B. Manson, M. D. Lukin, and F. Jelezko, Electron–phonon processes of the silicon- vacancy centre in diamond, New Journal of Physics 17, A. DeAbreu, C. Bowness, R. J. Abraham, A. Medvedova, K. J. Morse, H. Riemann, N. V. Abrosimov, P. Becker, H.-J. Pohl, M. L. Thewalt, and S. Simmons, Character- ization of the Si:se+ spin-photon interface, Phys. Rev. Applied 11, 044036 (2019). D. B. Higginbottom, A. T. K. Kurkjian, C. Chartrand, M. Kazemi, N. A. Brunelle, E. R. MacQuarrie, J. R. Klein, N. R. Lee-Hone, J. Stacho, M. Ruether, C. Bow- ness, L. Bergeron, A. DeAbreu, S. R. Harrigan, J. Kana- ganayagam, D. W. Marsden, T. S. Richards, L. A. Stott, S. Roorda, K. J. Morse, M. L. W. Thewalt, and S. Sim- mons, Optical observation of single spins in silicon, Na- ture 607, 266 (2022). F. Beeler, O. K. Andersen, and M. Scheffler, Electronic and magnetic structure of 3d transition-metal point de- fects in silicon calculated from first principles, Physical Review B 41, 1603 (1990). U. Lindefelt and A. Zunger, Interstitial transition atom impurities in silicon: Electronic structure and lattice re- laxation, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 17, A. Zunger and U. Lindefelt, Theory of substitutional and interstitial 3d impurities in silicon, Physical Review B 26, L. Komza, P. Samutpraphoot, M. Odeh, Y.-L. Tang, M. Mathew, J. Chang, H. Song, M.-K. Kim, Y. Xiong, G. Hautier, and A. Sipahigil, Indistinguishable pho- tons from an artificial atom in silicon photonics, arXiv preprint (2022), arXiv:2211.09305v1. M. Prabhu1, C. Errando-Herranz, L. D. Santis, I. Chris- ten, C. Chen, C. Gerlach, and D. Englund, Individ- ually addressable and spectrally programmable artifi- cial atoms in silicon photonics, arXiv preprint 14 R. J. Abraham, A. Deabreu, K. J. Morse, V. B. Shuman, L. M. Portsel, A. N. Lodygin, Y. A. Astrov, N. V. Abrosi- mov, S. G. Pavlov, H. W. H ̈ubers, S. Simmons, and M. L. Thewalt, Further investigations of the deep double donor magnesium in silicon, Physical Review B 98, 1 (2018). K. Mathew, J. H. Montoya, A. Faghaninia, S. Dwarakanath, M. Aykol, H. Tang, I. heng Chu, T. Smidt, B. Bocklund, M. Horton, J. Dagdelen, B. Wood, Z.-K. Liu, J. Neaton, S. P. Ong, K. Persson, and A. Jain, Atomate: A high-level interface to generate, execute, and analyze computational materials science workflows, Computational Materials Science 139, 140 S. P. Ong, W. D. Richards, A. Jain, G. Hautier, M. Kocher, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, V. L. Chevrier, K. A. Persson, and G. Ceder, Python materials genomics (py- matgen): A robust, open-source python library for mate- rials analysis, Computational Materials Science 68, 314 G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Computational Materials Science P. E. Bl ̈ochl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). S. B. Zhang and J. E. Northrup, Chemical potential de- pendence of defect formation energies in gaas: Applica- tion to ga self-diffusion, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 2339 (1991). H.-P. Komsa, T. T. Rantala, and A. Pasquarello, Finite- size supercell correction schemes for charged defect cal- culations, Phys. Rev. B 86, 045112 (2012). C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer, and C. G. Van de Walle, Fully ab initio finite-size corrections for charged-defect supercell calculations, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 016402 Y. Kumagai and F. Oba, Electrostatics-based finite-size corrections for first-principles point defect calculations, Phys. Rev. B 89, 195205 (2014). A. Gali, E. Janz ́en, P. De ́ak, G. Kresse, and E. Kaxiras, Theory of spin-conserving excitation of the n−V − center in diamond, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 186404 (2009). S. Li, G. Thiering, P. Udvarhelyi, V. Iv ́ady, and A. Gali, Carbon defect qubit in two-dimensional WS2, Nat. Com- mun. 13, 1210 (2022). Q. Zheng, Vasp band unfolding, https://github.com/ QijingZheng/VaspBandUnfolding (2018). A. Togo and I. Tanaka, First principles phonon calcu- lations in materials science, Scripta Materialia 108, 1