Journal Name Coherent imaging and dynamics of excitons in MoSe2 monolayers epitaxially grown on hexagonal boron nitride Karolina Ewa Połczyńska,a Simon Le Denmat,b Takashi Taniguchi,c Kenji Watanabe,c Marek Potemski,a,d,e Piotr Kossacki,a Wojciech Pacuski,a Jacek Kasprzak,a,b, f Using four-wave mixing microscopy, we measure the coher- ent response and ultrafast dynamics of excitons and trions in MoSe2 monolayers grown by molecular beam epitaxy on thin films of hexagonal boron nitride. We assess inhomoge- neous and homogeneous broadenings in the transition spec- tral lineshape. The impact of phonons on the homogeneous dephasing is inferred via the temperature dependence of the dephasing. Four-wave mixing mapping, combined with the atomic force microscopy, reveals spatial correlations between exciton oscillator strength, inhomogeneous broadening and the sample morphology. The quality of coherent optical re- sponse of the epitaxially grown transition metal dichalco- genides becomes now comparable with the samples pro- duced by mechanical exfoliation, enabling coherent nonlinear spectroscopy of innovative materials, like magnetic layers or Janus semiconductors. 1 Introduction. We are witnessing an astonishing progress in the assembly of complex heterostructures based on monolayers of semiconduct- ing transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), an iconic exam- ple being MoSe2 placed between flakes of hexagonal boron ni- tride (hBN). The fabrication technology principally relies on me- chanical exfoliation of thin films from van der Waals bulk crys- tals, similarly to the revolutionary extraction of graphene from graphite 1. This technique has enabled important discoveries in a Faculty of Physics, University of Warsaw, ul. Pasteura 5, 02-093 Warszawa, Poland E-mail: karolina.polczynska@fuw.edu.pl b Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, Institut Néel, 25 rue des Martyrs, 38000 Grenoble, France c International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan d Laboratoire National des Champs Magnétiques Intenses, CNRS-UGA-UPS-INSA-EMFL, 25 Av. des Martyrs, 38042 Grenoble, France e CENTERA Labs, Institute of High Pressure Physics, PAS, PL-01-142 Warsaw, Poland f Walter Schottky Institut and TUM School of Natural Sciences, Technische Universität München, 85748 Garching, Germany the field of condensed matter physics to name a few: demon- strations of novel strongly-correlated electron systems 2, moiré quantum matter 3, optical sensing of a quantum Hall effect 4, non-hydrogenic Rydberg series of excitonic excitations 5, high- harmonic optical generation 6,7 and giant coherent nonlinear re- sponse 8,9. It also boosted developments toward future appli- cations of these materials in optoelectronics 10 and medicine 11. While the non-scalability of the exfoliation top-down approach is not an issue for the fundamental research, for which the proof- of-principle demonstrations are essential, it is a major roadblock on the academia-industry pathway of this field. In order to merge these novel materials with the semiconductor microelectronics, strain-free monolayer samples homogeneously covering wafers of a few cm diameter are required 12. This can only be achieved by employing epitaxial techniques. The chemical vapor deposition of TMD layers, including mono- layers, have been reported 13 with post-growth processing im- proving the samples’s quality 14. Also molecular beam epitaxy of TMDs has been highlighted 15,16. The optical response of as- grown monolayers was dominated by the inhomogeneous broad- ening of the studied exciton transitions (EX), typically in a range of several tens meV. Moreover, the MBE growth of the materi- als incorporating transition metals: Mo, W, is particularly chal- lenging owing to their low surface mobility. This causes their aggregation, especially when roaming on a rough surface, such that typically grains not exceeding 10 nm size were obtained on a commonly used SiO2 substrate. On top of that, the epitaxy has a slow rate and requires high temperatures for sublimation, render- ing it demanding. Recently, a breakthrough in this area has been achieved 17: by using atomically flat and thin hBN layers, MoSe2 monolayers with 85% of surface coverage were MBE-grown, ho- mogenously occupying terraces of several hundreds of μm. A step-like improvement of the optical response was achieved with exciton’s photoluminescence line width below 10 meV and a sup- pressed distribution of the central transition energy, down to 0.16 meV. Importantly, good optical properties of the MBE-grown Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–7 | 1 arXiv:2303.10697v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 19 Mar 2023 Fig. 1 Optical and structural characterization of the MBE-grown MoSe2 monolayer. a) A large scale atomic force microscopy (AFM) im- age of the sample, showing the hBN flake on top of the SiO2 substrate. b) The morphology of the sample revealed by the AFM performed with enhanced spatial resolution. The MoSe2 monolayer flakes with a typical size of 100 nm grow on atomically flat terraces of the hBN. c) Four-wave mixing spectral interferogram (in red) measured at the exciton energy at T=5 K. The excitation pulse is given in green. d) Four-wave mixing intensity dependence. The linear regime of the FWM, also known as the χ(3) regime, occurs for the driving powers up to 3μW. With increasing the excitation intensity, the onset of Rabi rotation is visible. TMD are achieved without post-growth mechanical processing. Further to that, a heteroepitaxial growth of MoSe2 monolayers on hBN, yielding wafer-scale van der Waals heterostructures of a good optical quality has recently been reported 12. For optoelectronic applications, like ultrafast photodetectors, it is important to examine nonlinear absorption properties of these materials. In this work, we investigate the coherent optical re- sponse of these high quality epitaxial MoSe2 monolayers using tools of nonlinear spectroscopy. By performing four-wave mixing (FWM) microscopy 18, we assess the exciton’s and trion’s inhomo- genenous σ and homogeneous γ line widths (FWHM). The impact of phonons on γ is evaluated by performing temperature depen- dence studies of the dephasing. Using FWM, we also measure the exciton density dynamics and find a longer population lifetime of trions with respect to excitons, as predicted in the literature 19,20. Next, by performing FWM spatial imaging we observe correla- tions between the FWM amplitude and σ. 2 Optical characterization A large scale atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the in- vestigated sample is presented in Fig. 1 a. We concentrate on the macroscopic hBN flake, containing atomically flat terraces on sev- eral micron scale, which is deposited onto a SiO2/Si substrate. The corresponding AFM image, measured with enhanced spatial resolution, is shown in Fig. 1 b. Therein, we recognize MoSe2 monolayers with a typical size of around 100 nm, homogeneously covering the hBN, not yet affected by the grain coalescence pro- cess, required to obtain a complete monolayer 17. Further AFM images are presented in Supplementary Fig. 8. The fabrication technology is described in Ref. . The sample presented in this work has been prepared in the following process: Before launching the MBE-growth, the substrate containing hBN flakes was degassed for 10 min at 750 deg C. Next, during 25 minutes of growth, we deposited a single monolayer of MoSe2 at 300 deg C, and finally, we annealed the sample in Se flux for 2h at 750 deg C. Se was deposited from a standard effusion cell, Mo was deposited from the e-beam source with a Mo rod heated at one end by electrons. After the growth, there was no need for further processing of the sample to perform optical measurements. The optical experiments were performed at T=5K, unless stated otherwise. In the photoluminescence, presented in the Supplementary Fig. 6, we observe the narrow emission lines of neutral excitons and charged excitons (trions), similarly as in Ref. . The same exciton complexes are distinguished in white light reflectance. To infer the coherent response of these mono- layers we perform FWM microscopy. We employ the same con- figuration of the setup as in Refs. . On the sample surface, we focus three, colinearly polarized 100 fs pulses E1,2,3 generated by a Ti:Sapphire laser. E1,2,3 are spectrally centered at 750 nm, which is the expected wavelength of the exciton transition in MoSe2 monolayers. By using acousto-optic deflectors operating around 80 MHz, we introduce distinct phase drifts (φ1, φ2, φ3) within each of the triple-pulse seqence of the pulse train. In the reflected light, one can still differentiate and recover the ampli- tude and the phase of the pulses by homodyning and performing spectral interferometry with a reference pulse ER. Conversely, various nonlinear signals propagate at yet another frequencies within the reflected pulse train sequence. In particular, the FWM which is proportional to E ∗ 1 E2E3, has a precisely defined phase φFWM = φ3 + φ2 − φ1, which we detect by optical heterodyning. The resulting spectral interference of such heterodyned FWM with the ER is presented in Fig. 1 c. An example of the FWM spec- trum, retrieved from the interferogram via spectral interferome- try, is shown in the Supplementary Fig. 6 c. The signal-to-noise ratio is similar to previously studied bare monolayers obtained via mechanical exfoliation 9. To remind, by measuring the FWM integrated amplitude as a function of the delay τ12 (τ23) between the first (last) two arriving pulses, the dynamics of the excitonic coherence (density) is monitored —- the relevant pulse sequences employed in our experiments are depicted at the top of Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, respectively. At first, we take care to perform the experiments in the χ(3) regime, in order to minimize excitation induced dephasing 21 and local field effects. To check that, we carry out the FWM intensity dependence measurement 22, presented in Fig. 1 d. We observe a purely linear increase of the FWM when increasing the E1 aver- age power up to around 3μW, followed by the saturation and the onset of the local-field induced Rabi rotation. The following ex- periments have been therefore performed for E1 = E2 = E3 < 1μW. 3 Coherence dynamics The main advantage of FWM spectroscopy is its capability to ac- curately measure homogeneous, γ, and inhomogeneous, σ, con- tributions to the spectral line shape of the optical transition. By construction, there is a phase conjugation between the first or- der absorption induced by E1 and the FWM signal. In a presence 2 | Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–7 Fig. 2 Analysis of dephasing via four-wave mixing. Top: The pulse sequence employed to probe the coherence dynamics. a) Time-resolved four-wave mixing as a function of delay τ12 measured at the exciton transition displaying the photon echo. The temporal width of the echo yields the inhomogeneous broadening σEX = 11.8meV. b) as a) but mea- sured at the trion transition. The pronounced echo yields σTR = 30.4meV. c) Exciton dephasing versus temperature as indicated, measured via time- integrated FWM. d) Resulting exciton homogeneous line width versus temperature. The red trace is the fit corresponding to a linear increase of γ due to interaction with acoustic phonons, followed by an exponential increase owing to the thermal activation of the optical phonons. of σ, such conjugation generates the rephrasing and constructive interference in the FWM transient, known as photon echo, simi- lar to the spin-echo phenomenon in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. From the decay of the echo as a function of τ12 one can measure the intrinsic dephasing time T2 of the material and the homogeneous broadening (FWHM) γ = 2 ̄h/T2, whereas the temporal width of the echo yields σ. We now thus analyse the exciton’s spectral lineshape. The time- resolved FWM signal of the exciton is shown in Fig. 2 a. We ob- serve the formation of a photon-echo: with increasing the delay τ12, the maximum of the FWM transient shifts towards longer times t, such that the signal is aligned along the diagonal t = τ12 in the two-dimensional representation. The presence of σ, which quantifies the amount of electronic disorder, induces rephasing in the FWM transient, generating its Gaussian form, as depicted in orange. From the temporal FWHM of this Gaussian equal to δt = 363fs (corrected with respect to the pulse duration), we can calculate the spectral inhomogeneous broadening FWHM to be σEX = 8ln(2) ̄h/δt = 11.8meV. This value is consistent with the linewidth read from the FWM spectral interferogram, shown in Fig. 1 c. Importantly, when the photon echo is developed, the time- integrated (TI) FWM amplitude as a function of τ12 is not sen- sitive to σ, but instead reflects the microscopic dephasing time T2, governing FWHM of the homogeneous broadening γ = 2 ̄h/T2. The blue circles in Fig. 2 c show such time-integrated FWM at T=5K. It is fitted with the exponential decay convoluted with the Fig. 3 Exciton and trion density dynamics measured via four-wave mixing. Top: a pulse sequence used to measure the density grating evolution via FWM, Middle (and bottom): Exciton (and trion) density dynamics showing a biexponential decay. Gaussian, to account for a finite pulse duration, as represented in grey. For τ12 > 0, an exponential decay is observed, yielding γEX(5K)=3 meV. This value is three times that measured on the bare MoSe2 MLs 9 and is also larger then in hBN/MoSe2/hBN het- erostructures (produced via exfoliation and deterministic transfer methods) operating at the homogeneous limit 21. We attribute such a rapid loss of the exciton coherence to the strong non- radiative processes in our MBE grown samples. Interestingly, we also observe the signal for τ12 < 0: the FWM onset is detected noticeably earlier than expected from the finite pulse duration, especially bearing in mind a careful compensation of the tempo- ral chirp in our experiments. From the exponential decay toward negative delays, we determine the coherence time due to the local field effect of approximately TLC = 0.1ps. In Fig. 2 b, we present analogous time-resolved FWM, but this time measured on the trion transition. We remark that the photon echo is even more pronounced, i.e. the FWM is yet more congre- gated along the diagonal, indicating a larger σ. Indeed, we here determine σTR = 30.4meV. Again, from the TI FWM (not shown) we determine γTR = (7.7 ± 0.2)meV. This larger value with re- spect to γEX is expected and consistent with recent measurements on exfoliated MoSe2 9 and past predictions and experiments on GaAs QWs 19. We further notice lack of the signal for τ12 < 0ps, due to a larger σ. In Figs. 2 d we report the temperature dependence of γEX. We observe a linear increase of γ, due to a coupling with acoustic phonons. It is then followed by an exponential growth with an activation energy of 35 meV, well corresponding to the thermal Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–7 | 3 Fig. 4 Four-wave mixing imaging characteristics. a) Time-integrated FWM amplitude measured on a large area of (36 x 72) μm2 showing the strong signal generated at MoSe2 monolayers grown on hBN. b) as a), but zoomed in, as indicated by the blue square. c) Spatial mapping of the spectral inhomogeneous broadening (FWHM) obtained from the temporal width of the photon echo. Areas generating a strong FWM in b) also display the lowest inhomogeneous broadening in c), as indicated by the yellow circle. activation of optical phonons 9,22. This phonon induced dephas- ing is therefore similar to previously reported TMDs and prior measurements on GaAs quantum wells. With increasing tempera- ture, we have to deal not only with the increased dephasing rate, but also with a dramatic suppression of the FWM signal ampli- tude, such that we are unable to retrieve T2 above 130 K. 4 Population dynamics We now move to the pulse sequence depicted in Fig. 3 (top): the first two beams generate a temporal density grating in a material, which is then converted into the FWM signal by the last arriving beam. In this sequence, we thus probe the dynamics of excitons resonantly injected into the light cone. The result is presented in Fig. 3. As in recent works 23–25, the data are modeled as a co- herent superposition of several complex exponential decays. In our case, two processes are sufficient to describe the observed dynamics: the initial ultrafast decay is followed by a longer com- ponent. The first component is due to both radiative decay and non-radiative exciton scattering out of the light cone, the second component describes the effective secondary scattering of dark exctions back into the light cone. The trion’s radiative lifetime is expected to be significantly longer than the exciton’s one, as was also measured experimentally 25. Here instead, the first fast decay component for the trion is barely τ1,TR = 0.52ps therefore indicating a prominant non-radiative decay channel. An ultrafast initial decay of the neutral exciton τ1,EX = 0.14ps, at the limit of the temporal resolution of the experiment, also points toward the existence of a fast non-radiative recombination channel. 5 Coherent imaging and correlations In this last section, we discuss the coherent spatial imaging of the sample. The time-integrated FWM map, spanning across a large area of (36x72) μm2 is shown in Fig. 4 a. Let us remind that the MoSe2 covers the entire sample. We however observe that the co- herent response is uniquely generated at the hBN flakes, we also distinguish a decreased FWM signal along the discontinuities in the hBN flake, and virtually no signal from the material deposited on the SiO2. Furthermore, we noticed that no FWM is generated at the thick hBN flakes, with increased roughness and no well de- fined atomic terraces. The presence of the atomically flat surface, as provided by thin hBN flakes, is therefore essential to perform a successful epitaxy and to carry out cohererent spectroscopy re- ported here. The hyperspectral imaging allows us to determine the central energy of the FWM spectrum. We find that the exciton peak position is centered at 1652.5 meV and is remarkably homo- geneous with a standard deviation (FWHM) of 0.87 meV across the entire flake 17. We carry on by performing a high resolution FWM image (em- ploying a raster scanning step size of 0.2 μm), around the spot at which the temporal dynamics was measured. In Fig. 4 b we notice a strong variation of the FWM signal’s amplitude. Having access to time-resolved FWM, we can map out σ, and plot it in Fig. 4 c. In agreement with recent studies 24,26, we find correlations be- tween the FWM amplitude, linked with the transition oscillator strength, and σ, reflecting the disorder: a stronger FWM signal is detected at the areas with a lower inhomogeneous broadening, as marked with yellow circles. Similar correlations were also found on neighbouring hBN flake on the same sample, further support- ing our claim, see Supplementary Fig. 7. Other correlations, be- tween the FWM amplitude and parameters provided by the AFM measurements (height of the hBN terraces, spatial density and orientation of the monolayers) were not detected. However, a decrease of the FWM signal is observed along the hBN cracks. 6 Conclusions & outlook We have demonstrated a robust coherent nonlinear optical re- sponse of MBE-grown MoSe2 monolayers. By exploiting FWM signal in the temporal domain we have measured dephasing of exciton complexes and ascertained their dephasing via tempera- ture dependence studies. Our results show that these epitaxial monolayers, which could be compatible with the semiconductor optoelectronics industry if grown on wafer-size epitaxial hBN, al- ready display excellent optical response. This however is pro- moted by their crystallisation on atomically flat surfaces, here provided by exfoliated hBN flakes. The quality and intensity of their coherent nonlinear optical response is comparable with their non-encapsulated counterparts obtained via exfoliation. A versatility of the MBE growth opens new research av- enues for these materials. For example, Janus architecture 27 or MoXW1−XSe2 alloys with a well controlled stochiometry, can be fabricated. Such a technology could be employed to grow magnetic two-dimensional materials, like CrSBr. By exploiting a strong spin-orbit interaction in TMDs monolayers, with controlled doping (for example with vanadium atoms), one can obtain a fer- 4 | Journal Name, [year], [vol.], 1–7 romagnetic semiconductor operating at room temperature 28–30. These layers could also be embedded into microcavities and serve as excitonic work-bench in polaritonics. Furthermore, with lat- eral structurization one could introduce in-plane confinement and manufacture quantum dot or quantum wires, permitting to ex- plore the physics of edge states. Surprisingly, the epitaxial growth via CVD has recently been employed to understand the surface reconstruction mechanisms during the formation of moiré quantum matter 31,32. In that con- text, we believe that combining the MBE-growth of transition metal dichalcogenies homo- and hetero-bilayers with nonlinear spectroscopy could yield intriguing findings, within the crossover of material science at the nanoscale and their light-matter inter- action. 7