Solution-processed NiPS3 thin films from Liquid Exfoliated Inks with Long-Lived Spin-Entangled Excitons Andrii Shcherbakov1,2, Kevin Synnatschke3,4, Stanislav Bodnar1,2, Johnathan Zerhoch1,2, Lissa Eyre2,5, Felix Rauh2, Markus W. Heindl1,2, Shangpu Liu1,2, Jan Konecny6, Ian D. Sharp2, Zdenek Sofer6, Claudia Backes4,7 and Felix Deschler1,2,*. Affiliations: 1) Physical-Chemistry Institute, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 229,69120 Heidelberg 2) Walter Schottky Institute and Physics Department, Technical University of Munich, Am Coulombwall 4, 85748 Garching bei Munich, Germany 3) School of Physics, Trinity College Dublin, The University of Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 4) Applied Physical Chemistry, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 253, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 5) Electrical Engineering Division, University of Cambridge, 9 JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge, CB3 0FA, United Kingdom 6) Department of Inorganic Chemistry, Faculty of Chemical Technology, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, 166 28, Prague 6, Czech Republic 7) Physical Chemistry of Nanomaterials, University of Kassel, Heinrich-Plett-Straße 40, 34132 Kassel, Germany Keywords: Low-dimensional materials, liquid phase exfoliation, antiferromagnet, exciton, optical spectroscopy. Abstract Antiferromagnets are promising materials for future opto-spintronic applications since they show spin dynamics in the THz range and no net magnetization. Recently, layered van der Waals (vdW) antiferromagnets have been reported, which combine low-dimensional excitonic properties with complex spin-structure. While various methods for the fabrication of vdW 2D crystals exist, formation of large area and continuous thin films is challenging because of either limited scalability, synthetic complexity, or low opto-spintronic quality of the final material. Here, we fabricate centimeter-scale thin films of the van der Waals 2D antiferromagnetic material NiPS3, which we prepare using a crystal ink made from liquid phase exfoliation (LPE). We perform statistical atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) to characterize and control the lateral size and number of layers through this ink-based fabrication. Using ultrafast optical spectroscopy at cryogenic temperatures, we resolve the dynamics of photoexcited excitons. We find antiferromagnetic spin arrangement and spin-entangled Zhang- Rice multiplet excitons with lifetimes in the nanosecond range, as well as ultranarrow emission linewidths, despite the disordered nature of our films. Thus, our findings demonstrate scalable thin-film fabrication of high-quality NiPS3, which is crucial for translating this 2D antiferromagnetic material into spintronic and nanoscale memory devices and further exploring its complex spin-light coupled states. Introduction The discovery of graphene,1 launched a new epoch in modern material science and provided a basis for entirely new classes of advanced optoelectronic devices. Since then, different families of 2D materials have emerged, including transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs),2 black phosphorus (BP),3 and metal hexathiohypo diphosphates.4 Each class of these van der Waals crystals5 exhibits unique optoelectronic, magnetic, and mechanical properties in their low dimensional forms. More recently, the exploration of 2D magnetic materials has opened access to new applications in opto-spintronics due to enhanced spin fluctuations and magnetic anisotropy, which can also be tuned externally via doping, electric and magnetic fields, mechanical stress, or formation of Moiré patterns.6–10 Among such materials, antiferromagnets are particularly promising candidates for spintronics because of their natural spin dynamics in the THz range.11 These materials show zero net magnetization, which leads to the absence of stray magnetic fields, increasing the stability of magnetic order and leading to improved performance for memory applications.12–15 One of the most promising classes of 2D antiferromagnets are the transition metal phosphorus trisulfides (MPS3, where M can be Co, Fe, Mn, or Ni), which is attractive because the antiferromagnetic spin arrangement can be flexibly tuned by exchanging the metal atoms.16–19 In addition, one can replace sulphur with selenium, which allows the electronic properties to be modified while preserving the crystal structure.8 NiPS3 is a 2D antiferromagnetic layered metal phosphorus trisulfide, which is characterized by a hexagonal configuration of Ni atoms, with each Ni surrounded by six S atoms (Fig. 1a) to form trigonally distorted octahedra. Within one layer, three ligand atoms are located below and three above the Ni2+ ion (Fig. 1b). In other words, the divalent Ni2+ is surrounded by hexathiohypo diphosphate ions (P2S64-), forming a honeycomb lattice in monoclinic C2/m symmetry. As such, the material is often referred to as Ni2P2S6 to describe the structure more accurately. However, we will choose NiPS3 for simplicity. The bulk material is an antiferromagnet below a Néel temperature of 155 K. The magnetic moments of Ni are mainly in the plane of the layer. They are colinear with the a direction of the crystal and form ferromagnetic zig-zag chains along this crystal axis.20,21 Bulk NiPS3 was previously used for UV photodetectors,22,23 field-effect transistors,24 and humidity sensors with high selectivity.25 Recently, micromechanically exfoliated NiPS3 sheets have been reported to show non-trivial excitonic Zhang-Rice (ZR) singlet/triplet states,26–30 in which a strong hybridization of Ni 3d and S 3p orbitals gives rise to localized charge transfer states.26,31 The ZR- states are created by the coherent many-body behavior of the spin and electron subsystems of the crystal, which creates an unusual link between magnetic and optoelectronic properties.26,27,32–37 The luminescence from the ZR-excitons in NiPS3 shows an extremely sharp linewidth for spontaneous emission (FWHM = 0.4 meV).27 However, the exact nature of the ZR-excitons and the origin of the luminescence remain to be fully understood, and further experimental insights on the transient behavior of the spin and charge carriers of these spin-entangled excitons are desired. Despite the intense scientific interest and the realization of novel physics with 2D magnetic compounds, the scalable fabrication of high quality low-dimensional materials remains challenging and is crucial for future device applications.38 We now demonstrate that large area thin films of NiPS3 nanosheets can be fabricated using ‘inks’ from liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE),39 while also retaining stable Zhang-Rice excitons with extremely narrow linewidth comparable to previously reported micromechanically-exfoliated flakes.26–30 We use the prepared thin film samples in combination with low temperature optical spectroscopy to gain insights into the energetics, interactions, and recombination dynamics of spin- entangled ZR-excitons and find unexpectedly long lifetimes on the nanosecond scale. Our demonstration has significant potential for enabling future technologies, since it provides high quality functional material and is compatible with a wide range of related antiferromagnetic VdW crystals. Results Ink preparation and thin film fabrication The schematic illustration of the ink preparation for the investigated samples of LPE NiPS3 flakes is shown in Fig. 2a. The stock dispersion containing NiPS3 nanosheets for fabrication of thin films was prepared by bath sonication (Branson, CPX2800-E, 130W) of ground NiPS3 crystals in an inert atmosphere for 7 h. For this purpose, 250 mg of the ground material was immersed in 100 ml of dry and degassed isopropanol in a 250 ml round bottom flask. The stock dispersions were size-selected by liquid cascade centrifugation (LCC) in multiple steps of iteratively increasing centrifugation speeds. Since 2D NiPS3 has potential magnetic applications because of its distinctive spatial anisotropy of spin and charge subsystems, it is crucial to control the alignment of the nanosheets upon deposition onto the substrate. To this end, the NiPS3 nanosheets were deposited in parallel alignment with respect to the substrate surface using a Langmuir Schaefer-type approach40–42 in a custom-built setup (see Methods), which provides a high degree of in-plane alignment on glass and silicon substrates. As shown in Fig. 2b and 2c, respectively, the SEM images of prepared samples with large flakes (size selected via two-step 0.6-3k g centrifugation, for details on the sample labeling see Methods) and small flakes (10-30k g) demonstrate the homogeneous coating of substrates with tiled networks of NiPS3 nanosheets covering several square centimeters. These two types of samples with large and small flakes will further be investigated in optical measurements, as discussed below. To evaluate the detailed distribution of the number of layers and lateral sizes of the nano-flakes in the two samples, statistical atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used. To this end, diluted nanosheet inks were flash evaporated on silicon wafers (for further details on the process, see Methods).39 The average thickness distribution for the sample containing small nanosheets is 5.5±0.24 layers (Fig. 2d), with individual flakes possessing lateral dimensions of 112±4 nm (Fig. 2e). Samples with large flakes show a broader size and thickness distribution, with an average thickness of 7.8±0.5 layers (Fig. 2d) and 255±10 nm lateral size (Fig. 2e). We note that for LPE, the number of layers is connected to the lateral size of the nanomaterial (Supporting Information Fig. 2).43 Low-Temperature Photoluminescence of NiPS3 Nanosheet Films To demonstrate that the inherent optoelectronic properties of our NiPS3 nanosheet films are preserved after exfoliation, we investigated their luminescence with steady-state photoluminescence (PL). Importantly, we observe extremely narrow photoluminescence peaks below the Néel temperature in LPE NiPS3, in line with previous reports on micromechanically exfoliated NiPS3 crystals27–30 and demonstrating that complex many-body magnetic state-dependent interactions can be achieved. In particular, high- resolution PL spectroscopy on the deposited LPE NiPS3 nanosheets at 4K, excited with a 532 nm diode laser at a power density of 0.32 W/cm2, shows an emission feature located at 1.4762 eV (Fig. 3a, ‘Peak I’). The emission profile of this peak is asymmetric and non-Gaussian. Therefore, it was fitted with three Gaussian profiles at 1.4762 eV (peak A), 1.4775 eV (peak B), and 1.4790 eV (peak C), in agreement with literature.27 All three subpeaks have a small full width half maximum (FWHM) of approximately 1.7 meV, suggesting that this emission stems from coherent excitations or localized defect states, in line with previously reported data.27 We note that the FWHM of LPE NiPS3 is around 5 times larger than reported for bulk NiPS3 and coincides with the values for couple layer sheets which were micromechanically exfoliated.27,28,30 We associate this with additional inhomogeneities coming from the edges of flakes44–47 together with the non-zero size and thickness distribution, which can influence the bandgap energy48 and energy of the exciton,27 thereby causing emission broadening. Nevertheless, the FWHM is extraordinarily small considering the facile solution-based preparation of disordered 2D material nanosheet thin films. We further find PL in the range of 1.42-1.47 eV (Fig. 3b), which is likely associated with the phonon sideband of excitonic peak A. 28 Samples containing large and small flakes of LPE NiPS3 were characterized by similar PL lineshapes. However, some small changes, such as increased relative intensity of the subpeaks B and C and the emergence of a weak feature to the left of subpeak A for the small flakes, suggest a difference in the quantum confinement and influence from the edges, both of which should be more significant for the sheets with the smaller lateral size. Previous studies have shown that such narrow PL is observed down to 3-layered samples, in which the antiferromagnetic order is still preserved, with a slight blue shift for thinner sheets.16,27,28 Thin films from large nanosheets showed an eight times enhanced PL intensity compared to films made from smaller sheets, which is in qualitative agreement with previous studies of PL dependence on the crystal thickness,27,30 and attributed to increased number of emitters due to thicker films. The luminescence from Peak I vanishes with increasing temperature (Fig. 4c and Supporting Information Fig. 5a), which is in line with previous reports27 and can be considered as a result of the antiferromagnetic- to-paramagnetic phase change in the NiPS3 thin films. However, the emission already disappears at approximately 100 K, which is below the Néel temperature of NiPS3. Thus, we identify an additional effect from thermal heating on the excitonic luminescence in LPE NiPS3, beyond the reported connection to the presence of antiferromagnetic order. The blue shift of the subpeaks (A, B, and C see Supporting Information Fig. 5a) upon cooling is typical of the temperature-dependent bandgap energy49 change in semiconductors. The energy difference between subpeaks remains almost unchanged while heating the sample, though slight variations could be a consequence of minor softening of the responsible phonon bands4 for material at elevated temperatures. Subpeak A is broadened at higher temperatures (Supporting Information Fig. 5a.) because of the increased phonon density, which results in stronger electron-phonon scattering. Importantly, subpeaks B and C also broaden with increasing temperature and follow a similar trend. One may hence conclude that they originate from the same transition as subpeak A. Furthermore, the temperature-dependent PL spectra show an additional narrow peak located at 1.4968 eV (Supporting Information Fig. 4, ‘Peak II’). The peak is barely visible at 4 K, reaches its intensity maximum around 55 K, and disappears above 100 K. Previous studies have assigned this peak with phonons coupled to the exciton.4,28 These observations suggest three main processes acting on the emission from Peak I and Peak II: a. The existence of the antiferromagnetic ordering of the material; b. Thermal activation of the state driving emission of Peak II between 50 K and 60 K, which might be evidence of its indirect nature; and c. Destructive phonon scattering at higher temperatures which is a competitive process to b. According to the Zhang-Rice nature26,33–35,37 of the ground and excited states underlying the investigated optical transitions, they usually involve a spin flip, which should lead to a certain degree of polarization of the emitted PL with respect to the crystal axis direction of the nanosheets.27,28,30 We also measured polarization-dependent PL and did not find any preferable polarization direction, which can be attributed to the random orientation of the tiled NiPS3 sheet network on the substrate plane. Nevertheless, these luminescence measurements on our solution-fabricated nanosheet thin films allow us to conclude that antiferromagnetic order is achieved at cryogenic temperatures and that Zhang-Rice excitons are formed with optoelectronic properties comparable to the ones reported for micromechanically-exfoliated sheets. Low-temperature broadband transient absorption of NiPS3 Having characterized the excitonic energetics and interactions via steady state PL measurements, we now move to the transient exciton dynamics in our NiPS3 nanosheet thin films, which were studied using with low-temperature transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. For this purpose, we excite above the bandgap with a 2.41 eV pump laser beam (275 fs pulse duration, 5 kHz repetition rate). Broadband probe beams were produced in CaF2 to detect transmission properties through the samples in the region of the excitonic transitions. The probe energy vs. time delay TA map of excitonic transitions measured at 4 K (Supporting Information Fig. 6) shows distinct positive, long-lived TA signals (bleach signals) at 1.4778 eV and 1.4974 eV, which align well with the positions of Peak I and Peak II in our PL data. We assign the strong negative signal at early times to a cross-phase modulation50 artifacts when both pump and probe pulses overlap in the sample causing nonlinear effects. We note that the detected TA excitonic peaks only exist in the presence of both the pump and probe beams, which excludes a contribution of the PL signal. We further find a broad positive signal over the whole region of probe energies, which we associate with the low energy shoulder of the previously reported 1.7 eV d-d transition dressed with phonon replicas. 51 The temperature-dependent TA of both excitonic peaks shown in Fig. 4 and Supporting Information Fig. 8 vanish above 120 K, indicating their dependence on antiferromagnetic order. The integrated intensity of Peak II drops faster than Peak I while heating the sample. Together with the observation of more substantial broadening, these findings suggest that the Peak II exciton-phonon bound state scatters more effectively with other phonons than the Peak I excitonic state. We analyze the kinetics of the excitonic Peaks I and II up to 20 ps after the pump excitation (Fig. 4b). The peaks are overlapped with the cross-phase modulation50 background at early times and the phonon replica background during all probed time delays.51 We obtain the pure kinetics of the excitonic Peaks I and II (black lines Fig. 4b) by subtracting the kinetics of the background, taken from the probe region of 1.46±0.01 eV for Peak I and 1.51±0.01 eV for peak II (blue lines Fig. 4b), from the as-measured convoluted excitonic-background kinetics (green lines Fig.4 6b). From single-exponential decay fits we determine fast kinetics of the backgrounds τ1 (for Peak I) and τ3 (for Peak II) that lay in the range 3.5 – 4.8 ps, which is comparable to the decay of the ground state bleach (GSB) region (Supporting Information Fig. 6 & 7). After the background correction we can only identify a short lifetime component of Peak II, which is equal to τ2= 99 ps. The remaining decay kinetics of excitonic Peak I and Peak II are beyond the time range of our setup, in the nanosecond range. The long lifetime of these states is in contrast to the reported PL lifetime28 (on the order of 10s of ps) and the kinetics of transient reflection51 (below 1 ps). We attribute this difference to the fact that our nanosheet films now provide access to optical processes that unambiguously probe the electronic absorption of photoexcited populations, and we resolve that the decay times of the photoexcited excitonic populations must be unexpectedly long, into the nanosecond range. Conclusion Our report of spin-entangled excitonic Zhang-Rice states with narrow luminescence linewidth, as well as long-lived transient absorption, in thin films fabricated from LPE NiPS3 nanosheet inks, demonstrates a scalable, solution-based fabrication route for thin films of magnetic 2D materials, which preserves a high purity of the antiferromagnetic order. The evidence of excited states responsible for Peak I and Peak II transitions have previously been reported in a resonant inelastic X-ray spectroscopy (RIXS) study and was corroborated by a theoretical model.27 For the luminescence from Peak II, different origins have been proposed, including two-magnon-exciton coupled states,27 exciton-phonon coupled states28 or formation of many-body Zhang-Rice quasiparticles, as reported for cuprates.26,32–37 From our temperature- dependent PL analysis of this peak, and the energy spacing to Peak I, we assign the origin of Peak II to coupling to the phonon mode at 180 cm-1, which is highly spin-dependent and weakly pronounced in monolayer nanosheets.4,18 The transition between local Zhang-Rice singlet and triplet states is further highly sensitive to antiferromagnetic order and scattering with phonons in the system, which is a competing process in forming the Peak I transition. A comparison of our PL and TA results suggests that the Peak II transition has a higher oscillator strength than Peak I, but that PL emission occurs mainly from the lower-energy Peak I transition. From the TA kinetics, we conclude that the lifetime of the Peak II transition is shorter than the Peak I transition. Together with stronger scattering observed in temperature-dependent TA, we confirm that the Peak II excited state is based on the Peak I excited mode. In conclusion, LPE inks of 2D magnetic semiconductor nanosheets present a facile, scalable thin film fabrication process that retains the excitonic properties of the studied 2D magnetic materials. Access to thin film samples of this promising class of materials will be instrumental in investigation of the detailed physical origins of Peak I and Peak II, and the translation of these materials into opto-spintronic applications. Methods Solvent preparation. Isopropanol (IPA) was dried over molecular sieves (10 Å, dried at 300 °C in vacuum overnight) for 2 days, distilled and saturated with nitrogen prior to use. Liquid Phase Exfoliation (LPE). The stock dispersion containing NiPS3 nanosheets was prepared by bath sonication (Branson, CPX2800-E, 130W) of ground NiPS3 crystals in an inert atmosphere for 7 h. For this purpose, 250 mg of the ground material was immersed in 100 ml of dry and degassed isopropanol in a 250 ml round bottom flask. In order to avoid effects from sample heating, the water in the bath was kept below 10 °C by exchanging it with ice-cooled water every 30 min. The atmosphere inside the flask was kept inert by constantly bubbling nitrogen through the solvent. Dispersions prepared according to this protocol are referred to as stock dispersion. Size selection. The stock dispersions were size selected by liquid cascade centrifugation (LCC) in multiple steps of iteratively increasing centrifugation speeds. A Hettich Mikro220R centrifuge equipped with a fixed-angle rotor (1195A) was used for this purpose. Each centrifugation step was performed for 2 h at 20 °C. Four different nanosheet sizes were isolated after sedimentation of the material at 0.6, 3, 10, and 30k g. After each step, the sediment was redispersed for analysis in a reduced solvent volume (∼1 mL IPA), and the supernatant was used for the subsequent step. The expression “0.6−3k g” denotes consecutive centrifugation steps. In this example, the sample was obtained by sedimentation of nanosheets at 3000 g from the supernatant obtained after centrifugation at 600 g. Thin Film Formation. Nanosheets were processed into thin films by a modified Langmuir Schaefer approach, using a custom- built setup. To this end, a substrate was immersed in deionized water and horizontally aligned to the liquid level. Approximately 2 ml of hexane was added to the water surface and concentrated nanosheet dispersion was added to the interface between water and hexane until a closed film was observed. The substrate was then vertically moved through the nanosheet film and left to dry. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM). For AFM measurements, a Dimension ICON3 scanning probe microscope (Bruker AXS S.A.S.) was used in ScanAsyst mode (non-contact) in air under ambient conditions using aluminum-coated silicon cantilevers (OLTESPA-R3). The concentrated dispersions were diluted with isopropanol to optical densities <0.1 at a wavelength of 300 nm. A drop of the dilute dispersions (15 μL) was flash-evaporated on pre-heated (175 °C) Si/SiO2 wafers (0.5x0.5 cm2) with an oxide layer of 300 nm thickness. After deposition, the wafers were rinsed with ~15 mL of water and ~15 mL of isopropanol and dried with compressed nitrogen. Typical image sizes ranged from 20x20 μm2 for larger nanosheets to 5x5 μm2 for small nanosheets and were acquired at scan rates of 0.5-0.8 Hz with 1024 lines per image. Previously published length corrections were used to correct lateral dimensions from cantilever broadening. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). SEM images were acquired with a JEOL JSM-7610F field emission scanning electron microscope (FE- SEM), using an in-lens Schottky field emission electron gun with different acceleration voltages but not higher than 15 kV at 2.5×10−9 mbar. The images were measured with a dual (upper and lower) detector system consisting of collector-, scintillator-, light guide-, and photomultiplier units for secondary electron imaging (see Supporting Information Fig. 1). Steady-state Photoluminescence Measurements The steady-state PL was measured on the LPE NiPS3 placed on the Si substrate in an open cycle He cryostat in reflection geometry. Excitation was performed with a 532 nm diode laser and detection was achieved with a high-resolution CCD spectrometer (HORIBA). Transient Absorption Measurements Transient absorption (TA) measurements were performed by exciting our LPE NiPS3 samples on a transparent glass substrate with a 275 fs duration linearly polarized 514 nm pump laser beam (2nd harmonic of a diode-pumped Yb femtosecond laser Hiro + Pharos, Light Conversion). Probing of transient absorption in the visible range was done with the fundamental beam (1030 nm) of the laser-focused into a YAG crystal, which generated a broad spectrum of visible light. Probing of transient properties of the investigated samples in the NIR region was accomplished with the same laser-based noncolinear optical parametric amplifier (NOPA) and 2nd harmonic generation (Pharos + Orpheus + Prism compressor + Lyra, Light Conversion) of a 840 nm single color beam of 80 fs pulse duration, which was used for NIR white light generation in a calcium fluoride crystal. The crystal was vibrated on a loudspeaker to avoid its damage. Both pump and probe beams were directed through the front window of a closed cycle cryostat (Montana Instruments), spatially overlapped on the sample, and exit through a second window, after which the pump beam was blocked. The probe beam was detected by a fast CMOS camera triggered by the laser. By varying the optical path of the pump pulse with a mechanical delay stage, we controlled the time between sample excitation and probing. A chopper wheel was used to modulate the pump beam by blocking every second pulse, thereby allowing the camera to detect probe pulses when the pump pulse was both on and off. Finally, the difference between pumped and non-pumped signals was found and divided by the non-perturbated transmission spectrum. Data availability Data which was used in the evaluation of the conclusions of our findings is available from the Wiley Online Library or from the authors upon reasonable request. Acknowledgments This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC Starting Grant agreement no. 852084 — TWIST). F. D acknowledges financial support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under the Emmy Noether Program (Project 387651688). I.S. acknowledges DFG under Germany ́s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2089/1 – 390776260. Supporting Information Supporting Information which includes detailed sample morphology analysis, temperature dependencies with fitting parameters for them and TA maps is available.