Electronic-mediated nuclear stopping power in proton irradiated water ice Daniel Mu ̃noz-Santiburcio,1, 2, ∗ Jorge Kohanoff,2 and Emilio Artacho1, 3, 4, 5 1CIC nanoGUNE BRTA, Tolosa Hiribidea 76, 20018 San Sebasti ́an, Spain 2Instituto de Fusi ́on Nuclear “Guillermo Velarde”, Universidad Polit ́ecnica de Madrid, C/ Jos ́e Guti ́errez Abascal 2, 28006 Madrid, Spain 3Theory of Condensed Matter, Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge, J. J. Thomson Ave, Cambridge CB3 0HE, United Kingdom 4Donostia International Physics Center (DIPC), Tolosa Hiribidea 76, 20018 San Sebasti ́an, Spain 5Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011 Bilbao, Spain (Dated: March 24, 2023) Traditionally, it has been assumed that the stopping of a swift ion travelling through matter can be understood in terms of two essentially independent components, i.e. electronic vs. nuclear. Performing extensive Ehrenfest MD simulations of the process of proton irradiation of water ice that accurately describe not only the non-adiabatic dynamics of the electrons but also of the nuclei, we have found a stopping mechanism involving the interplay of the electronic and nuclear subsystems. This effect, which consists in a kinetic energy transfer from the projectile to the target nuclei thanks to the perturbations of the electronic density caused by the irradiation, is fundamentally different from the atomic displacements and collision cascades characteristic of nuclear stopping. Moreover, it shows a marked isotopic effect depending on the composition of the target, being relevant mostly for light water as opposed to heavy water. This result is consistent with long-standing experimental results which remained unexplained so far. The interaction of a swift ion with matter has been usu- ally rationalized using the concept of ‘stopping power’, which consists in expressing the capacity of a target ma- terial to stop a given ion travelling through it as the en- ergy lost by the projectile per unit of travelled length. It has been usually assumed that this has two components, being the ‘electronic’ and ‘nuclear stopping power’ . The former consists of the energy absorbed by the elec- tronic subsystem of the target, which becomes excited as a consequence of the projectile’ passing, while the lat- ter consists of the energy gained by the target’ nuclei as a consequence of the direct impact of the projectile with them. Both these quantities show a strong depen- dence on the velocity of the projectile, in such a way that the velocity regimes where each of them has a signifi- cant value are basically non-overlapping. While it has been usually acknowledged that there is a certain do- main of projectile velocities where both effects coexist, it was assumed that this happened where both compo- nents are quite small, and therefore this coincidence was not regarded as important for most purposes. Especially for computer simulations aimed at determining the elec- tronic stopping power of any material by first-principles methods, the motion of the target’ nuclei and even the change of the velocity of the projectile are almost always neglected not only for practical reasons (i.e. alleviating the computational cost of the simulation by skipping the calculation of the atomic forces), but also because nu- clear stopping is assumed to be negligible in the domain of projectile velocities that are relevant for the electronic stopping power. In this work, we show that such approxi- mation neglects a channel for the projectile-target energy transfer that has remained hitherto unexplored. Methods.– We performed Real-Time Time-Dependent DFT simulations within the Ehrenfest MD (EMD) for- malism, explicitly considering the forces on all atoms during the irradiation process, employing the CP2K code and using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional. All the simulations were carried out at the all-electron level with the 6-311++G2d2p basis set , using the GAPW method with a cutoff of 350 Ry for the planewave expansion of the soft part of the density. The model sys- tem consists of a Ih ice slab with 144 H2O molecules in the unit cell constructed from the corresponding bulk system with the experimental density at T = 145 K (ρ = 931.19 kg/m3, with a = 15.59, b = 13.50 and c = 21.98 ̊A in the bulk , extended to c = 33.0 ̊A in the slab), with a proton projectile initially placed in the vacuum region above the slab and with an initial velocity perpendicular to the slab. We simulated 19 different pro- ton trajectories for each one of 11 different values of the projectile’ velocity, from 0.2 to 8.0 a.u. The timesteps for the EMD simulations were chosen to obtain a projectile displacement of ≈ 0.005 ̊A per EMD step in each case. Further details will be published elsewhere, including a deeper description of the methods and further analyses of the results. Stopping power: electronic vs. nuclear.– The elec- tronic, nuclear and total stopping power are readily ob- tained from each simulation as Se = ∆EKS/d, Sn = ∆Etarget kin /d, and St = −∆EH+ kin /d, being respectively the differences between the initial and final EMD steps of the Kohn-Sham energy and of the kinetic energies of the target nuclei and the projectile, in all cases divided by the distance travelled by the projectile within the target. arXiv:2303.12975v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 23 Mar 2023 2 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 ⟨Sn⟩ (10−3 Hartrees/Bohr) ⟨Se⟩ (10−2 Hartrees/Bohr) vH+ (a.u.) SRIM Se SRIM Sn ICRU Se ICRU Sn This work ⟨Se⟩ This work ⟨Sn⟩ Shimizu 09/10 Se Average nuclear and electronic stopping power of protons in water ice computed in this work, compared to that obtained from SRIM 2013 (using a 0.94 compound correction) and ICRU 2014 , in addition to the Se experi- mental results of Shimizu et al . All values are scaled to a water density of 998 kg/m3 for an easier comparison. These definitions imply that in the following we will em- ploy the terms ‘electronic’ and ‘nuclear’ stopping as mere quantifyiers of the energy transferred to the electronic vs. nuclear subsystems, with independence of the underlying mechanism of such transfer. In all the simulations, the relation St = Se + Sn holds, with an excellent energy conservation along the irradi- ation process. As shown in Fig. 1, the average elec- tronic stopping power agrees remarkably well with that from SRIM 2013 and with the tabulated data in ICRU Report 90 , with a perfect agreement with the experimental results of Shimizu et al. at high ve- locities. On the other hand, the average nuclear stopping power differs greatly from the SRIM and ICRU data, oc- curring the greatest values in the same regime of projec- tile velocities as the electronic stopping maximum. The small ⟨Sn⟩ obtained by us in the low velocity limit is surely a consequence of the small size- and timescales in our simulations, which do not allow to observe the proper collision cascades which are characteristic in the regular nuclear stopping processes. On the other hand, the strik- ingly high ⟨Sn⟩ values in the vH+ range from 1 to 2 a.u. require a more complex explanation. The origin of such unexpected result can be found after careful inspection of all the individual EMD trajectories. As we will expose in detail in further publications, in few cases at the lowest projectile velocity, the dynamics of the system is consistent with a ‘classical’ mechanism where the target nuclei which gain more kinetic energy are those closer to the path of the projectile, existing also a certain deflection of the projectile which supports the usual picture of nuclear stopping in terms of elas- tic collisions. However, as vH+ increases, the behavior of the system is no longer fully consistent with that pic- ture. On one hand, the closest nuclei to the projectile path (with impact parameters of about 0.15 ̊A or even less) acquire velocities that are not consistent with a bi- nary collision mechanism (Fig. 2). Moreover, we find several nuclei quite far from the projectile path (belong- ing to molecules that are first or even second neighbors of the water molecules that are directly affected by the projectile) that gain a significant kinetic energy. In all the cases, the target nuclei that gain such kinetic energy are the hydrogen ones, being the kinetic energy gained by the oxygen nuclei negligible. Electronic density perturbations and nuclear stopping.– The fact that the highest ⟨Sn⟩ and ⟨Se⟩ values are both obtained at the same vH+ range suggests that this un- expected energy transfer to the nuclei may be related to the perturbation of the target electronic subsystem dur- ing the irradiation process. The analysis of the individual simulations confirms a certain correlation between Sn and Se, though the Sn/Se ratio varies significantly among the different trajectories, being as high as 15–20% in some of them. In particular, Sn is higher in the cases where the projectile crosses, or passes very close to, the O–H bonds in the target. Inspection of the electronic density of the system during the irradiation process for such cases re- veals that the passing of the projectile causes very severe changes in the density distribution with respect to the ground state (Fig. 3), which can be as high as a three- fold increase of the density in the close vicinity of the closest target atom. Such perturbations of the electronic density of the wa- ter molecules along the projectile path induce further density changes that are propagated to the neighboring waters along the H-bond network, as visualized in Fig. 3. Analysis of the forces in such regions reveals that sev- eral H and O atoms therein experience extremely high forces, though only the hydrogen atoms eventually ac- quire meaningful kinetic energies (note that similar forces on H/O atoms imprint an acceleration on H that is 16- fold that on O, which together with the short timescale of the process implies that only hydrogen atoms can reach a significant velocity). We note in passing that this ef- fect does not involve the oxygen’ core electrons in any way, and actually thorough electronic structure analy- ses that will be unfolded elsewhere show that the role of oxygen’ core electrons in the proton stopping process is much smaller than previously thought . Isotopic effect in electronic-mediated nuclear stopping.– The findings above disclosed strongly suggest the possibility of an isotopic effect for the stopping of protons in light vs. heavy water, as the mass of the target nuclei becomes relevant for this electronic-mediated nuclear stopping to take place. Motivated by this, we performed additional irradiation simulations of protons in heavy ice, employing the same simulation settings previously used for light ice, for the three projectile velocities that showed the highest total stopping in light ice (vH+ = 1.41, 1.72 and 2.00 a.u.). 3 Vector scale: |v| = 0.01 au y (Å) x (Å) −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 z (Å) −2 −4 −6 −8 −10 0 2 4 6 8 10 H+→ E (Hartree) Simulation time (as) −∆EH+ kin ∆EH2O kin ∆EKS ∆Econs 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 0 200 400 600 800 Left/center: Atomic positions and velocities at the end of the simulation with the highest Sn in this work, obtained with a 75 keV proton. The scale of the vectors indicating the velocities is shown above; vectors are only drawn for atoms with velocities greater than 0.001 a.u. The initial/final positions of the projectile are shown as a green circle in the xy projection and its trajectory is shown as a green line in the yz projection; note that the projectile travels in the −z direction. Right: Change of the different energy components during the same simulation with respect to their initial values. Ground State Time-Dependent TD/GS ratio Ground State Time-Dependent TD/GS ratio 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4 2.6 z (Å) -1.0 -0.6 -0.2 y (Å) -2.8 -2.6 -2.4 -2.2 -2.0 -1.8 x (Å) -1.0 -0.6 -0.2 y (Å) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 ρe (e−/Bohr3) -1.0 -0.6 -0.2 y (Å) 0 1 2 3 ρTD e /ρGS e Analysis of the electronic density for the simulation with the highest Sn at an instant where the projectile (green ball) has just passed close to the target atom with the highest kinetic energy increase. Left/center panels: side/top views of the system, with the blue/yellow isosurfaces (at an isovalue of ±0.005 e−/Bohr3) representing respectively the regions of density depletion/accumulation with respect the ground state, i.e. ∆ρ = ρTD − ρGS, with ∆ρ < 0 in blue and ∆ρ > 0 in yellow. Right panels: electronic density at clipping planes passing through the said target atom (green “×” symbol) parallel to the xy/yz directions, computed at the ground state vs. that obtained during the TD-DFT irradiation simulation, showing also the ratio of the non-adiabatic to the ground state density. The position of the projectile is indicated as a green circle (note that the projectile is slightly offset from the clipping plane) The results, in Fig. 4, show that the total stopping is indeed smaller in deuterated ice, while the electronic stopping is practically the same. Actually, long-standing results in the literature confirm the existence of an isotopic effect in the irradation of water by protons, which has remained so far unexplored to the best of our knowledge. Indeed, the precise isotopic composition of the target is usually ignored when analyzing or comparing the electronic stopping power from different experiments or simulations, due to the underlying assumption that Se is solely determined by the response of the electronic subsystem of the target and thus independent of the nuclear masses. In Fig. 4 we plot the electronic stopping power for pro- ton projectiles experimentally determined by Wenzel and Whaling using heavy water and the one by Bauer et al. using light water , together with our simu- lation results. Remarkably, both experimental datasets basically agree in the points farther from the stopping maximum (at vH+ ∼ 1 a.u. and ∼ 3.5 a.u.), but dif- fer significantly around vH+ ∼ 2 a.u., which is precisely the region where the electronic-mediated nuclear stop- ping found by us is relevant. At this point, we stress that the electronic-mediated kinetic energy transfer from projectile to target nuclei that we have just described occurs without any noticeable deflection of the projec- 4 tile. Regarding the experimental determination of the electronic stopping power done via analyses of scattering spectra of the irradiating projectiles, this implies that the stopping mechanism that we just described is experimen- tally indistinguishable from the usually assumed mecha- nism purely based on electronic excitations. Therefore, we conclude that the ‘electronic stopping power’ exper- imentally reported for H2O and D2O in that regime of projectile velocities in Refs. is actually equiva- lent to the total stopping power determined by us in this work. Finally, the qualitative differences between our com- putational results and the experimental results deserve further comments. The experimentally reported isotopic effects are greater than in our simulations, as clearly seen in Fig. 4. On one hand, this could be due to a triv- ial sampling issue: Sn is much more sensitive to small differences of the projectile trajectory than Se. This sug- gests that our current estimation of the average ⟨Sn⟩ may be improved with a more intensive sampling of the pos- sible projectile trajectories, maybe including directions not parallel to the hexagonal channel. But on the other hand and more interestingly, the presence of H/D iso- topic effects always open the question of the possible role of nuclear quantum effects such as the greater quantum delocalization of H compared to D. At that respect, we note that our simulations employ classical nuclei, and of course the inclusion of nuclear quantum effects in the simulations could greatly affect the dynamical response of the H nuclei to the dramatic changes of the electronic density of the system during the irradiation. 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 S (10−2 Hartrees/Bohr) vH+ (a.u.) Bauer 1994 (H2O) Wenzel 1952 (D2O) H2O Se H2O St D2O Se D2O St Electronic stopping power experimentally reported for H2O and D2O (respectively filled and empty di- amonds) together with the average electronic and total stop- ping power (resp. circles/squares) found in this work from first-principles simulations for light and heavy ice (resp. red filled vs. blue empty symbols). All values are scaled to cor- respond to a light water density of 998 kg/m3 for an easier comparison. Conclusions and outlook.– Our extensive Ehrenfest MD simulations, which strictly consider the atomic forces during the irradiation process, disclosed a so far unknown channel for the energy transfer from the projectile to the target nuclei. This transfer occurs due to the dramatic changes of the electronic density of the target, which are the origin of great forces on the target nuclei during the passing of the projectile. This phenomenon is funda- mentally different from other well-known processes such as the electron-phonon energy transfer that occurs after the irradiation at longer timescales. The fact that this electronic-mediated nuclear stopping occurs at the short timescale of the irradiation itself implies that only light atoms (i.e. hydrogen) experience a meaningful gain of the kinetic energy, and moreover is the reason of an isotopic effect when comparing the stopping of light vs. heavy water, in agreement with experiments that had been so far unexplained. Indeed, despite the fact that this ef- fect occurring with no deflection of the projectile makes it rather elusive when it comes to its experimental de- termination, the isotopic effect experimentally described for H2O vs D2O is a very strong confirmation of our sim- ulation results. Actually, the experimental data show an even stronger isotopic effect than our simulations, which could be due to the missing nuclear quantum ef- fects in our approach. This aspect opens up an interest- ing –though technically challenging– avenue for further research. We expect that this effect will be present in aqueous systems, and in particular biological tissues. Regarding the latter, this could represent a further mechanism for the creation of damage in biomolecules, which would add up to other purely electronic damage mechanisms already described . On the other hand, it remains to be seen whether it will also occur in hydrogen-rich materials that lack the precise electronic structure of water and its as- sociated H-bond network (e.g. hydrocarbon-based poly- mers of industrial relevance). Clearly, these findings open up a new and exciting aspect of the radiation damage processes that deserves to be explored. This project has received funding from the Euro- pean Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation pro- gramme under the Marie Sk�lodowska-Curie grant agree- ment No 748673. This work received funding from the Research Executive Agency under the EU’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation program ESC2RAD (Grant ID 776410). We acknowledge PRACE for awarding us ac- cess to MareNostrum at Barcelona Supercomputing Cen- ter (BSC), Spain. The author thankfully acknowledges the computer resources at MareNostrum and the tech- nical support provided by Barcelona Supercomputing RES-FI-2019-2-0017, RES-FI-2019-3- FI-2022-1-0028, RES-FI-2022-3-0040). This work has been supported by the Madrid Government (Comunidad de Madrid-Spain) under the Multiannual Agreement with Universidad Polit ́ecnica de Madrid in the line Support for 5 R&D projects for Beatriz Galindo researchers, in the con- text of the V PRICIT (Regional Programme of Research and Technological Innovation). ∗ E-mail: daniel.munozsan@upm.es J. F. Ziegler, J. P. Biersack, and M. D. Ziegler, SRIM – The stopping and range of ions in matter (SRIM Co., T. D. K ̈uhne, M. Iannuzzi, M. Del Ben, V. V. Ry- bkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khal- iullin, O. Sch ̈utt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wil- helm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borˇstnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Laz- zaro, H. Pabst, T. M ̈uller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Gl ̈oß, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. Van- deVondele, M. Krack, and J. Hutter, CP2K: An elec- tronic structure and molecular dynamics software pack- age - Quickstep: Efficient and accurate electronic struc- ture calculations, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 194103 (2020). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996), Erratum: Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1396– R. Krishnan, J. S. Binkley, R. Seeger, and J. A. Pople, Self-consistent molecular orbital methods. XX. A basis set for correlated wave functions, J. Chem. Phys. 72, 650 M. J. Frisch, J. A. Pople, and J. S. Binkley, Self- consistent molecular orbital methods 25. Supplementary functions for Gaussian basis sets, J. Chem. Phys. 80, G. Lippert, J. Hutter, and M. Parrinello, The Gaussian and augmented-plane-wave density functional method for ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, Theor. Chem. Acc. 103, 124 (1999). M. Krack and M. Parrinello, All-electron ab-initio molec- ular dynamics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2, 2105 (2000). V. F. Petrenko and R. W. Whitworth, Physics of ice (OUP Oxford, 1999). J. F. Ziegler, M. D. Ziegler, and J. P. Biersack, SRIM– The stopping and range of ions in matter (2010), Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 268, 1818 (2010). SRIM 2013 Pro, www.srim.org. Appendix. Stopping power and range tables for charged particles, Journal of the ICRU 14, 79 (2014). M. Shimizu, M. Kaneda, T. Hayakawa, H. Tsuchida, and A. Itoh, Stopping cross sections of liquid water for MeV energy protons, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. M. Shimizu, T. Hayakawa, M. Kaneda, H. Tsuchida, and A. Itoh, Stopping cross-sections of liquid water for 0.3–2.0 MeV protons, Vacuum 84, 1002 (2010). Y. Yao, D. C. Yost, and Y. Kanai, K-shell core-electron excitations in electronic stopping of protons in water from first principles, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 066401 (2019). W. A. Wenzel and W. Whaling, The stopping cross sec- tion of D2O ice, Phys. Rev. 87, 499 (1952). P. Bauer, W. K ̈aferb ̈ock, and V. Neˇcas, Investigation of the electronic energy loss of hydrogen ions in H2O: influ- ence of the state of aggregation, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B 93, 132–136 (1994). C. Shepard, D. C. Yost, and Y. Kanai, Electronic exci- tation response of DNA to high-energy proton radiation in water, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 118401 (2023).