1 Superconductivity above 30 K achieved in dense scandium Xin He a,1,2,3, Changling Zhanga,1,2, Zhiwen Li1,2, Sijia Zhang1,Shaomin Feng1, Jianfa Zhao1,2, Ke Lu1,2 Baosen Bin1,2, Yi Peng1,2, Xiancheng Wang*1,2, Jin Song1, Luhong Wang4, Saori I. Kawaguchi5, Cheng Ji6, Bing Li6, Haozhe Liu6, J.S. Tse7, Changqing Jin*1,2,3 1Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 2School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3 Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan 523808, China 4 Shanghai Advanced Research in Physical Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China 5 Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute, SPring-8, Sayo-gun Hyogo 679-5198, Japan 6 Center for High Pressure Science & Technology Advanced Research, Beijing 100094, China 7 Department of Physics, University of Saskatchewan, Canada Superconductivity is one of most intriguing quantum phenomena, and the quest for elemental superconductors with high critical temperature (Tc) is of great scientific significance due to their relatively simple material composition and the underlying mechanism. Here we report the experimental discovery of densely compressed scandium (Sc) becoming the first elemental superconductor with Tc breaking into 30 K range, which is comparable to the Tc values of the classic La-Ba-Cu-O or LaFeAsO superconductors. Our results show that Tc onset of Sc increases from ~3 K at around 43 GPa to ~32 K at about 283 GPa (Tc zero ~ 31 K), which is well above liquid neon temperature. Interestingly measured Tc shows no sign of saturation up to the maximum pressure achieved in our experiments, indicating that Tc might be even higher upon further compression. a These authors contributed equally to this paper * Corresponding authors: wangxiancheng@iphy.ac.cn; jin@iphy.ac.cn 2 Introduction Searching for high-Tc superconductors is one of most important research topics in physical sciences. Elemental superconductors attract special and growing attention due to the simplicity of their singular composition . About 20 elemental solids are known to show superconductivity at ambient pressure, of which niobium has the highest superconducting transition temperature Tc ~ 9.2 K and its alloy NbTi has been widely used for its excellent superconducting performance . High pressure is a powerful tool and has been playing an important role in exploring new elemental superconductors and tuning superconducting properties . For simple elemental metals, high pressure usually suppresses Tc because of the electronic band broadening and resulting reduction of the density of state (DOS) near the Fermi energy. Lattice stiffness is another important factor that Tc goes down under pressure. However, these pressure effects on superconductivity may be altered by subtle structural and electronic changes associated with bonding or phase transitions. Pressure may also enable non-superconducting metals or even insulating solids at ambient pressure to host superconductivity at high pressure. For example, calcium is non-superconducting at ambient pressure, but exhibits a high Tc of 25 K at 161 GPa, and insulating sulfur shows superconductivity with Tc~17 K at 200 GPa. All known elemental superconductors with Tc near or above 20 K are realized under pressure, such as Li with Tc ~16-20 K at 43-48 GPa and yttrium with Tc ~17 K at 89 GPa . Our recent study showed that elemental titanium reached Tc of 26.2 K at pressure of 248 GPa . It is indicated that both Ca and Ti show very high Tc among elemental solids because of the pressure induced s-d electron transition, which also drives a sequence 3 of phase transitions. The structure instability associated with the pressure induced tendency and occurrence of phase transitions favors superconductivity because of the lattice softening enhanced electron-phonon coupling strength. The crystal structure and physical properties of Sc metal under pressure was examined by previous studies , which showed that Sc has the hcp structure (Sc-I) at ambient conditions, and pressure generates four structural transitions at about 23, 104, 140, and 240 GPa, respectively, producing high-pressure phases of Sc II, Sc III, Sc IV, and Sc V, respectively . Sc II phase crystallizes in an incommensurate composite structure comprising a body centered host structure and a C face centered guest structure , and Sc V phase has a hexagonal lattice consisting of 6 screw helical chains , while Sc III and Sc IV phases are not fully determined . Previous work reported that Sc starts to show superconductivity at 21 GPa with Tc ~ 0.35 K . With further compression, Tc reaches as high as 19.6 K at 107 GPa, which occurs just at the phase boundary of Sc II and Sc III. However, Tc was reported to drop to ~10 K when pressure is further increased and Sc III phase appears . Here, we report high pressure measurements up to 283 GPa to explore superconductivity in Sc. A maximal Tc above 30 K was observed at the highest experimental pressure, which sets a new record among elemental superconductors. To date Sc is the only known elemental superconductor with Tc breaking into 30 K temperature range. Experimental Section The electrical resistance measurements were performed by using the four probe Van der Pauw method for tiny specimen as described in the literatures . The 4 pressure was calibrated via the shift of the first order Raman edge frequency from the diamond cutlet as shown in previous works . The applied current is 100 μA. Diamond anvil cells were used to produce high pressures. A variant of anvils with double beveled culet size of 20/140/300 μm, 30/140/300 μm or 50/140/300 μm were adopted in the experiments. A plate of T301 stainless steel covered with mixture of cBN powder and epoxy as insulating layer was used as the gasket. A hole of approximately 15~30 μm in diameter depending on top culet size was drilled in the center of the gasket to serve as high pressure chamber. hBN powder was used as pressure transmitting medium that filled in the high pressure chamber. We used the ATHENA procedure to produce the specimen assembly. Four Pt foils with thickness of approximately 0.5 μm as the inner electrode were deposited on the culet surface, after which cross shaped Sc specimens with side lengths ~10 μm × 10 μm and thickness of 1 μm were adhered on the electrodes and culet surface. Tens of specimens are prepared for the experiments. Diamond anvil cells were put into a MagLab system that provides synergetic extreme environments with temperatures from 300 to 1.5 K and magnetic fields up to 9 T for the transport measurements. Results and discussion up to 215 GPa measured during the warming process for Sc Sample 1. The Sc metal starts to show superconductivity with Tc above 3.3 K at 43 GPa. The Tc monotonously rises to ~26.2 K at 215 GPa, which is much higher than the 8.2 K at 74 GPa reported by J. J. Hamlin et. al. and 19.6 K at 107 GPa reported by Debessai et. al.. Considering that Tc shows an increasing tendency with further compression, we 5 extended to higher pressures up to 283 GPa for Sample 2 and observed enhancement of Tc in dense Sc metal. Temperature dependence of the electrical resistance for sample 2 under various pressures are shown in Figure 1b. With further increasing pressure, Tc reaches 32 K at the maximum experimental pressure of 283 GPa as shown in Figure 2, where both cooling and warming curves are presented. It is evidenced in the experiments that cooling process usually gave rather higher transition temperature since it is not easy to reach thermal equilibrium with helium cooling rate. Alternatively the warming process can be subtly tuned to reach thermo equilibrium that approaches the intrinsic properties of the measured samples. We hence chose the Tc measured from warming process. For the warming process the onset critical temperature (Tc onset) and the zero resistance critical temperature (Tc zero) of superconducting transition at 283 GPa can be determined by the derivative of resistance with respect to temperature dR/dT to be 32 K and 31 K, respectively, demonstrating a very narrow superconducting transition. The data for samples 3 and 4 shown in Figure S1(a,b) further confirm the superconductivity of Sc under high pressure with Tc above 30 K. Among elemental superconductors, niobium has the highest Tc of 9.2 K at ambient pressure, while under high pressure several elements exhibit high Tc near or above 20 K, such as Li (Tc ~ 15-20 K at 48 GPa ), Ca (Tc ~ 25 K at 220 GPa ), Y (Tc ~ 20 K near 100 GPa ), V (Tc ~17 K at 120 GPa ), S (Tc ~ 17 K at 220 GPa ) and Ti (Tc ~ 26.2 K near 248 GPa ). Superconductivity above 30 K in elemental solids has never been reported before, and Sc is the first and so far only known elemental superconductor with Tc breaking into the record-setting 30 K range, which is comparable to the Tc of the classic LaBaCuO and LaFeAsO 6 superconductors . To further probe superconductivity of dense Sc metal under high pressure, we measured transport properties under different magnetic fields for Sample 2. Figure 3a presents the electrical resistance measured at 283 GPa with applying magnetic fields. It is seen that the superconducting transitions are gradually suppressed by the magnetic field. Here, the temperature at 90% of normal state resistance was used to plot the data of Tc 90% versus magnetic field measured at 283 GPa as shown in Figure 3b, from which the upper critical field at zero temperature μ0Hc2(0) can be estimated. A linear fitting of Hc2(T) leads to the slope of dHc2/dT|Tc of −2.65 T/K. Using the the μ0Hc2(0) value controlled by orbital deparing mechanism in a dirty limit (μ0Hc2 Orb(0)) was calculated to be 58 T. The Ginzburg Landau (GL) formula of zero temperature. As shown in Figure 3b, the fitting of μ0Hc2(T) by GL formula gives a value of Hc2(0) = 43.7 T that is slightly smaller than μ0Hc2 Orb(0). Using the obtained value of Hc2(0), the GL coherence length was calculated to be ξ = 27.4 Å via μ0Hc2(0) = Φ0/2πξ2, where Φ0 = 2.067 × 10-15 Web is the magnetic flux quantum. Combining our high pressure x ray experiments (Fig. S2) and the phase transition behaviors reported by previous works , we plot the pressure driven structure-superconductivity phase diagram shown in Figure 4. Five different crystal structures of Sc are identified when pressure varies from ambient pressure to 297 GPa. No superconductivity above 2 K was observed in Sc-I within the pressure range of 0-23 GPa. With increasing pressure, Tc monotonously rises from 3.1 K at 43 GPa to 32 K at 283 GPa as shown from the data of thin foil samples from S1 to S4. 7 One remarkable interesting feature is the pressure dependence of Tc shows non-saturating behavior, which suggests that Tc could be further enhanced by further compression at higher pressure conditions. We notice that the monotonous rise of Tc is different from the previous work reported by Debessai et. al. , where an abrupt Tc drop is found at 111 GPa that is near the boundary between the Sc II and Sc III phases. To double check this discrepancy, one additional high pressure transport measurement was performed on powder Sc sample instead of thin film. As shown in Fig. S1(c,d), at 102 GPa there exist two superconducting transitions at 17.5 K and 14 K, respectively. When further increasing pressure, the low Tc transition gradually shifts toward high temperature while the high Tc transition disappears, which implies that there does exist a phase transition near 102 GPa. The low Tc superconductivity should arise from the Sc III phase, which is consistent with the Tc drop near the phase transition reported in the previous work . Except for the data in the Sc II phase between 82~102 GPa, the pressure dependence of Tc for the thin film and powder samples are well matched. Sc II phase adopts an incommensurate modulated host-guest structure with space group I4/mcm(γ) . This incommensurate structure consisting of two interpenetrating sublattices, a body-centered host structure and a C face centered guest structure, along the crystallographic c axis. For powder Sc sample, the incommensurability increases with pressure and Tc increases accordingly . It is speculated that the strain in the thin film samples should suppress the increase of incommensurability under high pressure relative to the powder sample and lead to the Tc discrepancy. In the phases from Sc III to Sc V, Tc rises consistently at rising pressure. Sc III and Sc IV phases are not fully resolved, although a recent theoretical study suggested that the Ccca 20 phase and Cmca 32 phase are likely candidates for 8 the observed Sc III and Sc IV, respectively . Sc V phase occurs when pressure exceeds 240 GPa, which adopts a hexagonal lattice (space group P6122) consisting of 6 screw helical chains . These results suggest that pressure induced structure instability plays a key role in driving rising Tc in dense Sc, possibly driven by rising contribution of d orbital electronic states near the Fermi energy and the lattice softening associated with the phase transitions, both of which strengthen the electron phonon coupling. We also have performed electron phonon coupling density functional calculations to confirm the experimentally observed superconductivity as seen in Fig. S3. Details of the calculations are given in supplementary materials. The predicted Tc at 240 GPa varies from 30 to 33 K with empirical Coulomb repulsion parameter from 0.13 to 0.1. The results are similar to those reported in ref. 32. A valence electronic configuration Sc of 3s1.563p5.253d2.424s0.25 was obtained from Mulliken population analysis of the crystal orbitals calculated using atom-centered localized basis set . It is obvious the substantial charge migration from the Sc 4s to the 3d orbitals is responsible for the strong electron phonon coupling. Conclusions In summary, we have investigated transport properties of Sc under high pressure up to 283 GPa, and we have found that Tc is monotonously enhanced by pressure from 3.1 K at around 43 GPa to 32 K at around 283 GPa, following a sequence of high-pressure phase transitions from Sc II to Sc V. The increase of Tc shows no sign of saturation up to the highest experimental pressure of 283 GPa, which indicates that Tc of superconducting Sc still has room to go higher upon further compression. 9 Scandium is the only currently known elemental superconductors with the Tc onset breaking through 30 K at high pressure. The present results offer fresh insights for exploring high-Tc superconductivity at ultrahigh pressures in diverse element solids. During preparing the paper (arXiv:2303.01062) we became aware that an independent similar work (arXiv:2302.14378) has been carried out by J. J. Ying et al.. Acknowledgments: The works are supported by NSF& MOST of China through research Projects. JST wish to thank NSERC Canada for a Discovery Grant. We thank C.F.Chen for the discussions.