On parent structures of near-ambient nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride superconductor Mingfeng Liu,1, 2, ∗ Xiangyang Liu,1, ∗ Jiangxu Li,1, ∗ Jiaxi Liu,1, 2 Yan Sun,1 Xing-Qiu Chen,1 and Peitao Liu1, † 1Shenyang National Laboratory for Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 110016 Shenyang, China. 2School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology of China, 110016 Shenyang, China. (Dated: 14th March 2023) Recently, near-ambient superconductivity has been experimentally evidenced in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. [Nature 615, 244 (2023)], which yields a remarkable maximum Tc of 294 K at just 10 kbar. However, due to the difficulty of x-ray diffraction (XRD) in identifying light elements such as hydrogen and nitrogen, the crystal structure of the superconductor remains elusive, in particular for the actual stoichiometry of hydrogen and nitrogen and their atomistic positions. This holds even for its parent structure. Here, we set out to address this issue by performing a thorough density functional theory study on the structural, electronic, dynamical, and optical properties of lutetium hydrides. Through thermal and lattice dynamic analysis as well as XRD and superconductor color comparisons, we unambiguously clarified that the parent structures are a mixture of dominant LuH2 phase of the CaF2-type (instead of originally proposed LuH3 structure of Fm ̄3m space group) and minor LuH phase of the NaCl-type. Introduction. Since Kamerlingh Onnes observed for the first time a superconducting transition on mercury in 1911 , the search for high-Tc superconductors at ambient conditions has been a perpetual dream for both experimental and theoret- ical scientists. During the last five years, boosts in the search have been witnessed in hydrogen-rich systems [2–6]. This originates from seminal intuitions of Neil Ashcroft that room- temperature superconductors may be found in hydrogen under sufficiently high pressures and hydrides at lower pressures by chemical precompression . This results in the discov- ery of many hydrogen-rich superconductors that can achieve near room temperature superconductivity at megabar pres- sures, such as H3S , H3P , LaH10 , ThH10 , YH6 , YH9±x , and Lu4H23 . However, the megabar pressures are still too high for prac- tical applications. This pushes the search to the ternary and quaternary superhydrides [17–20]. Indeed, it has been theor- etically predicted that the potassium doped Ca(BH4)2 can po- tentially be an ambient-pressure high-Tc superconductor . Very recently, near-ambient superconductivity has been exper- imentally evidenced in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. . This is remarkable achieve- ment that a maximum Tc of 294 K can be achieved at a much lower pressure of 10 kbar. From an alchemical perspective, the fact of the doped lutetium hydrides being high-Tc super- conductors seems an natural extension of already explored yttrium- or lanthanum-superhydrides superconductors, since they share similarity in the number of d and s valence elec- trons, i.e., Lu (5d16s2), La (5d16s2), and Y (4d16s2). In this superhydride, the N doping plays a role in providing addi- tional carriers and suppressing the formation of H− anions (unfavourable for superconductivity) in the lattice. Neverthe- less, due to the difficulty of x-ray diffraction (XRD) in identi- fying light elements of hydrogen and nitrogen, the crystal structure, the actual stoichiometry of hydrogen and nitrogen as well as their atomistic positions remain elusive. This also holds for its parent structure. In this work, we aim to identify the parent structures of this nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride superconductor by density functional theory (DFT) calculations. We found that simply comparing the simulated XRD to the experimental one is not capable of unequivocally determining the crystal structures: The LuH of zinc-blend type (ZB-LuH), LuH2 of fluorite type (FL-LuH2), and LuH3 in the Fm ̄3m space group exhibit al- most identical simulated XRDs that all mach well the main peaks of the experimental XRD. However, Fm ̄3m-LuH3 is thermodynamically and dynamically unstable. The remaining small peaks of the experimental XRD can be well reproduced with the LuH phase of NaCl-type (RS-LuH), which is dynam- ically stable both at 0 GPa and under pressures. Furthermore, the optical calculations show that FL-LuH2 exhibits vanish- ing absorption of photons near pink color, whereas RS-LuH and Fm ̄3m-LuH3 show large absorption of photons near pink color. Considering the experimentally observed pink color in the N-doped lutetium hydride superconductor samples , we therefore conclude that the dominant phase of the parent structures is most likely to be FL-LuH2. Computational details. The first-principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) . The plane-wave cutoff for the orbitals was chosen to be 500 eV. A Γ-centered k-point grid with a spa- cing of 0.03 2π/Å between k points was used to sample the Brillouin zone. The electronic interactions were described us- ing the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional . The projector augmented wave (PAW) pseudopotentials with the valence electron configurations of 5p65d16s2 and 1s1 were employed for Lu and H, respectively. The Gaussian smearing method with a smearing width of 0.05 eV was used. The convergence criteria for the total energy and ionic forces were set to 10−6 eV and 1 meV/Å, respectively. The variable- composition structure search was carried out using the gen- eric evolutionary algorithm as implemented in the USPEX code , with the maximum number of atoms being set to 32. The phonon dispersion relationships were computed using a 3 × 3 × 3 supercell and the Phonopy code based on density functional perturbation theory. The optical absorp- arXiv:2303.06554v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 12 Mar 2023 2 FL-LuH2 LuH3 LuH3 ZB-LuH RS-LuH Formation enthalpy (eV/atom) Composition ratio H/(Lu+H) RS-LuH FL-LuH2 (a) (b) (c) Lu H (a) Calculated formation enthalpies at 1 GPa of all the structures in the Lu-H system. Each blue circle represents individual DFT computations and the structures with the lowest formation enthalpies (in red solid circles) form a convex hull. The thermodynamical instabilities of ZB-LuH, RS-LuH, and Fm ̄3m-LuH3 are indicated by red crosses. The crystal structures and phonon dispersion relationships of (b) RS-LuH and (c) FL-LuH2. The polyhedral highlights the local environment of H. The detailed information on other compounds is given in Supplemental Material Fig. S1 . tion spectra were obtained within the independent-particle ap- proximation using a dense k-point grids with a spacing of 0.01 2π/Å. Note that here the Drude-like contributions stemming from intraband transitions were not considered. Structural phase diagram and phonon dispersions. Fig- ure 1(a) shows the calculated formation enthalpies of pre- dicted Lu-H compounds at 1 GPa derived by the variable- composition evolutionary algorithm. The structures with the lowest formation enthalpies forming a convex hull are thought to be the ground-state structures. It is evident that besides the experimentally observed FL-LuH2 phase , a new pre- dicted R32-LuH3 structure with six Lu and eighteen H atoms in the unit cell is also on the convex hull. It is interesting to note that R32-LuH3 is an insulating phase with an indirect gap of 0.86 and 0.82 eV at 0 GPa and 1 GPa, respectively (see Supplemental Material Figs. S1 and S2 ). The Fm ̄3m- LuH3 is, however, above the convex hull by 92 meV/atom, indicating its thermodynamical instability. The ZB-LuH and RS-LuH are above the convex hull as well, with the energies above the convex hull being 101 and 229 meV/atom, respect- ively. The phonon calculations demonstrate that ZB-LuH, RS-LuH, FL-LuH2, and R32-LuH3 are all dynamically stable, while Fm ̄3m-LuH3 exhibits soft phonon modes over the full Brillouin zone [see Fig. 1(c) and also Supplemental Material Fig. S1 ]. We note that this is in contrast to the calculated results of Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. , which, however, showed the presence of soft modes in RS-LuH. We argue that their incorrect predictions likely originated from the employed small supercell. For instance, using a smaller 2 × 2 × 2 su- percell for RS-LuH, we also reproduced the soft modes. All the detailed information on space groups, formation enthal- pies, optimized lattice parameters, and the Wyckoff positions of predicted Lu-H binary compounds is given in Supplemental Material Table S1 . As compared to FL-LuH2, an addi- tional hydrogen atom appears in a hollow octahedral site of Fm ̄3m-LuH3 (see Supplemental Material Fig. S1 ), im- plying strong anharmonicity. Therefore, the dynamical stabil- ity of Fm ̄3m-LuH3 should be further carefully examined with beyond harmonic approximation. XRD simulations. Figure 2 compares the simulated XRDs of different Lu-H binary compounds to the experimental one obtained at 0 GPa. One can see that ZB-LuH, FL-LuH2 and Fm ̄3m-LuH3 exhibit almost indistinguishable simulated XRDs that all mach well the main peaks of the experimental one. This is not unexpected, because all of them show the similar lattice constants (∼5.0 Å) (see Supplemental Mater- ial Tables S1 and S2 ) and the same framework of Lu (see Supplemental Material Fig. S1 ), while the subtle differences in the number and positions of H atoms are not capable to be captured by the XRD technique. Although the R32-LuH3 phase is the thermodynamical ground state (on the convex hull), its simulated XRD obviously deviates the exper- imental one, excluding its existence in the N-doped lutetium hydride superconductor. The remaining small peaks appear- ing in the experimental XRD can be well captured by the RS- LuH phase, indicating the existence of a small portion of the RS-LuH phase in the superconductor. We note that the per- fect agreement on the small peaks of the experimental data at 0 GPa can only be achieved by the RS-LuH phase at 2 GPa. Reducing the pressure results in increasing lattice constants, which lead to a rigid shift toward smaller diffraction angles. One might think that this is a result of the overestimation of lattice constants by the PBE functional. However, if this was the reason, the presently perfect agreement on the major peaks of the experimental data achieved by ZB-LuH, FL-LuH2 and Fm ̄3m-LuH3 would be somewhat deteriorated. Optical spectra. Figure 3 displays the calculated optical ab- sorption spectra of ZB-LuH, RS-LuH, FL-LuH2, and Fm ̄3m- 3 Intensity (a.u.) Experiment FL-LuH2 Fmത3m ZB-LuH Fmത3m Fmത3m -LuH3 20 40 60 80 RS-LuH Fmത3m (2 GPa) R32 -LuH3 30 50 70 2θ(°) 0 GPa (except for RS-LuH, which was obtained at 2 GPa) and com- pared to the experimental one obtained at 0 GPa. The experimental data are taken from Ref. . 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 Photon energy (eV) FL-LuH2 ZB-LuH Fm3m-LuH3 RS-LuH 5cm-1) Absorption coefficient (10 FL-LuH2, and Fm ̄3m-LuH3 compounds at 1 GPa. LuH3 compounds at 1 GPa within the independent-particle approximation. It is evident that only FL-LuH2 exhibits van- ishing absorption coefficients of photons near pink color, in good agreement with the experimental spectra . This arises from the existence of large direct band gaps (∼1.9 eV) between the bands close to the Fermi level over the full Bril- louin zone (see Supplemental Material Fig. S2 ). By con- trast, the Fm ̄3m-LuH3 structure shows strong absorption of the photons near pink color. Considering the experimentally observed pink color in the N-doped lutetium hydride super- conductor samples , the dominant phase of the parent structures is most likely to be FL-LuH2, rather than the ori- ginally proposed Fm ̄3m-LuH3 structure . We note that the overall optical absorption spectra change only slightly with the pressure from 0 to 1 GPa (compare Supplemental Mater- ial Fig. S1 and Fig. S2 ). Our work provides a new route to identify the parent structures via the optical spectroscopy. meV/atom), phonon stability, and absorption of pink-color photons as well as matching degree on the experimental XRD for different Lu-H binary compounds at 1 GPa. Phase Ehull Phonon Absorption of XRD stability pink-color photons match ZB-LuH 101 yes yes dominant peaks RS-LuH 229 yes yes minor peaks RL-LuH2 0 yes no dominant peaks Fm ̄3m-LuH3 92 no yes dominant peaks R32-LuH3 0 yes no no match Conclusions. In summary, we have carried out a thorough density functional theory study on the crystal structures, ther- modynamic and dynamical stabilities, as well as optical ab- sorption spectra of lutetium hydrides. The results are sum- marized in Table I. It is obvious that the FL-LuH2 phase is the only one that satisfies all the necessary requirements to- ward the experimental observations, i.e., thermodynamically and dynamically stable, no absorption of pink-color photons, and matching well the main peaks of the experimental XRD. Therefore, we can conclude that the FL-LuH2 phase is the dominant phase of the parent structures of the recently ex- perimentally synthesized near-ambient high-Tc lutetium hy- dride superconductor. The remaining small peaks of the ex- perimental XRD can better be described by the existence of a small portion of the RS-LuH phase, which is phonon stable at 0 GPa and under pressures. This is further confirmed by the fact that the predicted lattice constants for FL-LuH2 (5.017 Å) and RS-LuH (4.800 Å) at 0 GPa agree well with the experi- mental values (5.029 and 4.753 Å for the so-called compound A and compound B, respectively) . Given the unam- biguous identification of the parent structures, it is time to study the role of nitrogen doping in this near-ambient high- Tc lutetium hydride superconductor, since it was interestingly predicted by electron-phonon calculations that LuH2 is non- superconducting at 0 GPa .