Triplet supercurrents in lateral Josephson junctions with a half-metallic ferromagnet Yao Junxiang,1, ∗ Remko Fermin,2 Mariona Cabero,3 Kaveh Lahabi,1 and Jan Aarts1, † 1Huygens-Kamerlingh Onnes Laboratory, Leiden Institute of Physics, Leiden University. P.O. Box 9504, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. 2Department of Materials Science & Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, 27 Charles Babbage Road, Cambridge CB3 0FS, United Kingdom. 3ICTS - Centro Nacional de Microscop ́ıa Electr ́onica, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain (Dated: October 10, 2024) In the area of superconducting spintronics, spin triplet supercurrents in half-metallic ferromagnets (HMFs) could yield dissipationless spin transport over large distances, and high current density. Promising among the HMFs is the perovskite oxide La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (LSMO), and recent studies in combination with the high-Tc superconductor YBa2Cu3O7, or the conventional superconductor NbTi, showed long range effects. Here we focus on two issues that as yet received less attention: the value of the critical current in the HMF in the limit of a very small electrode distance (20 nm), and the nature of the spin triplet generator. We use lateral junctions shaped as bar, square, and disk, and find high supercurrent densities, of order 1011 A/m2, pointing to an efficient triplet generation mechanism. This is surprising in the sense that no magnetic inhomogeneity is purposely built in, as is done in conventional metal triplet junctions. Furthermore, from the magnetic field dependence of the critical current interference patterns we find a uniform supercurrent distribution in bar-shaped devices, but one more constricted to the rim in disk devices, which is an expected consequence of the geometry. We also analyze the temperature dependence of the critical current and find the quadratic dependence that was predicted in the limit of small junction lengths. From studying the NbTi/LSMO interface with scanning electron transmission microscopy, we conclude that the magnetic inhomogeneity required for triplet generation resides in the LSMO layer adjacent to the interface. I. INTRODUCTION Arguably the most promising ferromagnetic (F) materials to combine with a superconductor (S) for superspintronics applications [1–3] are the half-metallic ferromagnets (HMF), such as CrO2 and the metallic oxide perovskites La0.7X0.3MnO3 (X = Sr (LSMO); or Ca (LCMO)). In both types of HMF materials, long-range triplet (LRT) proximity effects were found in lateral Josephson junctions, showing the existence of supercurrents over extremely long length scales [4–7]: in CrO2 over a distance of almost 0.5 μm and in LSMO even bridging 1 μm . Not well understood, however, is what magnitude of the supercurrent can be expected. This touches upon the question what the generator of spin triplets is in the LSMO-based experiments. In conventional S/F systems, a spin- active interface is engineered at which spin mixing and spin rotation processes conspire to the formation of equal-spin triplet correlations . Stack of magnets with non-collinear magnetizations are generally used for the magnetic inhomogeneity [11–13]. More recently, magnetic vortices [14–17], domain walls [18–21] and spin-orbit coupling [22–29] were also identified as triplet generators. The results on CrO2 without engineered magnetic non-collinearity are hypothesized to result ∗ yao@Physics.LeidenUniv.nl † aarts@physics.leidenuniv.nl from intrinsic strain-induced magnetic inhomogeneity or grain boundary disorder , but there are no engineered or other established sources of spin triplet correlations in the recent experiments on LSMO junctions with either the high temperature superconductor YBa2Cu3O7 , or the conventional superconductor NbTi . Earlier we studied lateral junctions of LSMO/NbTi, fabricated by electron beam lithography, and with a large distance between the contacts, of minimally 500 nm, which made them diffusive junctions. Here, we go to the opposite regime and fabricate junctions with a gap- between-electrodes of around 20 nm, the smallest we can make by a focused ion beam. We study different ge- ometries and compare disk junctions, where spin texture actually can generate triplets , with square and bar- shaped junctions without engineered magnetic inhomo- geneity (see Fig.1). We find very high critical currents in our devices. Irrespective of the device geometry, the value at 4.2 K is around 109 A/m2, with the disk de- vice reaching 1011 A/m2 at 1.5 K. We also find a current distribution that depends on the geometry. Analysis of the critical current interference patterns upon applica- tion of a perpendicular magnetic field shows that in the disk, the supercurrent is highly constricted to its rims, similar to results we obtained on disk junctions made of Nb/Co . For the bars we find a much more ho- mogeneous distribution over its cross-section. The re- sults show that the triplet generator mechanism has to be found in the LSMO/NbTi interface, although the spin texture of the disk has a decided influence. From electron arXiv:2303.13922v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 9 Oct 2024 2 of different geometry. (a) A disk-shaped junction consisting of NbTi (orange) and LSMO (blue). Due to the shape anisotropy, a stable magnetic vortex forms in the LSMO layer, as indicated. (b) A bar-shaped junction with a uniform magnetic texture. The x(z)-axis is perpendicular (parallel) to the trench (both in the sample plane). The out-of-plane direction is the y-axis. energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), performed with a scan- ning transmission electron microscope (STEM), we find indications of oxygen inhomogeneity at the interface that could be responsible for magnetic inhomogeneity. More- over, for the disk sample we measured the dependence of the temperature T on the junction critical current Jc and found it to be proportional to (1 − t)2 (with t = T/Tc, and Tc the critcal temperature of the proximized device), as was predicted for clean HMF triplet junctions . II. EXPERIMENTAL METHODS LSMO (40 nm) was deposited on a (001)-oriented (LaAlO3)0.3(Sr2TaAlO6)0.7 (LSAT) crystal substrate at 700 oC in an off-axis sputtering system with a back- ground pressure of 10−7 mbar. The growth pressure was 0.7 mbar with Ar:O (3:2) mixing atmosphere. Informa- tion on the characterization of the LSMO films is given in the Supporting Information (SI) Section I. After cooling down to room temperature at a rate of 10 oC/min, the NbTi layer (60 nm) was deposited on LSMO in situ. The bilayer NbTi/LSMO was pre-patterned to define contacts pad around a central area through ebeam lithography and argon etching. Next, a gallium focused ion beam (Ga+ FIB) was utilized to structure the bilayer nanopattern, using a beam current of ∼ 30 pA. We fabricated disk, square, and bar geometries, the latter with two different aspect ratios (length-between-contacts to width) of 3:1 and 5:1. The typical dimension of all structures was 1.3 μm. Also by FIB, a trench was made in the middle of the devices with a width (the junction length) of ∼ 20 nm, For this, a small beam current (∼ 1.5 pA) was used. The depth of the trench was defined by the milling time. More details on the device fabrication can be found in the SI Section I, II. Shown there are control experiments where the milling time was reduced and increased the milling time to obtain NbTi and LSMO weak links, respectively. Transport measurements were performed in a four- probe configuration; both the electrical transport and magnetoresistance were measured by using a lock-in setup (excitation frequency 77.3 Hz). The resistance- temperature characteristics were taken with a 10 μA current in a cryostat (IntegraAC, Oxford Instruments). Direction-varying fields and a wide range of temperatures (300 K to 1.5 K) can be achieved in this cryostat. At the setpoint of temperature, the AC current was set to 1 μA as a background. The current vs voltage measurements were performed by sweeping a DC current superimposed on the background and reading the corresponding voltages, with a field sweep (yielding superconducting quantum interference (SQI) patterns) or a temperature sweep (yielding Ic(T)). Micromagnetic simulations were conducted using a GPU-accelerated mumax3 . The magnetization was set to 5.75×105 A/m, and exchange stiffness was 1.7×10−12 J/m, yielding an exchange length of lex ≈ 2.86 nm (lex = � 2Aex/μ0M 2s ). According to Ref. , we consider a biaxial anisotropy in the LSMO(40 nm)/LSAT system. Therefore, the constant of biaxial anisotropy was set to 600 J/m3. The damping constant was set to 0.5 artificially to get a high efficiency of convergence. To mimic the real situation, the arms were included in the simulation design. The STEM-EELS data were acquired at 200 kV in a JEOL ARM200cF microscope equipped with a spherical aberration corrector and a Gatan Quantum Dual-EELS spectrometer. The EEL spectra were acquired using the spectrum line mode, with an energy dispersion of 0.25 eV per channel, an acquisition time of 0.5 s and a pixel size of 0.15 nm. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on the EELS datasets to de-noise the spec- tra, by using the MSA plug-ins for Gatan DMS analysis toolbox . III. RESULTS The resistance R of the differently shaped NbTi/LSMO junctions was measured as a function of temperature T, as shown in Fig.2a. The normal 3 plot of current (I) - voltage (V) curves taken at different temperatures on the disk-shaped junction. (c) Measured IV curves on the bar-shaped (3:1) junction at different temperatures. state resistance for all devices is around 20 Ω, except for the square one which is 75 Ω, due to a different contact geometry. The traces show two transitions with decreasing temperature. The first one corresponds to the superconducting transition of NbTi at ∼ 7.5 K, and is followed by a plateau, which corresponds to the resistance of the LSMO weak link. As the tem- perature further decreases, the resistances fully go to zero, with broad tails, indicating that the weak links become superconducting in all junctions, regardless of their geometry and aspect ratio. Since LSMO is a half-metal, the proximity effect must be carried by LRT correlations. In Fig.2 we also show current I versus voltage V (IV-characteristics) for different temperatures of the disk-shaped and the (3:1) bar-shaped junctions, measured by sweeping the current back and forth. The data clearly show the onset of voltage at the crit- ical current Ic, without visible hysteresis. The multi- ple steps in the IV curves of the disk junction at higher temperatures result from destroying superconductivity in nanostructured regions in the junction. As mentioned, in previous work on Nb/Co devices we found proximity supercurrents in disk junctions, result- ing from the spin texture of the device. Nb/Co-based bar-shaped junctions were never superconducting due to their uniform magnetization. In the case of LSMO-based junctions, we find a temperature-dependent Ic for all junctions, regardless of the device geometry. For an easy comparison between the Nb/Co and NbTi/LSMO exper- iments, see Table I at the end of the paper. A. Spatial supercurrent distribution To study the relative distribution of critical currents along the junction, we recorded Ic(B⊥)-patterns (with B⊥ a magnetic field perpendicular to the junction plane) of the differently shaped junctions at 4.1 K (disk and square) and 3.5 K (3:1 bar). The results (see Fig.3d-f) show a clear dependence on the sample geometry. For the disk, the Ic(B⊥)-pattern is two-channel-like, where the side lobes have a period comparable to the central peak, and the Ic(B⊥) oscillations decay gradually and less fast than the 1/B⊥ behavior expected for a single junction. This points to the existence of two super- conducting channels in the disk-shaped NbTi/LSMO junction. Contrarily, for the bar (aspect ratio 3:1), we find a typical single-junction Fraunhofer-like pattern, the same as the longer bar-shaped (5:1) junction (SI Section II). The square-shaped junction is somewhat in between. We extracted the periodicity for each pattern by using a voltage criterion (see SI, Section III). In the case of the disk-shaped junction, the width of the central peak is about 5.91 mT, and that of the first lobe is about 5.04 mT, yielding a ratio of ∼ 1.17. For the square-shaped and bar-shaped junctions, we obtain ratios of ∼ 1.37 and ∼ 1.45, respectively. The difference may be intrinsic in these junctions or correlated with the magnetic structures, as we will discuss later. To convert the Ic(B⊥)-pattern into the spatial distri- bution of the critical supercurrent, we employ a Fourier method and reconstruct the supercurrent density along the z axis (along the trench) . The analysis requires the effective junction length Leff, which is often taken as Leff = d+2λL. Since the thickness of NbTi elec- trodes (60 nm) is smaller than their London penetration depth (λL; of order 0.5 μm), Leff is rather determined by the lateral geometry of the electrodes. This works out disk-shaped, square-shaped and bar-shaped junctions, re- spectively, where L ≈ 1.3 μm is the junction width . We find the supercurrents to be largely constricted to the rims of the device in the disk-shaped LSMO junc- tion (Fig.3h). This is similar to the disk-shaped Nb/Co 4 micrographs of disk-shaped, square-shaped, and bar-shaped (3:1) devices. Here, the color indicates the NbTi/LSMO bilayer and all scale bars are equal to 500 nm. (d-f) Measured Ic(B⊥)-patterns using a B⊥ sweep. The color scale gives the differential resistance. (h-j) The results of Fourier analysis. The red-dashed lines indicate the size of the weak link. junctions, although the width of the channels is larger (measured by the full width at half maximum ∼200 nm). However, as the geometry of the junction changes from disk to square to bar (Fig.3i and j), the density of super- current in the middle regions becomes more and more pronounced (Fig.3h-j). Notably, the control experiment on disk-shaped MoGe/Ag junction also proves singlet supercurrents are distributed homogeneously across the trench, rather than being localized at the rim . B. The effect of in-plane fields on the supercurrent distribution In Nb/Co disk junctions, we found that the proximity effect, and in particular the rim supercurrents, were a consequence of the spin vortex texture. Therefore, the transport characteristics of the device are very sensitive to the exact spin texture of the weak link, for example by moving the vortex core using an in-plane (IP) field. In order to explore the similarity, we apply IP fields on the NbTi/LSMO disk junction to change the mag- netic ground state, which is also a magnetic vortex (ac- cording to micromagnetic simulations; details in Meth- ods). The results, for fields of 200 mT both perpendicu- lar and parallel to the trench, taken at 4.1 K, are shown in Fig.4. Surprisingly, we find no change in the critical current while applying an IP field. Moreover, the Ic(B⊥)- patterns persist, both when IP fields are applied perpen- dicular or parallel to the trench. Even in a 200 mT field, for which micromagnetic simulations demonstrate that the disk is fully magnetized, we find hardly any change in the two-channel Ic(B⊥)-patterns (Fig.4b,c). Note that we see small shifts in the central peaks with respect to zero out-of-plane field, but these are due to the misalign- ment between the sample plane and field direction. We also paid attention to small fields (∼ 10 mT) when small motions of the vortex core are expected. We found no sign of a 0 − π transition as observed in the Nb/Co sys- tem. This agrees with the predicted implication that such a transition cannot exist in a HMF . More details are given in SI Section III. We conclude from our IP field experiments that spin texture is not responsible for the proximity effect in our LSMO-based junctions. Specifically, the observed phe- 5 measured at 4.1 K. (a) Ic(B⊥)-pattern measured at zero IP field. The micromagnetic simulation in the inset demonstrates the LSMO disk has a ground state of a magnetic vortex. Ic(B⊥)-patterns in the presence of 200 mT perpendicular (b) or parallel (c) to the trench. Accordingly, the insets display the fully-magnetized state in both cases. The color bar represents z components in the micromagnetic simulation. nomena are very different from the observations in the Nb/Co disk junctions, where changes in spin texture lead to changes in Ic with fields of mT’s, and where Ic is fully quenched when the disk becomes homogeneously magne- tized. Here, Ic(0) does not even decrease, emphasizing the robustness of the LRT supercurrents Another possi- ble source of LRT correlations would be a magnetically disordered interface. We come back to this below. Still, the occurrence of the rim currents appears to be cou- pled to the geometry. In order to test this further, we reshaped a disk junction by cutting off one side. Inter- estingly, rim supercurrents remain on the curved side, but are absent on the flat side (See SI Section IV). Since we ruled out spin texture, we conclude that there is a generator at play at, or close to, the LSMO/NbTi inter- face. In order to further investigate this, we attempted to fabricate junctions with an altered interface, by inserting a thin Ag layer (∼ 10 nm). However, the Ag turned out to form islands rather than a continuous layer, and the devices showed very similar properties to those without Ag. More details are given in SI Section V. C. Dependence of Ic on temperature One of the promises of supercurrents in HMFs is that the density can be very high, and therefore we measured Ic(T) down to 1.5 K. Although Ic is well-defined at low temperatures, near the critical temperature the IV characteristics become rounded around Ic, which results in a slight ambiguity in determining Ic. The latter is believed to result from phase slips . In this regime, we find Ic by fitting the IV curves to a model proposed by Ambegaokar and Halperin (AH) . The values for Ic obtained this way are slightly different from the values extracted with a resistance criterion. More details are given in SI Section VII, including the relevant IV characteristics. Also, we note that the fitting yields an average value for RN of 0.8 Ω. This is significantly lower than the plateau in the R(T) curve for this sample, which is around 2 Ω, indicating that the interface resistance is not small, and the interface is not very transparent. The results for Ic(T) are summarized Fig.5. They show a parabolic dependence, and a current density Jc = Ic/(d∗L) of about 1.7×1010 A/m2 at 1.5 K. If we consider that the currents mostly are confined to the rim of the disk, over a distance of ∼ 200 nm, Jc is ∼ 1.1 × 1011 A/m2. Such high-density spin-polarized supercurrent holds promise for practical applications in superconducting spintronics. Previously, Ic(T) of HMF junctions were analyzed by an analogy to long diffusive SNS junctions . Here this analogy cannot be made, since the diffu- sive coherence length is roughly the size of the weak link. To show this, we estimate a mean free path lH of 6.5 nm using the measured resistivity of LSMO (40 μΩcm). Next, using a Fermi velocity value vF ∼ 7.4 × 105 m/s this leads to a diffusion constant D = vF ∗ lH/3, and using Tc = 5.5 K, we find the diffusive coherence length ξF = � ħD/(2πkBTc) to be ≈ 19 nm, which is roughly the size of the weak link. The same conclusion follows from considering the Thouless energy ET h = ħD/L2, which is about 2.6 meV, clearly larger than the gap ∆, which is 0.9 meV. A theoretical framework for describing HMF-based junctions, which is more suited than the analogy to dif- fusive SNS junctions, was given in Refs. . For the clean case, the strength of Ic is determined by the two spin scattering channels (↑↓ − ↓↑) and (↑↑) from the superconductor to the half-metallic spin-up band. Close and a maximum at lower T, typically around t = 0.2. The maximum is robust, and is also predicted for long diffusive junctions , but has never been observed. In 6 shows how Ic values are obtained by fitting the IV curve (yellow) to the AH theory (black-dashed line) at 4.41 K, instead of being extracted with a resistance criterion. The extracted values of Ic are plotted by blue dots and well fitted by (1-t)2 with t = T/Tc (red line), with Tc = 5.5 K the current experiment, the data are well described by (1-t)2, using Tc = 5.5 K, see Fig.5. The experimentally lowest accessible temperature is 1.5 K, or t = 0.3, so the issue of the peak in Ic remains open. IV. STEM INSPECTION OF THE INTERFACE An aberration corrected STEM-EELS microscope was used to study the structural and chemical properties of the LSMO/NbTi interface. Fig.6a displays a high an- gle annular dark field image showing the high quality LSMO layer and the disordered LSMO/NbTi interface. Fig.6b shows a chemical profile of the layers from an av- eraged electron energy loss spectrum image, measured by the normalized intensities at the ionization edges of La M4,5, Mn L2,3, O K, and Ti L2,3. The interface is quite sharp, with no significant intermixing, although a few atomic layers around the interface may well be a mixture of La, Sr, Mn, Nb and Ti. The Nb L2,3 intensity profile vanishes along with the Ti L2,3 (See the averaged EEL chemical map in SI Section VI), which proves the mixing along the few atomic layers of the incoherent interface. What stands out is a small peak in the oxygen concentra- tion that we found in two out of three samples. Since the oxygen concentration is all-important for the magnetic state of the manganese, this suggests that the interface can easily be magnetically disordered. In order to get more precise information concerning Mn oxidation state along the LSMO layer, its numerical value was estimated from the L2/L3 intensity ratio of the signals (L23 ratio) in the EEL spectra, according to the procedure described by Varela et al. Using this experimental relationship and the L23 ratios obtained from our spectra, a numeri- cal estimate of Mn oxidation states was obtained. Fig.6 summarizes the results obtained, indicating that the Mn oxidation state is a Mn3+-Mn4+ mixture (as expected), and fully constant along the LSMO layer up to the inter- facial region of the sample. This reinforces the conclusion that the generator is to be found in the disordered inter- face. V. DISCUSSION Above, we demonstrated the occurrence of a super- conducting proximity effect in LSMO-based junctions of various shapes. In this section, we discuss the possible origin of the effect. First note that the superconducting transport is carried by triplet Cooper pairs, as is indi- cated by the quite pure (1−t)2 dependence of Ic(T). For short junctions with a normal metal interlayer, the ex- pected behavior is 1 − t . A quadratic dependence, or an upward curved behavior of Ic(T), can in princi- ple be found in S/N/S structures , but that would concern long junctions, whereas our junctions are in the short junction limit. We further discuss this point in SI Section VII. Next, we find that the supercurrent generation is independent of the magnetic texture of the HMF. By applying in-plane fields, we observe the supercurrents to persist, even though the spin texture has been quenched. This shows that another generator is at play for the triplets than the vortex magnetization pattern, in line with the fact homogeneously magnetized bar-shaped junctions show equally strong supercurrents, and confirming our results on long junctions . The inescapable conclusion is that the LRT correlations are generated at the NbTi/LSMO interface. A possible source of LRT correlations would be inhomogeneous interfacial magnetism, stemming from the atomically disordered interface. Disorder would generally favor antiferromagnetic interactions, which are less sensitive to magnetic fields. Finally, we discuss the relation of the LRT generator to the highly confined triplet supercurrents at the rims of the disk-shaped devices. In the Nb/Co disk junctions studied before, these rim supercurrents were believed to be a direct result of the triplet nature of the supercur- rents. Specifically, in the Nb/Co system the generator was identified as resulting from the synergistic effects of an effective spin-orbit interaction (provided by the vortex magnetization) and sample boundaries. This entails that LRT transport in the Nb/Co system can only emerge at the rims of the device, and consequently, rim supercur- rents are very sensitive to in-plane fields. Contrarily, in the NbTi/LSMO system (for a comparison, see Table I), triplet generation is independent of spin texture. In the LSMO-based junctions, we observe rim supercurrents in 7 LSMO/NbTi deposited on a (001)-oriented LSAT crystal substrate. The green line indicates the zone where an Electron Energy Loss line scan has been performed for the chemical profile shown in (b). (b) Mn oxidation state and chemical profiles of La M4,5, Mn L2,3, O K and Ti L2,3 edges along the NbTi/LSMO interface. A clear peak is visible in the oxygen signal at the interface. the disk that become weakened in the square and bar. We suspect that the difference between the Nb/Co and NbTi/LSMO systems is connected to the high spin po- larization of the LSMO, where only one spin state can exist, but also this remains an open question. SQI patterns disk bar IP field Nb/Co S not sc yes NbTi/LSMO S F no bars of Nb/Co and NbTi/LSMO. S means a SQUID pattern, F means a Fraunhofer pattern, not sc means the junction was not superconducting. The column IP field shows whether the patterns for the disks change under an in-plane magnetic field. VI. CONCLUSION In summary, we have unambiguously shown super- currents and Josephson coupling in lateral NbTi/LSMO junctions with different geometries, and examined their origin. Surprisingly, these currents remain robust against large in-plane fields that are able to erase the spin tex- ture, indicating that the spin texture is not relevant for producing such currents. Instead, intrinsic mag- netic inhomogeneity in the LSMO top layer may be the key, which would also explain triplet generation in the LSMO/YBCO system. By performing Fourier analysis on the various Ic(B⊥)-patterns, we find rim supercur- rents in the disk-shaped junctions. The origin of these rim supercurrents is tied to the combination of triplet transport and disk-shaped junction geometry. However, their exact origin is currently left unexplained. On a final note, the robust triplet generator that we find is helpful for researching further fundamental questions involving spin-polarized supercurrents, but less so for applications, because it lacks control. For that, a different interface geometry will have to be devised. VII. SUPPORTING INFORMATION Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://xxxx. It gives more detailed descriptions of the following: a characterization of the epitaxy of LSMO films (Section I); results on junctions with shallow and deep trenches (section II); critical currents extracted with a resistance criterion, and SQI patterns at small in-plane field (Section III); a disk-shaped NbTi/LSMO junction with a flat side (Section IV); measurements and TEM data on a LSMO/Ag/NbTi device (Section V); an av- erage EEL chemical map of the LSMO/NbTi interface (section VI), and the determination of Ic and a calcula- 8 tion of ET h for long diffusive junctions (Section VII). VIII. AUTHOR INFORMATION All authors contributed to designing the experiment. YJ and RF fabricated the devices, YJ performed the measurements and the data analysis, with input from RF, JA and KL. MCP performed the TEM analysis. YJ and RF wrote the manuscript, with input from all authors. IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the project ‘Spin tex- ture Josephson junctions’ (project number 680-91-128) and by the Frontiers of Nanoscience (NanoFront) pro- gram, which are both (partly) financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO). YJ is funded by the China Scholarship Council (No. The work was further supported by EU Cost actions CA16218 (NANOCOHYBRI) and CA21144 (SUPERQMAP). It benefited from access to the Netherlands Centre for Elec- tron Nanoscopy (NeCEN) at Leiden University. MC re- ceived support from the Spanish state research agency AEI through grants PID2020-118078RB-I00 and from the Regional Government of Madrid CAM through SIN- ERGICO project Y2020/NMT-6661 CAIRO-CM. Elec- tron microscopy observations were carried out at ICTS- CNME in UCM. The authors acknowledge the ICTS- CNME for offering access to their instruments. M. Eschrig, Spin-polarized supercurrents for spintronics: a review of current progress, Rep Prog Phys 78, 104501 J. Linder and J. W. A. Robinson, Superconducting spin- tronics, Nature Physics 11, 307 (2015). G. Yang, C. Ciccarelli, and J. W. A. Robinson, Boost- ing spintronics with superconductivity, APL Mater. 9, R. S. Keizer, S. T. Goennenwein, T. M. Klapwijk, G. Miao, G. Xiao, and A. Gupta, A spin triplet supercur- rent through the half-metallic ferromagnet Cro2, Nature M. S. Anwar, F. Czeschka, M. Hesselberth, M. Porcu, and J. Aarts, Long-range supercurrents through half-metallic ferromagnetic CrO2, Phys. Rev. B 82, 100501 (2010). A. Singh, C. Jansen, K. Lahabi, and J. Aarts, High- quality CrO2 nanowires for dissipation-less spintronics, Phys. Rev. X 6, 041012 (2016). J. Yao and J. Aarts, Fabrication of planar halfmetallic ferromagnetic Josephson junctions with long range cou- pling, Appl. Phys. Lett. 124, 202601 (2024). D. Sanchez-Manzano, S. Mesoraca, F. A. Cuellar, M. Cabero, V. Rouco, G. Orfila, X. Palermo, A. Balan, L. Marcano, A. Sander, M. Rocci, J. Garcia-Barriocanal, F. Gallego, J. Tornos, A. Rivera, F. Mompean, M. Garcia-Hernandez, J. M. Gonzalez-Calbet, C. Leon, S. Valencia, C. Feuillet-Palma, N. Bergeal, A. I. Buzdin, J. Lesueur, J. E. Villegas, and J. Santamaria, Extremely long-range, high-temperature Josephson coupling across a half-metallic ferromagnet, Nat Mater 21, 188 (2022). M. Houzet and A. I. Buzdin, Long range triplet Joseph- son effect through a ferromagnetic trilayer, Physical Re- view B 76, 060504 (2007). M. Eschrig and T. L ̈ofwander, Triplet supercurrents in clean and disordered half-metallic ferromagnets, Nature Physics 4, 138 (2008). T. S. Khaire, M. A. Khasawneh, J. Pratt, W. P., and N. O. Birge, Observation of spin-triplet superconductiv- ity in co-based Josephson junctions, Phys Rev Lett 104, J. W. Robinson, J. D. Witt, and M. G. Blamire, Controlled injection of spin-triplet supercurrents into a strong ferromagnet, Science 329, 59 (2010). A. Singh, C. Jansen, K. Lahabi, and J. Aarts, High- quality CrO2 nanowires for dissipation-less spintron- ics, Physical Review X 6, 10.1103/PhysRevX.6.041012 M. S. Kalenkov, A. D. Zaikin, and V. T. Petrashov, Triplet superconductivity in a ferromagnetic vortex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 087003 (2011). M. A. Silaev, Possibility of a long-range proximity effect in a ferromagnetic nanoparticle, Phys. Rev. B 79, 184505 K. Lahabi, M. Amundsen, J. A. Ouassou, E. Beukers, M. Pleijster, J. Linder, P. Alkemade, and J. Aarts, Con- trolling supercurrents and their spatial distribution in ferromagnets, Nat Commun 8, 2056 (2017). R. Fermin, D. van Dinter, M. Hubert, B. Woltjes, M. Silaev, J. Aarts, and K. Lahabi, Superconducting triplet rim currents in a spin-textured ferromagnetic disk, Nano Lett 22, 2209 (2022). F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Long- range proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet structures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4096 (2001). Y. V. Fominov, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Joseph- son effect due to the long-range odd-frequency triplet su- perconductivity in SFS junctions with N ́eel domain walls, Phys. Rev. B 75, 104509 (2007). Y. Kalcheim, T. Kirzhner, G. Koren, and O. Millo, Long-range proximity effect in La2/3Ca1/3MnO3/(100)YBa2Cu3O7−δ ferromag- net/superconductor bilayers: Evidence for induced triplet superconductivity in the ferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 83, 2 (2011). F. Aikebaier, P. Virtanen, and T. Heikkil ̈a, Superconduc- tivity near a magnetic domain wall, Phys. Rev. B 99, 1 9 Z. P. Niu, A spin triplet supercurrent in half metal ferromagnet/superconductor junctions with the interfa- cial Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Singlet-triplet conversion and the long-range proximity effect in superconductor-ferromagnet structures with generic spin dependent fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 117003 (2013). F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Spin-orbit cou- pling as a source of long-range triplet proximity effect in superconductor-ferromagnet hybrid structures, Phys. Rev. B 89, 134517 (2014). M. Alidoust and K. Halterman, Proximity induced vor- tices and long-range triplet supercurrents in ferromag- netic Josephson junctions and spin valves, Journal of Ap- plied Physics 117, 123906 (2015). S. H. Jacobsen, J. A. Ouassou, and J. Lin- der, Critical temperature and tunneling spectroscopy of superconductor-ferromagnet hybrids with intrinsic Rashba-Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B B. Bujnowski, R. Biele, and F. S. Bergeret, Switchable Josephson current in junctions with spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 100, 1 (2019). J. R. Eskilt, M. Amundsen, N. Banerjee, and J. Linder, Long-ranged triplet supercurrent in a single in-plane fer- romagnet with spin-orbit coupled contacts to supercon- ductors, Phys. Rev. B 100, 224519 (2019). M. A. Silaev, I. V. Bobkova, and A. M. Bobkov, Odd triplet superconductivity induced by a moving conden- sate, Phys. Rev. B 102, 100507 (2020). M. S. Anwar and J. Aarts, Inducing supercurrents in thin films of ferromagnetic CrO2, Su. Sci. Tech. 24, 024016 M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J. C. Cuevas, and G. Sch ̈on, The- ory of half-metal/superconductor heterostructures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 137003 (2003). A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, F. Garcia-Sanchez, and B. Van Waeyenberge, The de- sign and verification of MuMax3, AIP Advances 4, H. Boschker, M. Mathews, P. Brinks, E. Houwman, A. Vailionis, G. Koster, D. H. A. Blank, and G. Rijn- ders, Uniaxial contribution to the magnetic anisotropy of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 thin films induced by orthorhombic crystal structure, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 323, 2632 (2011). M. Watanabe, E. Okunishi, and K. Ishizuka, Analysis of spectrum-imaging datasets in atomic-resoltion electron microscopy, Microscopy and Analysis 23, 5 (2009). R. C. Dynes and T. A. Fulton, Supercurrent density dis- tribution in Josephson junctions, Physical Review B 3, R. Fermin, B. de Wit, and J. Aarts, Beyond the effective length: How to analyse magnetic interference patterns of thin film planar Josephson junctions with finite lateral dimensions, Physical Review B 107, 064502 (2023). T. J. Blom, T. W. Mechielsen, R. Fermin, M. B. S. Hes- selberth, J. Aarts, and K. Lahabi, Direct-write printing of Josephson junctions in a scanning electron microscope, ACS Nano 15, 322 (2021). V. Ambegaokar and B. Halperin, Voltage due to thermal noise in the dc Josephson effect, Physical Review Letters M. S. Anwar, F. Czeschka, M. Hesselberth, M. Porcu, and J. Aarts, Long-range supercurrents through half-metallic ferromagnetic cro2, Physical Review B 82, 10.1103/Phys- P. Dubos, H. Courtois, B. Pannetier, F. K. Wilhelm, A. D. Zaikin, and G. Sch ̈on, Josephson critical current in a long mesoscopic S-N-S junction, Physical Review B B. Nadgorny, I. I. Mazin, M. Osofsky, R. J. Soulen, P. Broussard, R. M. Stroud, D. J. Singh, V. G. Har- ris, A. Arsenov, and Y. Mukovskii, Origin of high trans- port spin polarization in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3: Direct evi- dence for minority spin states, Physical Review B 63, M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J. C. Cuevas, and G. Sch ̈on, Theory of half-metal/superconductor heterostructures, Phys Rev M. Varela, M. P. Oxley, W. Luo, J. Tao, M. Watan- abe, A. R. Lupini, S. T. Pantelides, and S. J. Pennycook, Atomic-resolution imaging of oxidation states in mangan- ites, Phys. Rev. B 79, 085117 (2009). K. K. Likharev, Superconducting weak links, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 101 (1979). P. G. De Gennes, Boundary effects in superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 225 (1964). M. Eschrig, Spin-polarized supercurrents for spintronics: a review of current progress, Rep Prog Phys 78, 104501 J. Linder and J. W. A. Robinson, Superconducting spin- tronics, Nature Physics 11, 307 (2015). G. Yang, C. Ciccarelli, and J. W. A. Robinson, Boost- ing spintronics with superconductivity, APL Mater. 9, R. S. Keizer, S. T. Goennenwein, T. M. Klapwijk, G. Miao, G. Xiao, and A. Gupta, A spin triplet supercur- rent through the half-metallic ferromagnet Cro2, Nature M. S. Anwar, F. Czeschka, M. Hesselberth, M. Porcu, and J. Aarts, Long-range supercurrents through half-metallic ferromagnetic CrO2, Phys. Rev. B 82, 100501 (2010). A. Singh, C. Jansen, K. Lahabi, and J. Aarts, High- quality CrO2 nanowires for dissipation-less spintronics, Phys. Rev. X 6, 041012 (2016). J. Yao and J. Aarts, Fabrication of planar halfmetallic ferromagnetic Josephson junctions with long range cou- pling, Appl. Phys. Lett. 124, 202601 (2024). D. Sanchez-Manzano, S. Mesoraca, F. A. Cuellar, M. Cabero, V. Rouco, G. Orfila, X. Palermo, A. Balan, L. Marcano, A. Sander, M. Rocci, J. Garcia-Barriocanal, F. Gallego, J. Tornos, A. Rivera, F. Mompean, M. Garcia-Hernandez, J. M. Gonzalez-Calbet, C. Leon, S. Valencia, C. Feuillet-Palma, N. Bergeal, A. I. Buzdin, J. Lesueur, J. E. Villegas, and J. Santamaria, Extremely 10 long-range, high-temperature Josephson coupling across a half-metallic ferromagnet, Nat Mater 21, 188 (2022). M. Houzet and A. I. Buzdin, Long range triplet Joseph- son effect through a ferromagnetic trilayer, Physical Re- view B 76, 060504 (2007). M. Eschrig and T. L ̈ofwander, Triplet supercurrents in clean and disordered half-metallic ferromagnets, Nature Physics 4, 138 (2008). T. S. Khaire, M. A. Khasawneh, J. Pratt, W. P., and N. O. Birge, Observation of spin-triplet superconductiv- ity in co-based Josephson junctions, Phys Rev Lett 104, J. W. Robinson, J. D. Witt, and M. G. Blamire, Controlled injection of spin-triplet supercurrents into a strong ferromagnet, Science 329, 59 (2010). A. Singh, C. Jansen, K. Lahabi, and J. Aarts, High- quality CrO2 nanowires for dissipation-less spintron- ics, Physical Review X 6, 10.1103/PhysRevX.6.041012 M. S. Kalenkov, A. D. Zaikin, and V. T. Petrashov, Triplet superconductivity in a ferromagnetic vortex, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 087003 (2011). M. A. Silaev, Possibility of a long-range proximity effect in a ferromagnetic nanoparticle, Phys. Rev. B 79, 184505 K. Lahabi, M. Amundsen, J. A. Ouassou, E. Beukers, M. Pleijster, J. Linder, P. Alkemade, and J. Aarts, Con- trolling supercurrents and their spatial distribution in ferromagnets, Nat Commun 8, 2056 (2017). R. Fermin, D. van Dinter, M. Hubert, B. Woltjes, M. Silaev, J. Aarts, and K. Lahabi, Superconducting triplet rim currents in a spin-textured ferromagnetic disk, Nano Lett 22, 2209 (2022). F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Long- range proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet structures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 4096 (2001). Y. V. Fominov, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, Joseph- son effect due to the long-range odd-frequency triplet su- perconductivity in SFS junctions with N ́eel domain walls, Phys. Rev. B 75, 104509 (2007). Y. Kalcheim, T. Kirzhner, G. Koren, and O. Millo, Long-range proximity effect in La2/3Ca1/3MnO3/(100)YBa2Cu3O7−δ ferromag- net/superconductor bilayers: Evidence for induced triplet superconductivity in the ferromagnet, Phys. Rev. B 83, 2 (2011). F. Aikebaier, P. Virtanen, and T. Heikkil ̈a, Superconduc- tivity near a magnetic domain wall, Phys. Rev. B 99, 1 Z. P. Niu, A spin triplet supercurrent in half metal ferromagnet/superconductor junctions with the interfa- cial Rashba spin-orbit coupling, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Singlet-triplet conversion and the long-range proximity effect in superconductor-ferromagnet structures with generic spin dependent fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 117003 (2013). F. S. Bergeret and I. V. Tokatly, Spin-orbit cou- pling as a source of long-range triplet proximity effect in superconductor-ferromagnet hybrid structures, Phys. Rev. B 89, 134517 (2014). M. Alidoust and K. Halterman, Proximity induced vor- tices and long-range triplet supercurrents in ferromag- netic Josephson junctions and spin valves, Journal of Ap- plied Physics 117, 123906 (2015). S. H. Jacobsen, J. A. Ouassou, and J. Lin- der, Critical temperature and tunneling spectroscopy of superconductor-ferromagnet hybrids with intrinsic Rashba-Dresselhaus spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B B. Bujnowski, R. Biele, and F. S. Bergeret, Switchable Josephson current in junctions with spin-orbit coupling, Phys. Rev. B 100, 1 (2019). J. R. Eskilt, M. Amundsen, N. Banerjee, and J. Linder, Long-ranged triplet supercurrent in a single in-plane fer- romagnet with spin-orbit coupled contacts to supercon- ductors, Phys. Rev. B 100, 224519 (2019). M. A. Silaev, I. V. Bobkova, and A. M. Bobkov, Odd triplet superconductivity induced by a moving conden- sate, Phys. Rev. B 102, 100507 (2020). M. S. Anwar and J. Aarts, Inducing supercurrents in thin films of ferromagnetic CrO2, Su. Sci. Tech. 24, 024016 M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J. C. Cuevas, and G. Sch ̈on, The- ory of half-metal/superconductor heterostructures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 137003 (2003). A. Vansteenkiste, J. Leliaert, M. Dvornik, M. Helsen, F. Garcia-Sanchez, and B. Van Waeyenberge, The de- sign and verification of MuMax3, AIP Advances 4, H. Boschker, M. Mathews, P. Brinks, E. Houwman, A. Vailionis, G. Koster, D. H. A. Blank, and G. Rijn- ders, Uniaxial contribution to the magnetic anisotropy of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 thin films induced by orthorhombic crystal structure, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 323, 2632 (2011). M. Watanabe, E. Okunishi, and K. Ishizuka, Analysis of spectrum-imaging datasets in atomic-resoltion electron microscopy, Microscopy and Analysis 23, 5 (2009). R. C. Dynes and T. A. Fulton, Supercurrent density dis- tribution in Josephson junctions, Physical Review B 3, R. Fermin, B. de Wit, and J. Aarts, Beyond the effective length: How to analyse magnetic interference patterns of thin film planar Josephson junctions with finite lateral dimensions, Physical Review B 107, 064502 (2023). T. J. Blom, T. W. Mechielsen, R. Fermin, M. B. S. Hes- selberth, J. Aarts, and K. Lahabi, Direct-write printing of Josephson junctions in a scanning electron microscope, ACS Nano 15, 322 (2021). V. Ambegaokar and B. Halperin, Voltage due to thermal noise in the dc Josephson effect, Physical Review Letters M. S. Anwar, F. Czeschka, M. Hesselberth, M. Porcu, and J. Aarts, Long-range supercurrents through half-metallic ferromagnetic cro2, Physical Review B 82, 10.1103/Phys- P. Dubos, H. Courtois, B. Pannetier, F. K. Wilhelm, A. D. Zaikin, and G. Sch ̈on, Josephson critical current in a long mesoscopic S-N-S junction, Physical Review B B. Nadgorny, I. I. Mazin, M. Osofsky, R. J. Soulen, P. Broussard, R. M. Stroud, D. J. Singh, V. G. Har- ris, A. Arsenov, and Y. Mukovskii, Origin of high trans- port spin polarization in La0.7Sr0.3MnO3: Direct evi- dence for minority spin states, Physical Review B 63, 11 M. Eschrig, J. Kopu, J. C. Cuevas, and G. Sch ̈on, Theory of half-metal/superconductor heterostructures, Phys Rev M. Varela, M. P. Oxley, W. Luo, J. Tao, M. Watan- abe, A. R. Lupini, S. T. Pantelides, and S. J. Pennycook, Atomic-resolution imaging of oxidation states in mangan- ites, Phys. Rev. B 79, 085117 (2009). K. K. Likharev, Superconducting weak links, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 101 (1979). P. G. De Gennes, Boundary effects in superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 225 (1964).