Impact of magnetization and hyperfine field distribution on high magnetoelectric coupling strength in BaTiO3–BiFeO3 multilayers Johanna K. Jochum1, Michael Lorenz2, Haraldur P. Gunnlaugsson3, Christian Patzig4, Thomas H ̈oche4, Marius Grundmann2, Andr ́e Vantomme3,Kristiaan Temst2, Margriet J. Van Bael1 and Vera Lazenka3 1KU Leuven, Laboratorium voor Vaste-Stoffysica en Magnetisme, Celestijnenlaan 200D, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 2 Felix-Bloch-Institut f ̈ur Festk ̈orperphysik, Universit ̈at Leipzig, Linn ́estraße 5, D-04103 Leipzig, Germany 3 KU Leuven, Instituut voor Kern en Stralingsfysica, Celestijnenlaan 200D, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 4 Fraunhofer-Institut f ̈ur Mikrostruktur von Werkstoffen und Systemen (IMWS), Center for Applied Microstructure Diagnostics, Walter - H ̈ulse - Straße 1, D-06120 Halle, Germany March 16, 2023 Abstract Understanding the mechanisms of magnetoelectric (ME) coupling within multiferroic structures is paramount from a fundamental as well as an applied point of view. We report here that the magnetoelectric proper- ties, as well as the magnetization, of BaTiO3-BiFeO3 superlattices can be tuned by varying the BiFeO3 layer thickness. The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient (αME) reaches its maximum of 60.2 V cm−1 Oe−1 at 300 K, one of the highest values reported so far, for a sample with a BiFeO3 thickness of 5 nm and a BaTiO3 thickness of 10 nm. To gain deeper insight into the increased magnetoelectric coupling, and both the local and macroscopic magnetic properties, samples with varying BiFeO3 thicknesses have been investigated. Correlations were established between the hyperfine field (HFF), the magnetoelectric voltage coefficient and the magnetization. The possible mechanisms responsible for the strong mag- netoelectric coupling are discussed. 1 arXiv:2303.08493v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 15 Mar 2023 1 Introduction Magnetoelectric multiferroic heterostructures are of high interest due to their increased magnetoelectric (ME) coupling, as compared to the very few single phase magnetoelectrics such as BiFeO3. In fact BiFeO3 is the only known single phase multiferroic with both ferroelectric and antiferromagnetic ordering tem- peratures above room temperature (antiferromagnetic N ́eel temperature TN ≈ 640 K and ferroelectric Curie temperature TC ≈ 1100 K). Bulk BiFeO3 is a G- type antiferromagnet with a cycloid spin structure with a period of 62 nm . Several mechanisms exist in multiferroic heterostructures that can contribute to an increased ME coupling, such as interfacial strain coupling between the dif- ferent components as well as magnetic coupling created by combining a ferromagnet with an electrically tunable antiferromagnet to form an exchange biased system, such that the exchange bias can be switched using an electric voltage . Out of the multiferroic composite structures investigated so far, thin film heterostructures such as multilayers and thin film composites show the strongest ME coupling . Wang et al. found a direct magne- toelectric voltage coefficient of 52 Vcm−1 Oe−1 for metglas/piezofiber/metglas structures far off their electromechanical resonance frequency. Dong et al found ME voltage coefficients (αME) up to 22 Vcm−1 Oe−1 for magnetostric- tive/piezofiber laminates. We have recently reached values for αME as high as 49.7 Vcm−1Oe−1 in BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayers with atomically sharp inter- faces . A clear dependency of αME on the oxygen pressure during pulsed laser deposition growth could be found in these multilayers. In a previous study, we found that an increase in the number of BaTiO3-BiFeO3 double layers from 2 to 20, while keeping the double layer thickness constant, can lead to perpendic- ular magnetic anisotropy in BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayers, while αME only increased slightly from 16.4 Vcm−1Oe−1 to 28.8 Vcm−1Oe−1. Here, we report a strong increase of the ME voltage coefficient when decreasing the BiFeO3 layer thickness in BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayers from 50 nm to 5 nm while keeping the number of double layers and the BaTiO3 layer thickness constant. Using conversion electron M ̈ossbauer spectroscopy (CEMS), interesting correlations of hyperfine (HF) field, magnetization, and magnetoelectric voltage coefficients could be established. 2 Sample growth and structure Multilayers consisting of 15 BaTiO3 - BiFeO3 double layers with varying BiFeO3 thickness (nominal thicknesses: 50 nm, 20 nm, 10 nm, 5 nm, hereafter referred BFO(5), respectively) and a constant BaTiO3 thickness of 10 nm have been grown by pulsed laser deposition from single phase BaTiO3 and BiFeO3 tar- gets. The BiFeO3 target contained 66.7% isotopically enriched iron (57Fe) in order to allow studying the local magnetic environment of the BiFeO3 films using conversion electron M ̈osbauer spectroscopy (CEMS). The samples were 2 grown simultaneously on SrTiO3(001) as well as SrTiO3:Nb(001) substrates, at an elevated temperature of 680◦C and an oxygen pressure of 0.25 mbar. More details on sample growth can be found in Reference . X-ray diffraction (XRD) 2θ–ω scans and reciprocal space maps (RSM) were measured at 300 K, utilizing a PANalytical X’Pert PRO MRD system with Cu Kα radiation using a parabolic mirror and a PIXcel3D array detector. The double layer thicknesses (L) of the multilayers have been calculated from the 2θ–ω superlattice peaks using the relation L = λ 2δθ cos θB , where λ is the X-ray wavelength, δθ is the angular separation between two adjacent satellite peaks and θB is the Bragg angle of the zero-th order satellite peak. The calculated values can be found in Table 1, for the 2θ-ω scans the reader is referred to the 6. The observation that the multilayer peaks are not vertically aligned with the substrate peak in the RSM of the asymmetric (103) reflection implies that the multilayers are at least partially relaxed. From the symmetric (001) substrate peak the superlat- tice peaks can be clearly distinguished (see 6). The tilt mosaicity, which can be extracted from the horizontal broadening of the film fringes, is higher for the thicker samples than for the thinner samples. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM), as well as high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and element distribution analysis by means of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) have been performed on samples electron microscope TITAN3 80-300 (FEI company). TEM micrographs show- ing the atomically sharp, layered structure of our multilayers can be seen in The thicknesses of the BiFeO3 and BaTiO3 layers were extracted from these micrographs (see Table 1). It can be seen that the BaTiO3 layers are not perfectly flat, which leads to a modulation in thickness for the thin BiFeO3 layers of sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) from 2 to 4 nm. For the thicker BiFeO3 lay- ers in sample 15×BTO-BFO(20), the modulation in BiFeO3 thickness is lower (15-16 nm). 3 sample; the measured thicknesses of the BFO (darker) and BTO (lighter) layers have been indicated. The extracted BFO and BTO thicknesses lie in the range of 15-16 nm and 11-12 nm respectively for 15×BTO-BFO(20) and 2-4 nm and 11-13 nm respectively for 15×BTO-BFO(5). The local magnetic environment of the 57Fe atoms in the BiFeO3 layers was probed using CEMS at room temperature and zero magnetic field. As in our previous work , the M ̈ossbauer spectra were fitted using the “hyperfine field (HFF) distribution model” within the Vinda software. This model takes the possible coupling of isomer shift δ and hyperfine (HF) field BHF as well as quadrupole shift ε and HF field into account: δ = δ0 + dδ dBHF and ε = ε0 + dε dBHF . The macroscopic magnetic properties of our multilayers were investigated using SQUID (Superconducting QUantum Interference Device) magnetometry. Magnetization vs. field curves were recorded at 300 K in out of plane geome- try with a LOT - Quantum Design MPMS 3 SQUID VSM. The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient was measured using a LOT - Quantum Design Physical Prop- erties measurement System, making use of the relation: αME = dE dH = 1 t dV dH ≈ 1 t VAC HAC , where t is the film thickness and VAC the AC voltage induced across the structures in response to a small applied AC magnetic field HAC. αME was determined as a function of temperature and DC magnetic field at an AC magnetic field of 1 mT and a frequency of 1 kHz (for further details on the measurement method see reference ). 4 TEM; the nominal values (which are used throughout the manuscript for the sample description) are shown as well. Samples nominal thicknesses thickness, XRD thickness, STEM BiFeO3 BaTiO3 double layer double layer BiFeO3 BaTiO3 [nm] [nm] [nm] [nm] [nm] [nm] 15×BTO-BFO(50) 50 10 60 49 ± 2 − − 15×BTO-BFO(20) 20 10 30 26.3 ± 0.8 15×BTO-BFO(10) 10 10 20 19.5 ± 0.2 − − 15×BTO-BFO(5) 5 10 15 15.3 ± 0.7 2-4 3 Multiferroic properties The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient has been measured as a function of tem- perature and of DC bias field (see Figure 2). αME reaches its maximum, off - resonance, value of 60.2 V cm−1 Oe−1 for sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) at a bias field of 2 T. This value of αME is, to the best of our knowledge, among the highest recorded in literature so far. The values for the other samples lie notice- ably lower with 32 V cm−1 Oe−1, 22.5 V cm−1 Oe−1 and 11.2 V cm−1 Oe−1 spectively. The high values for αME in BiFeO3 and BiFeO3 heterostructures (discussed in our previous work ) have been theoretically confirmed by Popkov et al. . They describe the rotation of the oxygen octahedra with the antiferrodistortion vector Ω and show that the linear ME effect depends on the derivative of Ω with respect to the external field. This leads to giant values of αME at so called critical fields, where a reorientation of the antiferrodistor- tion vector occurs, and its derivatives approaches critical behaviour. While the tendency of the field dependence of the magnetoelectric voltage coef- ficient at 300 K is the same for the four samples, there is a significant difference in temperature dependence. The dependence of αME on temperature changes continuously with decreas- ing BiFeO3 layer thickness. Sample 15×BTO-BFO(50) shows a decrease of αME with increasing temperature as has been observed for bulk BiFeO3 and for BaTiO3-BiFeO3 composite films . For the samples with BiFeO3 thick- nesses of 20 nm and 10 nm, two different regimes can be distinguished in the temperature dependency of αME: T¡Tmin (Tmin corresponds to the tempera- ture where αME shows the lowest value) where αME decreases with increasing temperature, and T¿Tmin where αME increases with increasing temperature. This temperature dependence of αME was also observed in our previous work . With further decrease in BiFeO3 thickness, the temperature depen- dence of αME changes further, showing an increase of αME with increasing temperature for sample 15×BTO-BFO(5). This change in temperature depen- dence as a function of BiFeO3 layer thickness points towards a change in ME 5 coupling mechanism as a function of the BiFeO3 layer thickness. Both the magnetostrictive and piezoelectric coefficients increase with increasing temper- ature . It is therefore evident to conclude that a magnetoelectric multilayer dominated by the coupling of piezoelectric and magnetostrictive interaction via strain would show the same temperature dependence. Therefore, it seems that there is a change from strain mediated coupling in sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) to a regime where the multilayers show strain mediated coupling above a certain temperature Tmin while obeying a different coupling mechanism below Tmin. A possibility for such a mechanism is charge transfer across the interfaces . It has been suggested before that this change in the magnetoelectric coupling mechanism might be induced by a phase change in the BaTiO3 layer. Bulk BaTiO3 undergoes two structural phase transitions in the measured temper- ature range. The first transition, from tetragonal to orthorhombic, occurs at 273 K. The orthorhombic phase changes into a rhombohedral phase at 183 K . The ferroelectric properties of the different phases of BaTiO3 are strongly connected to the displacement of the Ti ions along the different faces of the oxy- gen octahedra, which leads to different polarization directions for the different structures. It is well-known that structural phase transitions can be shifted to either higher or lower temperatures in thin films by pseudomorphic growth on a substrate with a sufficiently small lattice mismatch . The lattice parameters of SrTiO3, BaTiO3 and BiFeO3are close enough to each other to allow pseu- domorphic growth. (STO, cubic: a = 0.3905 nm (JCPDS 84-0444); BaTiO3, tetragonal: a = 0.39945 nm, c = 0.40335 nm (JCPDS 83-1880); BiFeO3, rhom- bohedral: a = 0.3962 nm (JCPDS 73-0548)) As can be seen from the (103) RSM (see Figures S5 - S8 in the appendix), the layers are not lattice-matched with the substrate, however the in-plane lattice parameters of the BiFeO3 and BaTiO3 layers are matched to each other , leading to small in-plane strains (up to about 1%). A possible explanation for the discussed change in the tempera- ture dependence of αME might therefore be the onset of the orthorhombic-to- rhombohedral phase transition in the BaTiO3 layers, which occurs at different temperatures for different BiFeO3-BaTiO3 layer thicknesses and repetitions. 6 of magnetic bias field (at 300 K) and b) a function of temperature, for the indicated superlattice structures, see Table 1. To find an explanation for the significantly increased ME voltage coefficient for 15×BTO-BFO(5) we investigated the macroscopic and local magnetic prop- erties of our multilayers. SQUID magnetometry measurements were done in out-of-plane configuration, the same geometry as was used for the ME voltage coefficient measurements. As can be seen in Figure 3 the (volume) magnetiza- tion (in Am−1) of 15×BTO-BFO(5) exceeds the (volume) magnetization of the other three samples by more than a factor of two, following the same trend as the ME voltage coefficient when comparing the results as a function of BiFeO3 thick- ness. The same tendencies for the dependence of magnetization as well as ME voltage coefficient on BiFeO3 thickness have been observed by Kotnala et al. for BaTiO3/BiFeO3/BaTiO3 trilayers. Figure 3 further shows that none of the samples is saturated at a field of 7 T. For samples 15×BTO-BFO(50), 15×BTO- BFO(20) and 15×BTO-BFO(10) coercive fields of approximately 35 mT were found which is comparable to what has been found by other groups . The coercivity almost disappears for 15×BTO-BFO(5). 7 plane geometry taken at 300 K. The data have been normalized to the multilayer volume. The inset shows a zoom into the highlighted rectangle to show the curves of 15xBTO-BFO(20) and 15xBTO-BFO(10) more clearly. To gain further insight into the magnetic behaviour of sample 15×BTO- BFO(5) we probed the local magnetic environment of the 57Fe atoms in our multilayers using CEMS at room temperature. All four samples show the typical magnetic sextet (see Figure 4) with an asymmetry in the linewidth broadening of the first/sixth peak as is expected for iron in a position of trigonal symmetry which is the case for iron in BiFeO3 . The hyperfine field distributions of the samples (see Figure 4b)), however, do not feature the typical bimodal distribution known to occur in BiFeO3 due to its spin spiral order . This is an indication of the break-down of the spin spiral magnetic order, which leads to the emergence of different spin orders . The HF field distribution of 15×BTO-BFO(50) shows a symmetric peak around the average hyperfine field of 49.1 T. However, with decreasing thickness of the BiFeO3 layer the distribution becomes more and more asymmetric with a tail towards lower fields. As a consequence, we can observe a decrease in average hyperfine field as a function of BiFeO3 layer thickness. To quantify the degree of asymmetry of the hyperfine field distribution we use the weighted skewness σ as defined in reference . σ is zero for a perfectly symmetric curve, while it assumes negative/positive values for negatively/positively skewed curves. The macroscopic magnetization as well as the magnetoelectric coupling and the average hyperfine field strongly depend on the BiFeO3 layer thickness. In Figure 5 αME and the magnetization are shown as a function of the skewness of the HF field to point out the correlation 8 between these three parameters. It can be clearly observed that αME as well as the magnetization increase with increasing asymmetry of the hyperfine field distribution. This shows that the ME properties in BaTiO3 - BiFeO3 multilayers depend on the local structural and magnetic environment of the Fe ions in the crystal lattice. tilayers recorded at 300 K. The white circles correspond to the data, whereas the red lines represent the fits. The blue line for sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) cor- responds to the non magnetic doublet needed to accurately fit the data; b) Hyperfine field distributions of the multilayers; the average hyperfine fields of the different samples are shown; furthermore, the skewness value σ, a measure of the distribution’s asymmetry is indicated. 9 efficient and the skewness of the hyperfine field (HFF) is shown (the straight lines are a guide to the eye). The skewness is a parameter describing the asym- metry of a distribution. The absolute value of the skewness increases as the asymmetry of a distribution increases. It can be seen that magnetization and ME voltage coefficient show the same trend with decreasing skewness. The increasing asymmetry of the HF field distribution further implies that the magnetic environment of the 57Fe atoms becomes less symmetric, or less well ordered. One contributing factor for a decrease in symmetry with decreasing layer thickness is the increasing surface - to - volume ratio. As the film thickness decreases the iron fraction that resides in an interface position of reduced sym- metry increases, leading to a stronger contribution of the low symmetry iron. This effect is especially pronounced for sample 15×BTO-BFO(5), where the asymmetric tail of the hyperfine field distribution extends down to zero Tesla. In addition to the magnetic sextet a non magnetic doublet appears in the M ̈ossbauer spectrum of 15×BTO-BFO(5). This doublet originates from high spin paramagnetic 57Fe which might be due to the presence of some iron oxide precipitates. Possible evidence for such precipitates can be found in the STEM- EDX analysis of sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) . It was found that the BiFeO3 layers of sample 15×BTO-BFO(5) contain up to 5 at. % of barium and titanium within the BiFeO3 layers, which might indicate that up to 5 at. % of Bi and Fe atoms are substituted by Ba and Ti in the BiFeO3 lattice. This intermixing of Ba and Ti into the BiFeO3 layers of 15×BTO-BFO(5) most likely leads to a lower leakage current and therefore increased polarization. We found that the ME voltage coefficient increases as the percentage of low - symmetry iron 10 increases. This is reflected in the increase of αME as a function of the skewness of the hyperfine field distribution. We summarize that an increased polarization and magnetization in combination with low mosaicity are important factors to explain the increase of αME in the investigated BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayer series. Furthermore, we discovered a strong correlation between the ME voltage coefficient, the magnetization and the symmetry of the hyperfine field distribution which indicates that for a bet- ter understanding of the magnetoelectric coupling the investigation of the local magnetic environment is essential. BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayers with decreasing nominal BiFeO3 layer thickness from 50 nm to 5 nm were grown and characterized. It was found that the mag- netoelectric voltage coefficient strongly depends on the BiFeO3 layer thickness. The largest value so far of 60.2 V cm−1Oe−1 was reached at 1 kHz, 10 Oe AC and 2 T DC magnetic field for the sample with a nominal BiFeO3 thickness of 5 nm. The temperature dependencies of the magnetoelectric voltage coefficient point to the conclusion that the main mechanism responsible for the magneto- electric coupling at 300 K is dominated by charge transfer for the sample with a BiFeO3 layer thickness of 50 nm. With decreasing BiFeO3 thickness the main coupling mechanism is dominated more and more by strain. As the BiFeO3 layer thickness decreases to 5 nm, the magnetization reaches its highest value, which exceeds the magnetization of the samples with a thicker BiFeO3 layer by a factor of about two. EDX element distribution analysis done previously by our group showed a presence of about 5 at. % Ba and Ti in the BiFeO3 layers of this specific sample, leading to an excess of iron in the BiFeO3 layers. This result was confirmed by our CEMS measurements that show Fe oxide pre- cipitates in the sample. The Ba and Ti content in the BiFeO3 layers most likely causes a decrease in leakage current and therefore an increase in polarization. The increased magnetoelectric coupling as well as the tunability of the magnetic and magnetoelectric properties of BaTiO3-BiFeO3 multilayers makes them an intriguing system. 4 Conflicts of Interest There are no conflicts of interest to declare. 5 Acknowledgments We acknowledge the financial support from the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO), the Concerted Research Actions GOA/09/006 and GOA/14/007 of KU Leuven and the Hercules Foundation. Work at the University Leipzig was sup- ported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft within SFB 762 “Functionality of oxide interfaces”. 11 6 Appendix - X-ray diffraction spectra and re- ciprocal space maps peak which is the highest peak in center; mean fringe period: 0.39630◦, mean double layer thickness: 0.0232 ± 0.0003 μm tion and on the right the asymmetric (103) direction 12 peak which is the highest peak in center; mean fringe period: 0.40480◦, mean double layer thickness: 0.0221 ± 0.0006 μm tion and on the right the asymmetric (103) direction 13 peak which is the highest peak in center; mean fringe period: 0.40455◦, mean double layer thickness: 0.0228 ± 0.0006 μm tion and on the right the asymmetric (103) direction 14 peak which is the highest peak in center; mean fringe period: 0.42693◦, mean double layer thickness: 0.0211 ± 0.0008 μm tion and on the right the asymmetric (103) direction 15