Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 1 Prediction of novel final phases in aged uranium-niobium alloys Xiao L. Pan1, 2, Hao Wang1, 2, Lei L. Zhang2, Yu F. Wang2, Xiang R. Chen1*, Hua Y. Geng2, 3*, Ying Chen4 1 College of Physics, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, P. R. China; 2 National Key Laboratory of Shock Wave and Detonation Physics, Institute of Fluid Physics, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang, Sichuan 621900, P. R. China; 3 HEDPS, Center for Applied Physics and Technology, and College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, P.R. China; 4 Fracture and Reliability Research Institute, School of Engineering, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8579, Japan. Abstract: Ordered intermetallics are long believed to be the final products of the aging of U-Nb solid solutions at low temperatures, a crucial property for the practical applications of this alloy in engineering and industry. However, such conjectured ordered compounds have not been experimentally or theoretically established. Herein, numerical evidence for ordered intermetallic U-Nb compounds is presented using thorough first-principles structure predictions up to 500 GPa. Two stable U2Nb compounds and one metastable U2Nb and one metastable U3Nb were discovered. A unique hybridized transition driven by pressure was observed in U2Nb, which is a superposition of one first-order transition and another second-order transition, leading to striking features near the transition pressure of 21.6 GPa. The decomposition limit of these compounds at high temperature was also investigated. The strong stability of U2Nb in the region of low pressure and high temperature was revealed. This discovery of ordered U2Nb and its strong stability over a wide pressure range completely changed the phase diagram of U-Nb alloys and shed new light on the dynamic response and aging mechanism of U-Nb alloys. Key words: U-Nb alloys; intermetallic phase; phase stability; phase transition; high pressure; first-principles I. Introduction The uranium–niobium (U-Nb) alloy is a complex system with many metastable phases. Depending on the Nb concentration, U-Nb alloys can be quenched to different metastable phases under ambient conditions from the high-temperature Nb- supersaturated BCC solid solution, which is called γ phase and becomes unstable below 923 K . They turn to (1) orthorhombic phase α' for 0–4.2 wt. % Nb, (2) monoclinic phase α" for 4.2 –6.9 wt. % Nb, and (3) tetragonal γo phase for 6.9–8.9 wt. % Nb . Among them, the stress-strain curves of α" and γo phases exhibit apparent double yield behavior and are significant shape-memory alloys . It is believed that, at temperatures above 600 K, all metastable phases of the U-Nb alloys would eventually evolve toward or decompose into the α + γNb final equilibrium * Corresponding authors. E-mail: s102genghy@caep.cn; xrchen@scu.edu.cn Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 2 state , where γNb is an Nb-rich BCC phase, commonly containing 75 at. % Nb or more at equilibrium . For low-temperature (< 600 K) aging of U-Nb alloys, some investigations have attempted to explain the mechanism from different aspects, such as spinodal decomposition , chemical redistribution and phase transformation , but the jury is still out. In addition to ambient pressure, Zhang et al. experimentally studied U-6 wt. % Nb and U-7.7 wt. % Nb at temperatures and pressures up to 1300 K and 5 GPa, respectively . They found that metastable α" exhibits complex paths upon heating at both ambient and high pressures, leading to diffusional phase decomposition, and is sensitive to the applied pressure. To date, a few explorations of the possible ordered phase have been conducted experimentally and theoretically. The ordering effect is speculated to be related to the aging mechanism of metastable phases, as suggested by Hsiung et al. . They experimentally studied the aging of metastable U-6 wt. % Nb at 200°C and concluded that the metastable α" phase will ultimately decompose into Nb-depleted α phase and an ordered phase. However, they only provided illustrative sketches for the ordered structure without further details or evidence. Zhang et al. attempted to develop possible candidate-ordered phases with a U:Nb ratio of 3:1 by redistributing atoms in the Cmcm lattice of α-U . This work enhanced the belief that ordered phases as the final products of aged U-Nb alloys may exist in the low-temperature region and that the metastable phase α" should decompose into these ordered phases. To merge this fundamental knowledge gap, also inspired by the complex behavior of uranium compounds under high pressures , we conducted a thorough structural search of the U-Nb system up to 500 GPa. Several previously unknown ordered intermetallic phases have been discovered that exhibit strong stability, even at ambient pressure. In addition, the ordered phase proposed by Zhang et al. is proven to be unstable, spontaneously relaxing into a new structure with Pmm2 symmetry that has higher energy than our newly discovered structures and is metastable. The discovery of these novel intermetallics as the final phases of aged U-Nb alloys significantly modifies the current phase diagram and lays a new foundation for further exploration of the aging mechanism of metastable U-Nb alloys. In the next section, the computational method is formulated. The results are presented in Section III. In Section IV, the results are discussed. Finally, Section V summarizes the main findings and conclusions of the study. II. Computational Method First-principles calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT) as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) . The description of the exchange-correlation functional adopted the Perdew-Burke- Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation (GGA). The atomic coordinates and lattice vectors were fully optimized until the Hellmann–Feynman forces acting on each atom less than 10-3 eV/Å and the convergence of the total energy was better than 10-7 eV between two successive ionic steps. The cut-off energy for the plane-wave basis was set to 550 eV, and Monkhorst-Pack k-meshes with a grid spacing of 2π × 0.015 Å-1 were used to sample the first irreducible Brillouin zone for Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 3 all calculations, ensuring that the energy for each structure converges to 1 meV per atom or better. Phonon frequencies were calculated by using the supercell approach (with small displacements) as implemented in the PHONOPY code . The lowest enthalpy candidate structures for U-Nb system up to 500 GPa were predicted by using particle swarm optimization method as implemented in CALYPSO , along with VASP. Elaborate structural searches were performed for five different composition stoichiometries (U:Nb = 3:1, 2:1, 1:1, 1:2, 1:3). Every composition has 30 structures in each generation of total 30 generations, and each structure contains up to 4 formula units per simulation cell. The 50 candidate structures with the lowest enthalpy in each composition were then carefully re-optimized with higher accuracy to pin down the most stable structure. The formation enthalpy per atom ΔH was calculated by following expression: by b =( ) x U N N U total y x x y   −  −  + , (1) and  = + PV , (2) with E, P, and V stand for the total internal energy, pressure and volume, respectively. x by U N total is the total enthalpy per formula of the candidate ordered intermetallic phase in U-Nb system, with x and y represent the number of U and Nb atoms in that formula, respectively. Nb and U are the total enthalpy per atom of BCC-Nb and α-U , respectively. For pressure higher than 270 GPa where γ'-U is more stable than α- U, U stands for the total enthalpy per atom of γ'-U . Considering the strong local interactions between the 5f electrons of uranium, GGA+U is used to verify the results of structure prediction. In addition, the local density approximation (LDA) and LDA+U were also used to check the results of structural prediction, and the results were compared with those of GGA. Specifically, we used rotationally invariant DFT+U approach from Dudarev et al. , which only employs a single effective interaction. The results of these different methods further confirm the reliability of the new structures predicted using GGA. Though the stoichiometries searched by CALYPSO already cover the commonly encountered actinide intermetallic compounds, in order to include all other possible stoichiometry and exhaust the structure search as complete as possible, the variable- chemical-composition genetic method for whole-composition-space structure search as implemented in USPEX was also employed to generate another independent set of candidate structures. These structures were then compared with those given by CALYPSO. In this structure search, maximal number of atoms in the primitive cell is 20. The first generation includes 60 structures, and each subsequent generation contains 30 structures. A total of 30 generations were generated. III. Results A. Structural stability at zero Kelvin Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 4 To determine the thermodynamic stability of U-Nb system at low temperatures, the enthalpy convex hull of the predicted candidate structures was constructed and shown in Fig. 1. For all these structures, both U3Nb (approximately 100–200 GPa) and U2Nb (approximately 0–200 GPa) have a negative formation enthalpy, suggesting the existence of ordered intermetallics at the U-rich end. In contrast, all formation enthalpies at the Nb-rich end are positive, indicating that intermetallics in this composition range are unstable, and phase separation at low temperatures or solid solutions at high temperatures might be formed. Additionally, the variation trend of formation enthalpy with pressure is different for Nb-depleted or Nb-rich regimes. Particularly, in the Nb-rich regime, it first increases when the pressure goes from 0 to 100 GPa, decreases when the pressure is approximately 100–300 GPa, and increases again when the pressure is larger than 300 GPa. In the Nb-depleted regime, it decreases first (up to 200 GPa) and then increases rapidly to a high value with higher pressure. From the convex hull, it is evident that U2Nb is the most stable compound within the whole chemical composition. In contrast, U3Nb is sufficiently close to the convex hull and can be a metastable intermetallic. The predicted U2Nb compound underwent several structural transitions when the pressure ranged from 0 to 500 GPa. Figure 2 presents the crystalline lattices of U2Nb and U3Nb. The low-pressure U2Nb is ordered in a hexagonal CaIn2-type structure (hP6 in the Pearson’s symbol) with a space group P63/mmc between -10 GPa (the lowest pressure we explored) and 21.6 GPa. It transforms into a hexagonal AlB2-type structure (hP3) with a space group P6/mmm when beyond 21.6 GPa. At pressures higher than 368 GPa, U2Nb became an orthogonal structure with Fmmm symmetry. In contrast, U3Nb has an orthogonal structure with Cmcm symmetry, and no other competitive structure was discovered between 0 and 500 GPa. It should be emphasized that the ordered U3Nb structure proposed by Zhang et al is in fact unstable. It spontaneously changes into a new structure with a space group of Pmm2, which is a distorted Cu3Au-type (L12) structure. This relaxed structure, however, has a formation enthalpy per atom approximately 0.2 eV higher than that of our newly discovered Cmcm-U3Nb and is thermodynamically unstable. The phonon dispersions of U2Nb and Cmcm-U3Nb were calculated to examine their dynamic stability, and no imaginary modes were found, confirming that they are all dynamically stable. This result also implies that Cmcm-U3Nb is metastable, although it is not on the convex hull. Note that these structures have distinct atomic environments and can be easily detected through X-ray diffraction experiments . Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 5 Fig. 1 (color online) Convex hulls of predicted structures at different pressures. Solid lines connect thermodynamically stable phases at the given pressure, and dashed-line connections represent instable or metastable phases. Fig. 2 (color online) Crystal structures of U2Nb in the phase of (a) P63/mmc (being stable up to approximately 21.6 GPa), (b) P6/mmm (stable within approximately 21.6– 368 GPa) and (c) Fmmm (beyond 368 GPa). (d) The predicted Cmcm structure of U3Nb. Considering the strong local interactions between the 5f electrons of uranium, we also use GGA+U to conduct structural search of the U-Nb system at 0 and 100 GPa to verify the reliability of the GGA results. The corresponding results are shown in Fig. 3(a), along with those of GGA as comparison. When GGA+U is considered, the convex hull of formation enthalpy has an obvious downward trend under the same pressure, especially in the niobium-rich region. Notably, U2Nb is still located on the convex hull, Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 6 and U3Nb is close to the convex hull at 100 GPa. Moreover, the new phases predicted using GGA+U are P63/mmc-U2Nb at zero pressure, P6/mmm-U2Nb at 100 GPa, and metastable Cmcm-U3Nb at 100 GPa, which is consistent with the results obtained using GGA. In addition to the GGA exchange correlation function, we also used the LDA and LDA+U to check the results of structure prediction, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The results of both LDA and LDA+U indicate that U2Nb lies on the convex hull at 0 and 100 GPa, and U3Nb is close to the convex hull at 100 GPa, which is consistent with the results of GGA and GGA+U. Furthermore, convex hulls of different U values (U= 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 eV) at 0 and 100 GPa in Fig. 4 further confirm the reliability of our structural prediction. As the U value increases, the convex hulls at both 0 and 100 GPa show an obvious downward trend. For the convex hulls of all U values at 0 and 100 GPa, U2Nb is always the most stable phase. U3Nb is close to the convex hulls of all U values at 100 GPa. In general, the calculated results of DFT+U further confirm the reliability of the structure prediction using GGA. Fig. 3 (color online) Convex hulls of predicted structures at 0 and 100 GPa using (a) GGA and GGA+U and (b) LDA and LDA+U (U=1.0 eV). Solid lines connect thermodynamically stable phases at the given pressure, and dashed-line connections represent instable or metastable phases. Fig. 4 (color online) Convex hulls of different U values calculated by GGA+U (U= 0, Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 7 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 eV) at (a) 0 GPa and (b) 100 GPa. Solid lines connect thermodynamically stable phases at the given pressure, and dashed-line connections represent instable or metastable phases. In order to confirm the reliability of the ordered phases of the U-Nb system predicted by CALYPSO, we also performed another independent structural search at 0 and 200 GPa using variable-chemical-composition genetic method as implemented in USPEX. Results of the variable-composition structure prediction are completely consistent with those of CALYPSO, as displayed in Fig. 5. The structure with the lowest enthalpy is P63/mmc-U2Nb at zero pressure and P6/mmm-U2Nb at 200 GPa. Metastable Cmcm-U3Nb are also predicted at 200 GPa. This cross-check guarantees the completeness of our structure search. Fig. 5 Results of variable-composition structure search using USPEX at (a) 0 GPa and (b) 200 GPa. Relationships between the newly predicted structures can be described by their interatomic separation histograms, as shown in Fig. 6. The shortest U-U separation in P63/mmc-U2Nb phase is 2.58 Å, which is slightly shorter than the 2.71 Å of α-U, suggesting a stronger interaction between U atoms in P63/mmc-U2Nb. If we do not distinguish U and Nb, the averaged local atomic environment of U atoms in P63/mmc- U2Nb is similar to that of α-U, in which both have four atoms with a separation distance less than 3 Å as the nearest neighboring shell; just above 3 Å, α-U has eight atoms in the second shell, while P63/mmc-U2Nb has seven atoms; at longer distances from 5 to 6 Å, α-U has 26 atoms, and P63/mmc-U2Nb has 29 atoms. This structural resemblance may be one of the reasons for the stabilization of the intermetallic U2Nb phase. On the other hand, compared to P63/mmc-U2Nb, the high-pressure P6/mmm-U2Nb phase has a higher symmetry. The former is derived from the latter by spontaneous symmetry breaking, which is reflected in the shell splitting in the U-Nb separation from the U atom just above 3, 5, and 5.75 Å, whereas the Nb-Nb separations only slightly change. Notably, the U-U separation and its neighboring count also change. In addition, both histograms of the interatomic separation from the Nb atom for P63/mmc-U2Nb and Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 8 P6/mmm-U2Nb exhibit a big shell gap between 3.2 and 4.8 Å, which is similar to BCC- Nb . Fig. 6 (color online) Histograms of interatomic separations for (a) α-U, (b) BCC-Nb, (c) P63/mmc-U2Nb, and (d) P6/mmm-U2Nb at zero pressure. B. Electronic structure All stable and metastable intermetallics obtained are metallic within the explored pressure range, with U-5f electrons dominating the electronic structure near the Fermi level, as shown by the band structure and density of state (DOS) in Fig. 7(a). For all of them, only the high-pressure Fmmm-U2Nb showed a strong presence of U-6d electrons around the Fermi level . In all of these structures, the contribution of Nb-4d to the total DOS is very small, suggesting a prominent charge transfer from Nb-4d to U-5f orbitals. The residual Nb-4d electrons slightly hybridize with the U-6d or U-5f states. The magnitude of charge transfer between the U and Nb atoms was characterized by Bader charge analysis . In Fig. 7(b), the average valence state of U (Nb) is increased from -0.11 (+0.22) at 0 GPa to -0.33 (+0.64) at 368 GPa. The average valence state of U (Nb) is -0.18 (+0.35) when the pressure is higher than 368 GPa, which slightly increases with pressure within the Fmmm phase. Evidently, these intermetallic ordered phases are weakly ionic, and their vibrational modes can be infrared-active. The differential charge density shown in Figs. 7(c) and (d) reveals the electron redistribution between U and Nb atoms, of which particular interest is that in the high symmetric P6/mmm-U2Nb phase, the charge is transferred between neighboring U atoms and formed weak  bonds that resemble the hexatomic ring in graphene. Weak bonds between the adjacent U-layers were also observed. Similar  bonds between metallic atoms with 4f electrons have also been previously reported in compressed CeO2 . It should be noted that Cmcm-U3Nb also possesses such kind of intralayer U-ring and interlayer U-U bonding . However, electron localization function analysis shows that these covalent bonds should be very weak. These features show that Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 9 the high-pressure U-Nb ordered phases are metallic compounds governed by delocalized 5f electrons, exhibiting weak ionic and covalent interactions simultaneously. Fig. 7 (color online) (a) Electronic band structure and projected DOS of P63/mmc-U2Nb at zero pressure. (b) The averaged Bader charge of U and Nb atoms in each U2Nb phase. (c) Differential charge density (isosurface = 0.02 e/bohr3) of P63/mmc-U2Nb at 0 GPa, and (d) P6/mmm-U2Nb at 200 GPa. The blue color indicates the loss of electrons from Nb atoms and the yellow color represents the grain of electrons between U atoms. C. Equation of state The equation of state (EOS) of U2Nb at 0 K was calculated and compared with those of α-U and BCC-Nb up to 100 GPa, as shown in Fig. 8. The DFT-calculated EOS for U2Nb exhibits a sharp volume collapse of 0.96% at a transition pressure Pt of 21.6 GPa, a signature of a first-order structure transition. Similarly, there was also a volume collapse of 1.59% at 368 GPa when P6/mmm-U2Nb transformed into Fmmm-U2Nb. To quantify the effect of ordering on the EOS of U2Nb, the compression curve of U-Nb solid solution is also estimated by using the ideal mixing model and the EOS of α-U and BCC-Nb. Both the EOS curve of this model and the direct DFT-calculated EOS curve are plotted in Fig. 8 for comparison. At the composition of U:Nb = 2:1, the EOS of the solid solution is roughly in line with the ordered phase. The deviation was approximately 1.42% at 0 GPa. The maximal deviation was approximately 1.58% Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 10 within a wide pressure range of 0–500 GPa . The EOS data below 21.6 GPa (for the low-pressure P63/mmc-U2Nb phase) can be fitted to a Vinet EOS model, which gives an equilibrium volume (V0) of 19.69 Å3 per atom, bulk modulus (B0) of 141 GPa, and pressure derivative of B (B') of 3.08 GPa at zero pressure. For the ideal mixing model of the solid solution with a chemical composition of U2Nb, the corresponding EOS parameters are V0 (19.43 Å3 per atom), B0 (148 GPa), and B' (4.80 GPa) at zero pressure). Fig. 8 (color online) Calculated equation of state of U2Nb, α-U, and BCC-Nb at 0 K. The hypothetical U-Nb solid solution with a composition of U:Nb=2:1 as estimated by using the ideal mixing model is also shown for comparison. IV. Discussion A. Unique phase transition in U2Nb The intermetallic ordered phase U2Nb is thermodynamically stable up to 294 GPa and could be metastable up to (or beyond) 500 GPa, within which it undergoes several structure transitions. Figure 9 shows the enthalpy differences of the P63/mmc and Fmmm phases with respect to the intermediate-pressure phase P6/mmm as a function of pressure. Evidently, the transition from the P63/mmc to the P6/mmm phase occurs at 21.6 GPa. The most interesting feature of this transition is that the low- pressure phase P63/mmc has very little hysteresis (i.e., over-pressuring) beyond the transition pressure Pt. In contrast, the high-pressure phase P6/mmm can survive and extend to very low pressure metastably. The enthalpy curves in Fig. 9 show a remarkable half-cross, as indicated by the dashed-line of the P63/mmc branch beyond Pt, where it becomes completely unstable and spontaneously collapses to the P6/mmm phase. The curved arrow in Fig. 9 illustrates this kind of "semi-continuous" change in the structure, which is a typical feature of a continuous transition. On the other hand, the reverse transition from P6/mmm back to P63/mmc exhibits a typical hysteresis of a Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 11 first order transition. In this sense, this transition is an ideal hybridization of the first- order and second-order transitions and has distinct features of both. To the best of our knowledge, this should be the first report of this kind of unique phenomenon, and we would like to nominally term it as the " 1 12 -order" transition to differentiate it from other mixing transitions of first-order and second-order, where the first-order feature is significantly weakened, such as that occuring in compressed vanadium . Further compression of P6/mmm will transform into the Fmmm phase at approximately 368 GPa, for which the enthalpy curve exhibits a clear intersection and is a typical first- order transition. Fig. 9 (color online) Enthalpy difference of U2Nb in P63/mmc and Fmmm phases with respect to the P6/mmm phase. The dashed-line indicates the region where P63/mmc becomes spontaneously unstable. The variation in the lattice constant of U2Nb with pressure is shown in Fig. 10 to elucidate the transition mechanism. We find that the lattice vector lengths a and c take distinct values when P < Ptfor P63/mmc and P6/mmm. Moreover, they collapse into that of P6/mmm when beyond Pt. The c/a ratio clearly illustrates this collapse behavior near the transition point. It first gradually decreases and then approaches that of P6/mmm at a faster rate when it is closer to Pt. However, this variation in c/a is very similar to the order parameter of a second-order transition, except for the sudden jump at Pt, which is a characteristic of a first-order transition. Therefore, the hybridization nature of this structural change is unequivocal. Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 12 Fig. 10 (color online) Variation of lattice vectors a and c, and their ratio c/a with pressure in P63/mmc-U2Nb and P6/mmm-U2Nb phases, respectively. The dashed- vertical line indicates the transition pressure. According to the relationship between the group and subgroup, P63/mmc is a Klassengleiche subgroup of P6/mmm with a doubled basis vector c . They belong to the same crystallographic class, with the U atoms of adjacent layers in the P63/mmc phase moving in the direction of to increase symmetry and form the P6/mmm phase. This also determines the transition path, and P63/mmc loses translational symmetry. The Klassengleiche group-subgroup transition is usually associated with a second-order continuous phase transition. This is in line with the observations shown in Figs. 9 and 10, demonstrating that there is a significant portion of the second-order transition in the P63/mmc-P6/mmm structural change. Furthermore, in a typical second-order transition, there is a soft mode associated with the breaking of symmetry . Indeed, a soft mode in the P6/mmm phase can be observed at the high symmetry point A in the irreducible Brillouin zone when the pressure is decreased to below Pt with the lattice parameter c/a along the transition path in Fig. 10, as shown in Fig. 11. This vibrational soft mode describes the internal rearrangement of the atoms during the pressure-driven transition. Since second order transition is usually accompanied with divergent higher-order derivatives of the free energy, we also examined the variation of the elastic constants and sound velocity in U2Nb. All elastic constants show a clear jump at Pt = 21.6 GPa . Particularly, the low-pressure branch of C33 exhibits a divergent signature when approaching Pt. We can extend this curve up to 24 GPa, which is the metastable limit of P63/mmc, where C33 becomes completely divergent and P63/mmc spontaneously collapses into a highly symmetric P6/mmm structure. The divergence in C33 indicates that this transition also has a feature of  transition (a type of continuous transition), which is terminated prematurely by the first-order change at 21.6 GPa and is buried in the domain of P6/mmm. This type of divergence is also reflected in the sound velocity, Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 13 as evidenced by the variation in the shear (Cs) and longitudinal (Cl) sound velocities with pressure, as shown in Fig. 12. The sharp volume collapse, soft vibrational mode, and discontinuous jump and divergence in elastic constants and sound velocity confirm the hybridization nature of the first-order and second-order transitions for this unique P63/mmc to P6/mmm phase transition. Fig. 11 (color online) Calculated phonon spectra of P6/mmm-U2Nb at 20.0, 21.0 and 21.6 GPa. The vibrational soft mode at high symmetry point A (0, 0, 1/2) is marked by the solid circles and shown in the inset. Fig. 12 (color online) Variation of (a) elastic constant C33 and (b) shear (Cs) and longitudinal (Cl) sound velocity with pressure. The vertical dotted-line indicates the first-order transition pressure, whereas the arrows mark the underlying  transition buried by the former and exhibits divergency in the elastic constant C33 and sound velocities. B. Landau model for phase transition in U2Nb Subsequently, we show that this hybridized transition can be described using Landau theory. As mentioned above, the lattice parameter c/a is strongly coupled with the internal coordinates of the U atoms. In principle, any of these can be taken as the order parameter. However, since the internal coordinates are directly related to the Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 14 symmetry change, we chose them as the order parameter to describe the hybridized transition process. The enthalpy differences as a function of the order parameter, at 21.0, 21.6 and 22.0 GPa, were calculated and are shown in Fig. 13. Here, the order parameter d is defined as the deviation of the Z coordinate of the U atoms in the P63/mmc phase from that of the P6/mmm phase, as shown in Fig. 14. Compared to a typical double well potential energy surface (PES), a triple well PES is observed, and the potential energy barrier is approximately 7.8 meV at a Pt of 21.6 GPa. This PES can be expanded around the transition point using pressure as the driven thermodynamic variable. Thus, the obtained Landau enthalpy model for the phase transition is : 2 4 6 0 0 0 0 ( ,d) ( ,0) ( ) - +c P P a P P d b d d  −  = − , (3) where H(P, 0) is the enthalpy of the ground state (with d=0) at a given pressure P, and a0, b0, c0 and P0 are positive constants. Notably, P0 is the absolute low-pressure instability limit for the high-pressure phase, rather than the transition pressure. The sixth-order term in Eq. (3) is necessary to stabilize the system. For a thermodynamically stable system, the transition occurs when 3 5 0 0 0 0 2 ( ) -4 +6c 0 P a P P d b d d d    = − =      , (4) and H(P, d)=H(P, 0) is simultaneously satisfied. The stable domain of the phases is defined by 2 2 4 0 0 0 0 2 2 ( )-12 +30c 0 P H a P P b d d d    = − =      . (5) According to this model, the low-symmetric phase has an order parameter of 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 ( / 3 )[1 1 3 ( ) / ] d b c a P P c b = + − − , (6) which decays to 0 0 2 b c at a rate of (P-P0)1/4. This rate of 1/4 is half of a second-order transition in mean field theory, and the critical order parameter at the transition pressure is 2 0 1/ b0 2c  . Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 15 Fig. 13 (color online) Performance of the Landau model against the direct DFT data at a pressure of 21.0, 21.6, and 22.0 GPa. Fig. 14 (color online) Evolution of the order parameter d from structure P63/mmc-U2Nb to P6/mmm-U2Nb as a function of pressure. The discontinuous jump at the transition pressure is evident. Inset schematics illustrate the atomic rearrangement during the structural transition, in which bold-line box represents the primitive cell of P6/mmm- U2Nb. The parameters of this model can be determined by fitting the enthalpy model to the direct DFT data. The obtained PES as a function of the order parameter is shown as a curve in Fig. 13. The variation in the order parameter with pressure is expressed in Eq. (6) and is compared to the direct DFT data in Fig. 14. The order parameter first decreased slowly and then jumped to zero at Pt when approaching the transition pressure Pt from the low-pressure end, revealing the termination of a continuous Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 16 transition by a sharp first-order change. The good agreement between Eqs. (3) and (6) and the DFT data confirms the validity of the Landau model for the pressure-driven P63/mmc to P6/mmm transition in U2Nb. This model predicts an enthalpy barrier of Eb = 7.4 meV, the position of the barrier db = 0.076 Å, and the critical order parameter dc = 0.132 Å, which are compared to the direct DFT results of Eb= 7.8 meV, db = 0.075 Å, and dc = 0.130 Å. It also predicts an over-compression limit of 24.05 GPa, and an under- compression limit of 13.99 GPa. Furthermore, based on this mathematical model, there will be a tricritical point when b0=0, and it will become a second-order transition when a0 reverses its sign. C. Thermal stability and decomposition limit of U2Nb The previous sections discuss phase stability and structural transition at absolute zero. Now, we turn to chemical stability at finite temperature. The contribution of lattice vibrations to the Gibbs free energy was considered using the quasi-harmonic approximation method. The calculated formation Gibbs free energy (G) of U2Nb under pressure is shown in Fig. 15 at temperatures of 0, 300 and 600 K. The thermal stability of ordered intermetallic U2Nb decreases as the temperature increases. At zero pressure, U2Nb decomposes into α-U and BCC-Nb or their solid solution at approximately 520 K, which is consistent with previous experiments, showing that the miscibility zone in U-Nb alloy is above 600 K . At the lowest pressure (-10 GPa) we investigated, the decomposition temperature increases to 890 K. Here, the decomposition temperature is defined as the temperature at which the formation Gibbs free energy becomes zero at a given pressure. It is the lower bound of the stability of the ordered phase, since it might still exist at higher temperature metastably. Notably, the ordered U2Nb is not thermodynamically stable and might segregate into other phases between 14 and 29 GPa and beyond 294 GPa. On the other hand, P6/mmm phase of U2Nb has the strongest stability, and its decomposition temperature is greater than 4410 K at 150 GPa. We also noticed that the stability of U3Nb was also weakened at high temperatures . It can metastably exist as a mixture of U2Nb, α-U and BCC-Nb at low temperatures (approximately 25 GPa). Fig. 15 (color online) (a) Calculated formation Gibbs free energy (G) of U2Nb from - 10 to 500 GPa with respect to α-U and BCC-Nb at 0, 300 and 600 K. The respective Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 17 region of each phase is also indicated. (b) Calculated finite temperature phase diagram of U2Nb, which highlights the stable domain of U2Nb with respect to decomposition. Based on the finite temperature stability of U2Nb at ambient pressure, we proposed a decomposition route for metastable U-Nb alloys (α' or α'') aged at room temperature, as shown in Fig. 16. In the figure, the U-rich metastable phase (U-2.3 wt. % Nb or U- 6.5 wt.% Nb) decomposes first into α-U and U2Nb, and then U2Nb undergoes a phase separation into α-U and BCC-Nb when it is beyond its stable zone. Furthermore, for the dynamic loading of U-rich U-Nb alloys, it transforms into ordered P6/mmm-U2Nb beyond 29 GPa based on our newly established phase diagram. The strong stability of this phase implies that it exists over a broad pressure-temperature range. In contrast, when released from the dynamically compressed state, the strong stability of P63/mmc- U2Nb in the dilated region (with negative pressure) suggests that the tensile sample might transition into this ordered phase and induce premature fracture because of the dynamic coupling of phase transition and plasticity. Fig. 16 (color online) Schematic decomposition route of aged metastable α' (U-2.3 wt. % Nb) or α'' (U-6.5 wt. % Nb) phase in U-Nb system via the intermediate U2Nb ordered phase. V. Conclusions Ordered intermetallic U2Nb was predicted to exist over a wide pressure range based on comprehensive DFT calculations and structural searches. The previously proposed U3Nb was proven to be unstable, and a new metastable Cmcm-U3Nb was predicted, which might coexist (as a mixture) with ordered U2Nb, α-U, and BCC-Nb at approximately 25 GPa. For the ordered U2Nb, its first structure change from P63/mmc to P6/mmm occurs at 21.6 GPa and has both features of first-order (sharp volume collapse and finite energy barrier) and continuous transitions (soft mode and discontinuous jump and "λ" shape divergency in elastic constants and sound velocities). Journal of Nuclear Materials 579 (2023) 154394 18 This hybridization nature with striking features of both transitions is rare, and we nominally termed it as the " 1 12 -order" transition to differentiate it from other mixing transitions, where the first-order feature is sufficiently weak. The proposed Landau model properly describes this symmetry-breaking transition. Both U2Nb and U3Nb exhibit prominent charge transfer from Nb to U atoms and are 5f metals with features of weak ionic and covalent bonding. The thermal stability of U2Nb at finite temperature reveals that P63/mmc has a decomposition temperature of 520 K at zero pressure, which increases to a higher temperature in the dilated region, whereas P6/mmm-U2Nb possesses very strong stability over a wide pressure-temperature domain. This also suggests that the low- temperature metastable α' and α'' phases could be shocked and segregated into α-U and P6/mmm-U2Nb phases, whereas P63/mmc-U2Nb could be formed and induce premature fractures by the phase transition in the released and tensile regime. These newly discovered U2Nb phases as the final products of aging not only completely change the low-temperature phase diagram of U-Nb alloys but also shed new light on their aging mechanism and peculiar mechanical properties. Furthermore, it would stimulate further theoretical and experimental investigations on this important subject. Acknowledgments This work was supported by the NSAF under Grant Nos. U1730248 and U1830101, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant Nos.11672247, 11872056, 11904282, 12074274. Part of the simulation was performed on resources provided by the center for Comput. Mater. Sci. (CCMS) at Tohoku University, Japan. Author Contribution Xiao L. Pan: Calculation, Analysis, Writing, Original draft preparation. Hao Wang: Analysis, Validation. Lei L. Zhang: Analysis, Validation. Yu F. Wang: Analysis, Validation. Xiang R. Chen: Writing, Reviewing and Editing, Fund. Hua Y. Geng: Conceive the idea, Design the project, Writing, Reviewing and Editing, Fund. Ying Chen: Analysis.