1 Reversible spin-optical interface in luminescent organic radicals Sebastian Gorgon1,2,*, Kuo Lv3, Jeannine Grüne4, Bluebell H. Drummond1, William K. Myers2, Giacomo Londi5, Gaetano Ricci5, Danillo Valverde5, Claire Tonnelé6, Petri Murto7, Alexander S. Romanov8, David Casanova6, Vladimir Dyakonov4, Andreas Sperlich4, David Beljonne9, Yoann Olivier5, Feng Li3, Richard H. Friend1,*, Emrys W. Evans10,* 1 Cavendish Laboratory, University of Cambridge; JJ Thomson Ave, Cambridge, CB3 0HE, United Kingdom 2 Centre for Advanced Electron Spin Resonance, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford; Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, S Parks Rd, Oxford, OX1 3QR, United Kingdom 3 State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials, College of Chemistry, Jilin University; Qianjin Avenue 2699, Changchun, 130012, P. R. China 4 Experimental Physics VI, Faculty of Physics and Astronomy, University of Würzburg; 97074 Würzburg, Germany 5 Laboratory for Computational Modelling of Functional Materials, Namur Institute of Structured Matter, University of Namur; Rue de Bruxelles 61, 5000 Namur, Belgium 6 Donostia International Physics Centre; Donostia, Euskadi, Spain 7 Yusuf Hamied Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, CB2 1EW, United Kingdom 8 Department of Chemistry, University of Manchester; Manchester, M13 9PL, United Kingdom 9 Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, University of Mons; 7000 Mons, Belgium 10 Department of Chemistry, Swansea University; Singleton Park, Swansea, SA2 8PP, United Kingdom *Corresponding authors. Email addresses: sg911@cam.ac.uk (S.G.), rhf10@cam.ac.uk (R.H.F.), emrys.evans@swansea.ac.uk (E.W.E.). Molecules present a versatile platform for quantum information science,1,2 and are candidates for sensing and computation applications.3,4 Robust spin-optical interfaces are key to harnessing the quantum resources of materials.5 To date, carbon-based candidates have been non-luminescent,6,7 which prevents optical read-out. Here we report the first organic molecules displaying both efficient luminescence and near-unity generation yield of high-spin multiplicity excited states. This is achieved by designing an energy resonance between emissive doublet and triplet levels, here on covalently coupled tris(2,4,6- trichlorophenyl) methyl-carbazole radicals (TTM-1Cz) and anthracene. We observe the doublet photoexcitation delocalise onto the linked acene within a few picoseconds and subsequently evolve to a pure high spin state (quartet for monoradicals, quintet for biradical) of mixed radical-triplet character near 1.8 eV. These high-spin states are coherently addressable with microwaves even at 295 K, with optical read-out enabled by intersystem crossing to emissive states. Furthermore, for the biradical, on return to the ground state the previously uncorrelated radical spins either side of the anthracene show strong spin correlation. Our approach simultaneously supports a high efficiency of initialisation, spin manipulations and light-based read-out at room temperature. The integration of luminescence and high-spin states creates an organic materials platform for emerging quantum technologies. 2 Considerable progress has been made towards designing molecular systems fulfilling the DiVincenzo criteria for practical qubits.8 Optical addressability has been demonstrated in organometallic complexes with triplet ground states at liquid helium temperatures.9 Related complexes display impressive spin coherence times, reaching the microsecond range at room temperature.10 Structures without metal atoms can be more immune to decoherence,11 and such fully organic molecules have been used in several demonstrations of quantum effects.12–14 Radical organic molecules contain unpaired electrons which can be stabilised by chemical design. Advances have been made using non-luminescent radicals that are covalently attached to chromophores, and such structures can support high spin multiplicity (S > 1) excited states.6,7 The presence of a radical can enhance the rate of intersystem crossing (ISC), leading to accumulation of chromophore triplet states.15 If exchange between the triplet (S = 1) and radical (S = 1/2) spin is larger than all other magnetic interactions, a distinct quartet (S = 3/2) and doublet (S = 1/2) state pair forms.16 If a second radical is additionally coupled, a quintet (S = 2) state can be achieved.17 High-spin states allow building dense architectures with multiple qubits hosted within a single manifold of spin sublevels.18 Such multilevel qubits, termed qudits, offer scalability advantages in quantum computation.19 The qudit behaviour of quartet states was recently demonstrated in PDI- TEMPO at 80 K.20 However, current high-spin structures have large (~1 eV) energy gaps between the photogenerated chromophore singlet state and the triplet manifold.6,17,21 Critically, this prevents reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) to a luminescent state. Thus, all organic high-spin systems to date are non-emissive, which makes optical read-out impossible. While most stable radicals are non-emissive, there is now a class of luminescent radicals that offer fully spin-allowed emission within the doublet manifold.22 The set of available molecular structures is rapidly expanding and spans a broad wavelength range.23,24 Record efficiencies for deep-red and infrared light emitting diodes (LEDs) were recently reached in tris(2,4,6- trichlorophenyl) methyl (TTM) radicals linked to carbazole electron donors.25 By utilising a doublet (D1) level with substantial oscillator strength for absorption and emission, we can avoid excitation via the singlet state in radical-chromophore structures. In our designs, we bring the triplet (T1) level into energy resonance with a D1 level on a luminescent radical. Eliminating the energy gap between the photogenerated and high-spin states allows interconversion in either direction. This makes it possible to initialise and, for the first time, optically read-out high-spin states in organic molecules. Optical properties We use TTM-1Cz as a luminescent radical unit “R” as it displays 41% photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) for red emission in dilute toluene solutions (Fig. 1a).26 Its small size allows proximity between the radical and chromophore. To achieve doublet-triplet energy resonance involving the emissive excited state with E(D1) = 1.82 eV, we select anthracene with E(T1) = 1.83 eV (Fig. 1b), linked at its 9-position to the para-position of the TTM-1Cz carbazole, thus preserving through-bond conjugation (SI Section 1). We prepare two “R-A” monoradical structures (TTM-1Cz-An, and TTM-1Cz-PhAn with a bridging phenyl ring), and a “R-A-R” biradical (TTM-1Cz)2-An. At room temperature their absorption spectra are only weakly modified, and their photoluminescence (PL) shows a red-shift relative to TTM-1Cz (Fig. 1c). The PLQE in toluene solution is 32% for TTM-1Cz-An, 4% for TTM-1Cz-PhAn and 3% for (TTM-1Cz)2-An. 3 Fig. 1. Luminescent radical-acene molecular system. a, Molecules featured in this study, their dilute toluene solution PLQE (ɸPL) and the highest spin quantum number of their excited state (Smax). b, Energy levels for TTM-1Cz and anthracene, extracted from emission data in separated molecules, revealing the D1-T1 energy alignment. c, Steady-state absorption and emission spectra obtained after 532 nm excitation in 200 μM toluene solutions at room temperature. Anthracene-linked compounds show a small redshift relative to TTM-1Cz. d, Ultrafast transient absorption kinetics of dilute toluene TTM-1Cz-An solution following a 600 nm pulse at 295 K extracted from photoinduced absorption features. Solid lines show 0.92 ps lifetime fits. e, Emission kinetics of 5% in PMMA films and solutions of TTM-1Cz and TTM-1Cz-An at 295 K following 532 nm excitation. f, Temperature dependence of integrated emission intensity of 5% TTM-1Cz-An in PMMA films after 520 nm excitation revealing that the radical emission is temperature activated. We perform transient optical absorption (TA) spectroscopy to establish the mechanism of interaction between the radical and linked anthracene. We selectively excite the radical using a 600 nm pulse, well below the anthracene singlet absorption onset (400 nm). In dilute solutions of R-A and R-A-R we observe rapid decay of the D1 photoinduced absorption (PIA) and a matching rise of the T1 PIA, indicating transfer of the excitation from the TTM-1Cz to the anthracene with local T1 character (Ext. Data Fig. 1). This occurs with an ultrafast lifetime of 0.9±0.2 ps in TTM- We focus on TTM-1Cz-An dynamics as it is the most emissive material. The prompt TA spectra reveal that partial local triplet character is present already within our 150 fs time resolution. When the solvent polarity is increased from cyclohexane to toluene, there are no changes to the rapid energy transfer dynamics, and we extract a 93% yield of T1 generation (Fig. S13). Subsequently, a new PIA near 685 nm appears around ~30 ps and we assign it to an intramolecular charge transfer (CT) state as its spectral position matches the anthracene radical cation.27 The population of the CT peaks around 100 ps in toluene solutions. In more polar 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (MeTHF) we observe complete non-radiative decay within 1 ns, likely via a low-lying CT state. 4 We perform time-resolved emission spectroscopy to understand how D1 emission is preserved despite rapid energy transfer dynamics. TTM-1Cz-An emission shows triexponential kinetics in toluene solutions at room temperature (Fig. 1e). The emission lineshape is unchanged throughout the decay (Fig. S14). The fastest emission component (55±1 ns) is two-fold slower compared to the monoexponential lifetime of TTM-1Cz in the same solvent (27±1 ns). Most of TTM-1Cz-An emission is delayed even further and occurs with a lifetime of 434±5 ns. Since the D1 character is lost with near unity yield well before the TTM-1Cz emission lifetime, all radical emission in TTM- 1Cz-An is preceded by a temperature-activated process. TTM-1Cz-An emission lineshape becomes more structured as the temperature is lowered and resembles anthracene phosphorescence at 10 K (Fig. S15). A vibronic progression is present in both excitation and emission scans at 77 K, similar to that of anthracene triplets (Ext. Data Fig. 2).28 These features could signify a partial T1-like character of the photogenerated state. We perform temperature-dependent time-resolved emission spectroscopy in dilute poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) films (Ext. Data Fig. 3). We find that the total emission intensity strongly increases with temperature (Fig. 1f), in contrast to the temperature-independent intensity and rate of D1 emission in TTM-1Cz (Fig. S16). Using an Arrhenius-type model, we estimate the activation energy for emission in TTM-1Cz-An to be approx. 20 meV. All R-A and R-A-R display temperature-activated emission and structured phosphorescence at low temperatures (Fig. S17). The activation energy for delayed emission in the (TTM-1Cz)2-An biradical is approx. 12 meV. Spin properties Our optical experiments show rapid generation of a local triplet character excited state followed by temperature activated emission with D1 character. We use ESR to probe the spin properties of the states involved in this mechanism. Continuous wave (cw) ESR in the dark shows a narrow signal centred at g = 2.0036 for all four molecules studied (Ext. Data Fig. 4), characteristic of a TTM D0 transition. We perform transient cw ESR (trESR) to track the excited state sublevel dynamics following selective D1 excitation with a pulsed laser.29 At X-band in the half field (HF) region, R-A show signals centred at g = 4.04 and g = 6.20 (Fig. 2a). These are first-order forbidden transitions with Δms = 2 and Δms = 3 respectively, where the latter gives clear evidence of probing a quartet state (Fig. S18). In the full field (FF) region, dilute frozen toluene solutions of R-A show a broad Δms = 1 signal with a width of ~103 mT, superimposed with a narrow signal at g = 2.00 (Fig. 2b). The signal width is reduced by a factor of 2/3 compared to one expected from anthracene triplets (~152 mT).30 This suggests that a quartet state is formed due to strong exchange between the anthracene triplet-like wavefunction and the ground state radical spin. Absence of level crossings in trESR at Q-band indicates that the R-A quartet-doublet energy gap is at least 0.8 meV (Ext. Data Fig. 5). Using a transient nutation pulse sequence, we can directly confirm the spin multiplicity of the sublevels involved in ESR transitions.31 In the dark, only the doublet nutation frequency (ω0) is detected for both R-A. Following 600 nm light excitation, we find that there is no contribution from triplet transitions (ω = √2ω0) across the entire spectra of R-A. The broad feature is due to “outer” quartet transitions (ω = √3ω0), while the narrow central features are due to both “inner” quartet (ω = 2ω0) and doublet (ω = ω0) transitions (Fig. 2c). This confirms the strong exchange regime holds throughout the entire molecular ensemble, regardless of conformational effects. 5 Fig. 2. ESR on high-spin states. a, Transient half field cw X-band ESR spectra at 80 K following 600 nm excitation showing Δms = 3 and Δms = 2 transitions in frozen toluene solutions of R-A, and a patterned Δms = 2 in R-A-R. b, Transient full field cw X-band ESR Δms = 1 spectra of TTM-1Cz-An frozen toluene solution at 150 K following 600 nm excitation and schematic population patterns extracted from the model. Size of circles is proportional to the sublevel population at early (blue) and late (red) times. c, Transient nutation at 80 K of dilute frozen toluene solution of TTM-1Cz-An following 600 nm excitation indicating quartet (S = 3/2) state formation. d, Transient nutation at 80 K of dilute frozen toluene solution of (TTM-1Cz)2-An following 600 nm excitation revealing quintet (S = 2) multiplicity of the polarized signal. e, Rabi oscillations on the TTM-1Cz-An quartet (331.5 mT) at 80 K as a function of microwave power. f, Temperature dependence of TTM-1Cz-An quartet (331.5 mT) polarisation inversion. 6 The presence of strong exchange in R-A indicates the anthracene-carbazole linkage supports significant wavefunction delocalisation. In the symmetrically substituted (TTM-1Cz)2-An biradical the FF trESR spectrum is further narrowed (Fig. S19). Its width of ~77 mT is consistent with formation of a quintet state in the strong exchange regime. The polarisation pattern reveals an ISC population mechanism, as in R-A quartets. Transient nutation confirms that the broad spectrum of (TTM-1Cz)2-An is due to quintet transitions (ω = √6ω0 or ω = 2ω0), while the narrow central feature is exclusively due to a doublet transition (Fig. 2d). We do not detect any quartet or uncoupled triplet features, which shows that the triplet-character excitation on the anthracene in R-A-R is strongly coupled to both radical electrons within an overall four-spin state. Turning to the most luminescent TTM-1Cz-An, we have explored Rabi oscillation experiments to quantify their potential as molecular qudits coupled to emission.32 We place the quartet in a coherent superposition which is then probed with a Hahn echo sequence (Fig. 2e). This allows us to find the quantum fidelity Ω! = 2T"ω#, where Tm is the spin coherence time, and ωR is the Rabi frequency. At 80 K, Tm is 1.5±0.1 μs, and ΩM values up to ~70 were found, comparable to non- luminescent high-spin states.20 The ΩM values scale linearly with microwave power, showing that this quartet state can be placed into an arbitrary superposition. We model the R-A trESR spectra to track the sublevel population dynamics (Ext. Data Tab. 1). The prompt signal shows a majority population of the quartet ms = ±1/2 sublevels at all temperatures (Fig. 2b diagram). The polarisation pattern inverts at later times, with the inversion occurring faster upon increasing temperature (Fig. 2f). By fitting the quartet polarisation inversion times to an Arrhenius-type model, we find an activation energy of 19±1 meV for TTM-1Cz-An (Ext. Data Fig. 5). This is in excellent agreement with the activation energy for emission found by optical spectroscopy and confirms that D1 emission is preceded by RISC from the quartet state. The ms = ±3/2 sublevels form the majority of the quartet population after inversion, consistent with a preferential depopulation of the ms = ±1/2 sublevels during RISC. Luminescent R-A mechanism Our ESR results show that a complete description of the electronic states in R-A and R-A-R requires knowledge of their total spin multiplicity as well as of the nature of the contributing anthracene-like and TTM-1Cz-like states (Fig. 3a). Multi-Configurational Self-Consistent Field (MCSCF) calculations for TTM-1Cz-An (SI Section 3) show the photogenerated state as a transition between the HR and SR molecular orbitals (MOs). This state is similar to the D1 state in TTM-1Cz, but additionally contains some wavefunction density on the linked anthracene in the HR MO (Fig. 3b). At the ground-state equilibrium geometry, this state contains approx. 5% contribution on the anthracene (Fig. S26), and lies 13 meV above states with local triplet character (Fig. S22, Tab. S2). The calculations also reveal the presence of an intramolecular charge-transfer state (2CT) from the anthracene to the TTM-1Cz moiety that spans a broad energy range from ~60 meV above the photogenerated state at the equilibrium geometry to ~20 meV below that state for an orthogonal arrangement of the anthracene unit (Tab. S5). We have developed a kinetic model for the energy transfer which includes a 2CT intermediate (Tab. S15). We compute energy transfer times spanning a 0.1-10 ps range when close to the ground-state equilibrium conformation. The calculated quartet state spin Hamiltonian parameters agree well with those extracted from modelling the ESR data (Fig. S25, Tab. S9). 7 Fig. 3. Luminescent R-A mechanism and optical read-out. a, R-A energy level diagram showing rapid quartet state generation following light absorption by the radical. At room temperature, activation to the 2[D1S0] state is efficient and only radical photoluminescence is seen. b, Molecular orbitals of TTM-1Cz-An obtained with MCSCF calculations (HR: Radical HOMO, SR: Radical SOMO, HA: Acene HOMO, LA: Acene LUMO). c, Summary scheme of dominant orbital contributions during quartet formation and radical emission. d, Vectorial depiction of the evolution of state mixing during reversible quartet formation. Character of the photoexcited doublet state evolves from majority 2[D1S0] to majority 2[D0T1] on ultrafast timescales. If energetically accessible, the 2CT state may be additionally involved in the doublet state mixing and thus assist the ISC to a pure quartet state. e, ODMR spectra of dilute frozen toluene solution of TTM-1Cz-PhAn under 532 nm excitation at 10 K, showing the participation of the quartet state in the FF and HF region. Inset: trODMR at 337.5 mT showing a PL reduction in resonance. f, ODMR spectra of dilute PMMA films of TTM-1Cz-PhAn under 532 nm excitation at 293 K. In the pure diabatic eigenstate description of R-A, absorption of light with energies below singlet anthracene band gap occurs from 2[D0S0] to 2[D1S0] (Fig. 3c). This photoexcited state is energetically close to 2[D0T1] and rapid localisation of the wavefunction onto the coupled anthracene occurs within a few ps. Such high rates are possible as the total spin multiplicity is conserved during 2[D1S0] to 2[D0T1] energy transfer. Subsequently, the 2[D0T1] exciton undergoes ISC to the 4[D0T1] quartet state. Since the spatial wavefunctions of the 2[D0T1] and 4[D0T1] levels are nearly identical, the direct SOC matrix element is small (Tab. S6).33 Direct ISC is thus unlikely to generate the high quartet yields on sub-20 ns timescales as implied by the observed emission dynamics. We consider that the 2CT state is close in energy to the 2,4[D0T1] excitonic states. This is supported by solvatochromism observed in TA and MCSCF calculations. Accessibility of a 2CT state might assist ISC to the quartet state via SOC, which is larger for states of different character (Tab. S8). The 2CT state can form from 2[D0T1] following spin-conserving electron transfer from LA onto SR. If a spin flip occurs during the back-transfer, the 4[D0T1] state forms. This forward mechanism is near-barrierless and supports our observations of a high yield of quartet states at temperatures from 20 to 300 K. We can estimate the quartet state yield using luminescence dynamics and PLQE, together with the T1 yield extracted from TA. The approximate yield of 4[D0T1] states in toluene solutions of TTM-1Cz-An at room temperature is ~73%. 8 The process preceding emission is temperature-activated. Due to low energetic barriers present in our molecular design, only ~22% of the total emission yield is lost in TTM-1Cz-An compared to TTM-1Cz at room temperature. Reforming a spin doublet state from the quartet is the rate-limiting step due to the need for a change in spin multiplicity. We assign the ~20 meV activation energy extracted from optical and trESR spectroscopy to 4[D0T1] à 2CT transfer. After the 2CT state is reformed, a hole transfer from anthracene onto the carbazole can rapidly yield the emissive 2[D1S0] state. At temperatures below 100 K, phosphorescence is observed. This can originate either from the 4[D0T1] in a spin-forbidden process at the lowest temperatures, or from the 2[D0T1] state in a spin-allowed process. The increase in phosphorescence intensity with temperature in this regime confirms that 4[D0T1] is the lowest energy excited state (i.e., that the exchange is ferromagnetic). The presence of a bridging phenyl in TTM-1Cz-PhAn leads to a large loss of PLQE, as both energy transfer (Fig. S12), RISC and emission (Ext. Data Fig. 3) are slower compared to TTM-1Cz-An. The observed PL redshift could be due to a smaller electron-hole overlap in TTM-1Cz-PhAn, which leads to a less emissive state. Despite the greater spatial separation between the radical and anthracene, TTM-1Cz-PhAn remains in the strong exchange coupling regime (Ext. Data Fig. 5). The small energy offsets between excited states involved in this mechanism likely lead to a high degree of mixing between the three states with overall doublet multiplicity (Fig. 3d), as indicated by calculated electronic couplings (Tab. S12).34 We detect signatures of 2[D1S0] and 2[D0T1] mixing in our ultrafast optical spectroscopy and in low temperature excitation scans. While these effects are likely modulated by conformational reorganisation, vibrational motion and environment dynamics, the quartet-doublet energy gap is always in the strong exchange regime, as demonstrated by our ESR experiments. Therefore, our system benefits from low energy offsets on the optical scales, but large energy offsets on the magnetic scales. This enables access to robust high-spin excited states coupled to an efficient emissive state. Optical read-out at room temperature The luminescence of our materials opens the path toward optical read out in organic high-spin molecules, which we explore with optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) measurements. Dilute frozen toluene solutions of R-A at 10 K show a broad, patterned FF ODMR signal (Fig. 3e), matching quartet simulation parameters of trESR. As in trESR, we also observe HF ODMR signals with Δms = 3 and Δms = 2 transitions at g = 6.17 and g = 4.23 respectively. To achieve read-out at ambient temperatures we perform ODMR on dilute PMMA films of the two R-A molecules. Both TTM-1Cz-An and TTM-1Cz-PhAn films show a clear ODMR contrast at room temperature. The resonant PL change in films at 295 K is comparable to that observed at 10 K (Ext. Data Fig. 6). The dipolar parameters remain unchanged, confirming assignment to the quartet state. No ODMR signals were detected for TTM-1Cz, indicating identical emissive rates for the ms = ±1/2 D1 sublevels in an isolated radical. The ODMR contrast in R-A is thus due to 4[D0T1] origin of 2[D1S0] emission, and demonstrates optical readout of the quartet state at room temperature (Fig. 3f). To investigate the sign of the ODMR signal, we perform transient ODMR (trODMR) measurements, which directly probe the PL change in resonant conditions using digitizer detection.35 ODMR transients with application of 2 ms square mw pulse at both FF and HF reveal a negative sign of all signals (Fig. 3e inset). While at lower temperatures the quartet state is coupled to phosphorescence, at higher temperatures quartet depopulation occurs via RISC. The negative 9 sign of the ODMR signal suggests that microwaves drive transitions from the more populated ms = ±1/2 to less efficiently linked ms = ±3/2 quartet sublevels, thus decreasing the PL from the doublet state in resonant conditions. As in ODMR, we observe spin polarised quartet signals in room temperature trESR on PMMA films of R-A (Fig. 4a). We additionally perform room temperature pulsed ESR experiments (Ext. Data Fig. 7). Quartet echoes were detectable up to 10 μs after photoexcitation at 295 K, further demonstrating the potential of these molecules as optically addressable qudits in the solid state. Biradical ground state control The presence of two radical spins in luminescent R-A-R allows engineering of more complex ground and excited state interactions. As shown above, the photophysical properties of the (TTM- 1Cz)2-An biradical are analogous to TTM-1Cz-An, with ultrafast wavefunction localisation onto the anthracene after light absorption followed by delayed emission. However, the biradical nature of R-A-R has significant consequences for the spin properties compared to R-A monoradicals. In the R-A-R ground state the exchange interaction between the two D0 electrons is extremely weak (≤μeV) as revealed by the exclusively doublet transient nutation signals in the dark and Fig. 4. Room temperature spin dynamics and ground state control. a, TrESR spectra on 5% PMMA films of TTM-1Cz-An under 600 nm excitation at 295 K (solid line) and their simulation (translucent lines). Noise of 30 μs trace scaled to match noise level in panel b. b, TrESR spectra on 5% PMMA films of (TTM-1Cz)2-An under 532 nm excitation at 295 K showing a long lived g = 2.00 (344.5 mT) signal. c, Comparison of g = 2.00 kinetics in trESR on 5% PMMA films at 295 K. Long lived doublet polarisation is seen in R-A-R but not in R- A. d, (TTM-1Cz)2-An energy level diagram showing two exchange coupling regimes. In the ground and initially photogenerated states the radical spins are uncorrelated (|J| ~ μeV), but become strongly coupled when the T1 wavefunction is present (|J| ~ meV) e, Summary scheme of dominant orbital contributions during quintet formation. The triplet channel is more kinetically favoured during temperature activated emission, which leads to a strong polarisation of the ground state. 10 temperature dependence of cw ESR intensity (Fig. S20). This is consistent with the large spin-spin distance of 2.09±0.19 nm determined by double electron-electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy (Fig. S21). Therefore, the biradical spin pair is uncorrelated in the ground state, and the 1[D0S0D0] and 3[D0S0D0] states are degenerate, as in a true biradical.36 Coupling between D0 electrons can be transiently switched on due to strong (~meV) exchange within [D0T1D0] excited states, and we detect polarised 5[D0T1D0] in room temperature trESR (Fig. 4b). The absence of 3[D0T1D0] triplet signals confirms that the quintet is the lowest excited state and is generated efficiently. Following relaxation back to the ground state, the spin information of the D0 biradical electrons is preserved. This is evidenced by the long-lived g = 2.00 polarisation, extending beyond 30 μs at room temperature (Fig. 4c), well past any luminescence or quintet polarisation. Such ground state polarisation is absent in R-A monoradicals. To understand its origin, we examine the energy level structure of R-A-R. As the singlet and triplet ground states are degenerate, both contribute to the forward process of quintet state generation (Fig. 4d). The singlet and triplet channels each provide an efficient, rapid, spin-conserving pathway to a [D0T1D0] state, analogous to the doublet pathway in R-A. However, as the quintet depopulation involves one spin-flip to access 3[D0T1D0] but two spin-flips to reach 1[D0T1D0], the triplet channel dominates the reverse process (Fig. 4e). Since the 3[D1S0D0] state can then quickly form and decay radiatively, this leads to an excess of 3[D0S0D0] ground state. Despite the ground state energetic degeneracy, this method allows for a preferential preparation of the triplet biradical configuration. Only following light-induced quintet generation and relaxation, the ground state biradical consists of a spin-polarized pair of electrons which loses spin alignment with a long lifetime of 20±1 μs at room temperature in solid films. This timescale matches spin-lattice relaxation time of D0 electrons measured in pulsed ESR on the same (TTM-1Cz)2-An film at 295 K (Ext. Data Fig. 7), and could be extended further by host engineering and deuteration. Conclusions Through our study combining optical spectroscopy, ESR, ODMR and theoretical modelling, we have demonstrated that we can generate pure high-spin states in organic molecules, manipulate them, and then read them optically (Fig. 3c). By using a luminescent radical and engineering an excited state manifold with small energy offsets, we have revealed a new pathway to generate high-spin states, here exemplified as a quartet or quintet. The radical can dress the triplet exciton in hybridised states, which can reversibly access the high-spin manifold. Consequently, a luminescent state can be restored from addressable high-spin states. Remarkably, we observe polarised high-spin states via ESR and ODMR at room temperature in non-crystalline solid state, showing real potential for future applications such as quantum sensing. Our approach of coherently manipulating high-spin states coupled to emission complements insights gained from alternative qubit platforms, such as colour centres, in particular the diamond nitrogen-vacancies (NV), where optical spin polarisation is also generated by excited-state intersystem crossing. While NV‒ centres display long spin coherence times at room temperature, their scalability may be limited by challenges of controlling defect placement and preventing decoherence in non-isolated defects.37 In contrast, molecules offer unparalleled chemical tunability due to a wealth of synthetic approaches, and potential to develop more extended spin structures, as demonstrated here by the behaviour of R-A and R-A-R. The scope for chemical tuning and for 11 extension to polyradical structures opens new opportunities for designs of coupled spin systems which can be addressed with light in target wavelengths ranges, noting that their placement and intermolecular interactions can be controlled with self-assembly and scanning probe methods.