1 Effect of nitrogen doping and pressure on the stability of LuH3 Yang Sun1,2*, Feng Zhang2, Shunqing Wu1*, Vladimir Antropov2*, and Kai-Ming Ho2 1Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China 2Department of Physics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA Abstract The report on the near-ambient superconductivity in a nitrogen-doped lutetium hydride has stimulated great interest in this material (Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. 2023). While its superconductivity is still a subject of debate, the structure of the claimed cubic phase remains uncertain. In this work, we study the effect of nitrogen doping and pressure on the energetic and dynamic stability of cubic LuH3. Our findings indicate that both pressure and nitrogen doping can enhance the stability of the cubic LuH3 phase. We propose a Lu!H"#N structure that exhibits stable phonon, reasonable thermodynamic stability at 1 GPa, and a similar XRD pattern to the experimental data. However, we do not observe electron-phonon coupling in the zone-center phonon modes of these crystal structures. *Email: yangsun@xmu.edu.cn (Y.S); wsq@xmu.edu.cn (S.W.); antropov@iastate.edu (V.A.) 2 The search for room-temperature superconductors under ambient conditions is a huge scientific challenge that can lead to many applications. More than 50 years ago Ashcroft and Ginzburg already discussed the possibility of having such superconductivity in the metallic phase of hydrogen . Recently it became possible to predict and observe new hydrogen-rich metallic phases with such superconductivity . High-pressure experiments have had great success in discovering many high-Tc hydrides, such as H3S with Tc above 200 K under 200 GPa , LaH10 with Tc ~ 250K at 170GPa , ThH10 with Tc ~ 160K at ~170GPa , CeH10 with Tc ~ 115K at 95GPa , YH6 with Tc ~ 224K at ~166GPa , YH9 with Tc ~ 262K at ~180GPa , CaH6 with Tc ~ 215K at 172GPa . However, such high pressures are still too extreme for practical applications. Therefore, doping or substituting hydrogen with other light elements such as B, C, and N has been proposed to lower the required high pressure [13–22]. Recently, Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. reported experimental evidence of superconductivity in N-doped Lutetium hydride near ambient conditions . The material was synthesized at 2 GPa and claimed to achieve the Tc of 274 K at 1 GPa. However, the superconducting behavior of this phase is being questioned , and the crystal structure of the synthesized phase is unclear. Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. described the structure as a cubic LuH3-δNε, where δ and ε are unknown values that account for the hydrogen vacancy defect and nitrogen contents, respectively. As the X- ray diffraction pattern is not sensitive to hydrogen and nitrogen, only the lattice parameter for the Lu sublattice was solved with a cubic structure with a=5.0289(4) Å. Elemental analysis revealed a weight percent of 0.8-0.9% N in the materials. However, the cubic LuH3 is known to be unstable under ambient conditions. Therefore, the unknown crystal structure makes the study of superconductivity in this compound difficult. In this work, we use first-principles calculations to investigate the effects of pressure and N doping on the thermodynamic and dynamical stability of cubic LuH3. Our aim is to find a stable structure model that can explain the experimental data reported in Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. Methods. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were carried out using the projector augmented wave (PAW) method implemented in the VASP code . PAW potentials with valence electronic configurations 6s25d15p6, 1s1, and 2s22p3 were used for Lu, H, and N atoms, respectively. The exchange and correlation energy was treated with the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) and parameterized by the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof formula (PBE) . A 3 plane-wave basis was used with a kinetic energy cutoff of 520 eV, and the convergence criterion for the total energy was set to 10-8 eV. The Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack grid was adopted for Brillouin zone sampling with a spacing of 2π × 0.025 Å$#. The convex hull in this work is based on static enthalpy calculations. The reference phases to compute the convex hull are consistent with Material Project and OQMD databases, which use the P6%/mmc phase for Lu, P6%/mmc phase for H2 and Pa30 phase for N2. The full Brillouin phonon spectrums were computed by the finite displacement method implemented in the Phonopy code using 4 × 4 × 4 supercell for LuH3 (256 atoms) and 2 × 2 × 2 supercell for Lu8H21N1 (240 atoms). The Gaussian smearing scheme is performed in the calculations. We tested Methfessel-Paxton and Fermi-Dirac smearing schemes and obtained results consistent with each other. The zone-center electron-phonon coupling strength (λ&) was calculated by the frozen- phonon method, which is the relative difference between the screened (ω) and unscreened (ω4) zone-center phonon frequencies as λ& = '( !$'! )'! . (1) The screened phonon frequency was computed by fully self-consistent field (SCF) calculations in the displaced atomic configurations using the tetrahedron method with Blöchl corrections. To compute the unscreened phonon frequency ω4, an SCF calculation with the tetrahedron method was first performed in the equilibrium configuration, followed by the SCF calculations with the displaced atoms, but with partial occupations fixed as the one in the equilibrium configuration. The detailed workflow of this method can be found in . The binary LuN , LuH2 and LuH3 phases have been synthesized and documented in the experimental ICSD database, but no stable ternary Lu-H-N phase has been reported yet. Computational databases, such as Material Project , Atomly and OQMD , yield consistent results. Lu-H-N system at 1 GPa shows a relatively simple phase diagram in which only LuN, LuH2, and LuH3 are stable phases (Supplementary Material Fig. S1 ). Both LuN and LuH2 have the Fm30m symmetry, with Lu occupying the fcc sublattice. In LuN, N occupies the octahedral site, while in LuH2, H occupies the tetrahedral site. The stable LuH3 phase exhibits a rhombohedral structure (noted as r-LuH3) with space group P30c1, where Lu atoms pack in an hcp sublattice. The cubic LuH3 (noted as c-LuH3) shows a relatively high enthalpy, with 85 meV/atom higher than r-LuH3 at 1 GPa (Table 1). 4 System Hhull (meV/atom) LuH2 0 Rhombohedral LuH3 0 Cubic LuH3 85 Lu4H11N, N at octahedral site 278 Lu4H11N, N at tetrahedral site 134 Lu8H23N, N at octahedral site 150 Lu8H23N, N at tetrahedral site 130 Lu8H21N, N at tetrahedral site 31 We first investigate the pressure effect on the stability of c-LuH3. The phonon spectra of c-LuH3 at various pressures are shown in Fig. 1. At pressures ranging in 1-5 GPa, the phonon modes show strong instability, which is mainly caused by the octahedral H atoms. As the pressure increases to ~20 GPa, the imaginary phonon modes are significantly reduced. At 25GPa, c-LuH3 does not show any imaginary phonon modes. The phonon density of states shows that the H atoms at the tetrahedral sites have much higher frequencies than those at octahedral sites. At 25 GPa, the enthalpy of c-LuH3 is only 12 meV/atom higher than that of r-LuH3, which is significantly reduced compared to 85 meV/atom at 1 GPa. These results suggest that high-pressure conditions can stabilize c-LuH3 both energetically and mechanically. We note that anharmonicity and quantum effects can affect the dynamical stability, possibly reducing the required pressure to stabilize the cubic phase . 5 Fig. 1 The phonon spectrum and phonon density of states (Ph. DOS) for cubic LuH3 as a function of pressures. The imaginary modes disappear when the pressure is higher than ~25 GPa. In the atomic structure of cubic LuH3, red shows H at the tetrahedral sites, while green shows H at the octahedral sites. Blue is Lu atoms. N doping effect on cubic LuH3. Although pressure can stabilize LuH3, the condition of 25 GPa is too high compared to the near-ambient condition reported in Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. . Hence, we dope the c-LuH3 with N to study its effect on the stability at 1 GPa. We first use a conventional c-LuH3 cell (4 f.u.) and substitute one H at an octahedral or tetrahedral site with an N, resulting in two inequivalent Lu4H11N structures. At 1 GPa, the enthalpies of both phases are well above the convex hull (Table 1), even higher than c-LuH3. The enthalpy of the structure with N at the tetrahedral site is lower than the one with N at the octahedral site, indicating that N prefers the tetrahedral sites of c-LuH3. N-doping at the octahedral site did not significantly alter the structure. However, doping at the tetrahedral site causes a change in the local H positions, as shown in Fig. 2(a). N repels the surrounding H atoms, leading to the formation of short H-H bonds and a local H tetrahedron. The phonon instability is contributed by the H atoms that form the local tetrahedron, as shown in Supplementary Material Fig. S2 . The N content in Lu4H11N is 1.9 wt.%, which is twice larger than the ones (0.8-0.9wt.%) measured by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. . To be closer to the experimental condition, we use a √2 × √2 × 1 supercell (8 f.u.) and replace one H with N to reduce the doping concentration, yielding Lu8H23N. As shown in Table. 1, Lu8H23N with N at the tetrahedral site still shows a lower enthalpy than that at the octahedral site. Thus, if N is doped into the c-LuH3, it is expected to occupy the tetrahedral sites. Both Lu4H11N and Lu8H23N show strong imaginary phonons in Fig. 2 and higher relative enthalpy above the convex hull compared to c-LuH3. Therefore, these phases are still unstable and cannot be used to model the experimentally claimed LuH3−δNε phase . 6 Fig. 2 The structural change in (a) Lu4H11N and (b) Lu8H23N due to the N doping at the tetrahedral site at 1 GPa. The connected H-H bonds are the shortened bonds caused by the N substitution. The circled sites indicate the vacancies. The right panels show the phonon spectrum and density of states of doped structures. By analyzing the phonon instability at the zone center in Lu8H23N, we find it is mainly caused by H atoms with shortened H bonds. To eliminate these instabilities, we introduce vacancies at the H sites that are closely related to these short bonds (circled sites in Fig. 2(b)). This generates a model with the composition of Lu8H21N. After relaxing this model, we find the phonon instability disappears, as shown in Fig. 3. Moreover, by introducing the defects, the enthalpy above the convex hull decreases to 31 meV/atom (Table 1). Thus, these defects significantly improve both thermodynamic and dynamic stability. As this structure contains 14 tetrahedral sites, the N atom can also replace other tetrahedral sites equivalently. It could form solid solutions at finite temperatures, introducing configurational entropy to further lower the free energy. If we estimate the configurational entropy with the ideal solid solution model as S*+,- = −k.[xlnx + (1 − x) ln(1 − x)] where x accounts for N concentration in the tetrahedral sites as x = # #), the free energy above the convex hull, i.e., ΔG = ΔH − TS, is ~24 meV/atom at 294 K, which is within the thermal fluctuation at room temperature. Therefore, from the perspective of energetics and dynamical stabilities, this Lu8H21N structure can exist under near-ambient conditions. We note that the vibrational and anharmonic effects at finite temperatures may also change the energetic stability, which is neglected in the present work. 7 Fig. 3 The phonon spectrum and atomic structure of Lu8H21N at 1 GPa. The circled sites indicate the vacancies. Comparison of XRD patterns. We compare the XRD of Lu8H21N structures with the experimental data in Fig. 4. The peak of Lu8H21N XRD shows good agreement with experimental XRD without any refinement, although some differences exist. Firstly, it shows small peak splitting at 2θ = 35°, 51° and 61°. These splittings are relatively small, even less than the FWHM of corresponding experimental peaks. They are mainly due to the change of lattice symmetry. With full DFT relaxation, the Lu8H21N model is a tetragonal phase with space group P40m2 (see crystallographic data in Supplementary Material Table S1 ). The a/c ratio is 1.406, which deviates from the original value of √2 ratio in the supercell of the cubic lattice. However, if it forms a solid solution at a finite temperature and N is randomly distributed to the tetrahedral site in the solid solution, the phase should recover the cubic lattice. Secondly, there is a systematical left shift of the peak positions of the fully relaxed structure compared to the experimental data. This is due to the lattice parameter difference. The XRD can be solved by the cubic lattice with a = 5.0289 Å, while the relaxed cell has c = 5.1051 Å. This can be attributed to the fact that PBE functional can sometimes overestimate the cell volume compared to the experimental measurement . If relaxing the structure by LDA functional, the lattice parameter becomes 5.0115 Å (see Supplementary Material Table S2 ). This is smaller than the experimental value and caused a right shift of the XRD peaks, as shown in Fig. 4. To eliminate the effect of these two 8 factors, we change the Lu8H21N lattice to experimental one a = b = 5.0289 × √2 Å and c = 5.0289 Å, while keeping atom positions fixed. This leads to an XRD that matches the main peaks of the experimental data well. With the experimental lattice the Lu8H21N phase maintains the dynamical stability (see Supplementary Material Fig. S3 ). Considering the significantly lower enthalpy of the Lu8H21N phase in comparison to other N-doped phases, it can be inferred that this phase is at a deep local minimum on the potential energy surface. Fig. 4 Comparison of XRD between experimental one and Lu8H21N model with different lattices. The fully relaxed lattices by PBE and LDA functionals are shown in Supplementary Material Table S1 and S2 , respectively. The experimental lattice uses a = b = 5.0289 × √2 Å and c = 5.0289 Å. Red arrows indicate the indexed peaks, which are also marked by dashed lines to guide the eye. The remaining peak can be explained by LuN+Lu2O3 as described in . 9 Zone-center electron-phonon coupling strength. We have demonstrated that both high pressure and N doping can stabilize the c-LuH3 phases, which show metallic nature (see Fig. S4 in the Supplementary Materials ). To examine the possibility of superconductivity in this phase, we employ a recently developed frozen-phonon method to compute the zone-center electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength in the present structures. This efficient method can identify the strong EPC candidates in many hydrides because the zone-center EPC shows a strong correlation with the full Brillouin zone EPC in these materials . In Fig. 5, we compute the screened (ω) and unscreened (ω4) zone-center phonon frequencies for LuH3 at 1 GPa and 25 GPa, as well as Lu8H21N at 1 GPa, respectively. We find the screened and unscreened phonon frequencies are almost the same, resulting in λ& ~ 0 for all these materials. In contrast, most hydride superconductors show λ& ranging from 0.3 to 1.1 . Therefore, the c-LuH3 phase, regardless of whether it is compressed or N-doped, does not show strong EPC in the zone center. Fig. 5 Zone-center EPC strength. Upper panels show the screened and unscreened phonon frequencies and lower panels show the zone-center EPC strength. In summary, we show that both pressure and nitrogen doping can improve the thermodynamic and structural stability of cubic LuH3. A pressure of 25 GPa can stabilize the phonon spectrum of the cubic LuH3 and reduce its enthalpy difference with respect to the stable rhombohedral LuH3 to 12 meV/atom. However, this condition is too far from the recently reported experimental condition in Dasenbrock-Gammon et al. We find that a more realistic way to stabilize 10 the cubic LuH3 is to substitute hydrogen atoms at the tetrahedral sites with nitrogen atoms and introduce vacancies to release the local distortion of hydrogen atoms. This can simultaneously stabilize the phonon spectrum and improve thermodynamic stability. We propose the Lu8H21N model to address the experimentally synthesized material. In addition, by examining the zone- center electron-phonon coupling, we cannot find any theoretical evidence of strong superconductivity in these structures.