Microwave photon-number amplification R. Albert,1 J. Griesmar,2 F. Blanchet,1 U. Martel,2 N. Bourlet,2 and M. Hofheinz2, 1 1Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, INAC-PHELIQS, F-38000 Grenoble, France 2Institut Quantique, Universit ́e de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qu ́ebec J1K 2R1, Canada (Dated: March 7, 2023) So far, quantum-limited power meters are not available in the microwave domain, hindering mea- surement of photon number in itinerant quantum states. On the one hand, single photon detectors [1–6] accurately detect single photons, but saturate as soon as two photons arrive simultaneously. On the other hand, more linear watt meters, such as bolometers [7–9], are too noisy to accurately detect single microwave photons. Linear amplifiers [10–12] probe non-commuting observables of a signal so that they must add noise and cannot be used to detect single photons, either. Here we experimentally demonstrate a microwave photon-multiplication scheme which combines the advan- tages of a single photon detector and a power meter by multiplying the incoming photon number by an integer factor. Our first experimental implementation achieves a n = 3-fold multiplication with 0.69 efficiency in a 116 MHz bandwidth up to a input photon rate of 400 MHz. It loses phase information but does not require any dead time or time binning. We expect an optimised device cascading such multipliers to achieve number-resolving measurement of itinerant photons with low dark count, which would offer new possibilities in a wide range of quantum sensing and quantum computing applications. Quantum measurements of propagating microwaves are so far mostly performed with linear amplifiers. If such an amplifier is able to amplify signals irrespectively of their phase, it must add noise. This noise is due to the fact that the quadratures of electromagnetic fields do not commute and, therefore, cannot be accurately measured at the same time. In order to respect the commutation relations of incoming and outgoing fields, the amplifier must couple the signal mode to an additional idler mode . The zero-point fluctuations of this mode then appear as additional noise in the amplified signal mode. The added noise can be avoided if the amplification is made phase-sensitive, i.e. only one quadrature is ampli- fied and the other attenuated by the same factor , so that phase-space volume is preserved. Therefore, linear amplifiers add noise or are blind to one quadrature of the signal and, therefore, cannot be used to discriminate single photons from vacuum. This discrimination can be achieved with single pho- ton detectors which have recently become available in the microwave domain [1–6]. They allow measuring the power of very weak signals without added photon noise by discarding phase information rather than one of the quadratures. But single-photon detectors are intrinsi- cally strongly non-linear, with their binary outcome map- ping all incoming non-zero photon number states to the same output state. This non-invertible behaviour dis- cards more information than strictly required by commu- tation relations, in particular the actual photon number. Many implementations also require frequent resets or use of a latching mechanism, so that even more information on the incoming photon state is lost, e.g. its actual arrival time. In this work we experimentally demonstrate a linear photon-number amplification scheme. It deamplifies phase-information, so that, like for a phase-sensitive amplifier, phase-space volume is preserved and no noise Spectrum analyser 2eV b a νin νout RB CB d c 200 μm 200 nm EJ V hνin hνout Setup, sample and working principle. a, The sample consists of two buffer resonators at frequencies νin = 4.8 GHz and νout = 6.13 GHz. The resonators are non-linearly coupled by a SQUID biased at a voltage V via a heavily filtered bias line. Its source impedance is modelled by a RB = 5 Ω resistor at an effective temperature of 90 mK (see App. C). An on-chip capacitor CB ≈ 100 pF shunts RB at the operation frequency (see App. A). b, The voltage bias V is set such that hνin + 2eV = nhνout. Under this condition an incoming photon in mode a is converted into n photons in mode b, with the energy 2eV of a tunnelling Cooper pair providing the required energy. c, Optical micrograph of the photon-multiplier. The large coils define the inductance of the input and output modes, the small one at the centre provides a flux bias to tune the SQUID. d, Scanning electron micrograph of one of the 170 nm by 170 nm Nb-Al-AlOx-Nb junctions of the SQUID. needs to be added. It allows to optimally measure the intensity of signals with unknown phase, such as single photons, making it complementary to phase sensitive amplifiers which are optimal for measuring signals with well-defined phase reference. A single photon detector represents a limiting case to our scheme with infinite arXiv:2303.03173v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 6 Mar 2023 2 multiplication factor, so that any incoming photon satu- rates the amplifier. Similar number-resolving detectors have so far only be implemented for photons residing in cavities , which allow for repeated measurements of the state. We implement this photon-number amplifier using Josephson photonics [17–23] based on inelastic Cooper pair tunnelling . Our device consists of a voltage- biased Josephson junction coupled to input and output lines via two low-Q cavities with resonance frequencies νin and νout, see Fig. 1a. The Josephson junction is bi- ased at a voltage V such that 2eV +hνin = nhνout. Under this condition a photon in the input mode at νin can be converted into n photons in the output mode at νout, with a tunnelling Cooper pair providing the difference in energy 2eV , as seen in Fig. 1b . In contrast to usual linear amplifiers where the gain depends on a continu- ously variable tuning parameter, the gain n is an inte- ger number set by the bias condition. The integer gain allows the scheme to be noiseless and phase preserving by having a phase-space response with n-fold rotational symmetry, so that phase-space volume is preserved. The photo-multiplication effect we describe corresponds, for n = 1, to the parametric frequency-conversion mode with unity gain of a parametric amplifier, which appears when the pump is set at the difference between idler and signal frequency. The experimental setup is presented in Fig. 1a. The two low-Q cavities are realised by spiral LC resonators visible in the optical micrograph of Fig. 1c. Their reso- nances are centred at νin = 4.8 GHz and νout = 6.13 GHz and have characteristic impedances Zc ≈ 400 Ω. A SQUID acts as a Josephson junction with Josephson energy EJ(Φ), tunable in situ by a local magnetic flux Φ. While we can not directly measure its critical current, measurements of test junctions on the same chip indicate a typical critical current Ic ≈ 60 nA. Fig. 1d shows a SEM picture of one of the Nb-Al-AlOx-Nb junctions of the SQUID. The flux line is low-pass filtered at dilution temperature with a homemade Eccosorb filter . A DC voltage bias is applied to the SQUID via a 5 Ω/1 MΩ voltage divider with heavy low-pass filtering . The two LC resonators (input and output) are capacitively coupled to microwave transmission lines. The capacitors are designed to obtain associated coupling rates around γin ≈ γout ≈ 90 MHz. Fig. 2 shows the Power Spectral Density (PSD) of spontaneous emission from the device cooled down to T ≈ 10 mK. For this measurement, no microwave tone is applied to the photo-multiplier. Only the DC volt- age bias, expressed in terms of its Josephson frequency νJ = 2eV/h, and the magnetic flux are tuned. At maximal SQUID frustration Φ = Φ0/2 (see Fig. 2a), only emission close to the input (4.8 GHz) and output (6.13 GHz) modes is visible. In this panel, the PSD of both the input (blue) and output (green) resonator is rep- 10 2 10 1 100 101 102 Input resonator PSD (photons) 10 2 10 1 100 101 102 Output resonator PSD (photons) 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 5 6 7 Emission freq. (GHz) J = J = 2 a 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 105 107 109 Emission rate (Hz) b 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Bias voltage J (GHz) 105 107 109 Emission rate (Hz) c SQUID Flux: 0.00 0 0.28 0 0.39 0 0.47 0 0.50 0 Spontaneous emission. a, Power Spectral Density (PSD) as a function of emission frequency and bias voltage. The PSD for the input (output) resonator is plotted in shades of green (blue). The flux in the SQUID loop is set to Φ0/2 to minimise the Josephson energy of the device. b and c, Photon emission rate from the input and output resonator, respectively, integrated over a 400 MHz bandwidth centred at 4.8 GHz and 6.13 GHz, respectively, for 5 values of flux in the SQUID loop. These frequencies are represented by horizontal dashed grey lines in a. The flux values of 0.47 Φ0, 0.39 Φ0 and 0.28 Φ0 correspond to the dashed vertical lines in Fig. 3 and the flux used in Fig. 4. The three vertical green dashed lines correspond, from left to right, to the voltages used for the conversions of Fig. 3 and 4 with, respectively, n = 1, 2 and 3. resented. The brightest spots around νJ = 4.8 GHz and 6.13 GHz are on the νJ = ν line and correspond to the emission of one photon per tunnelling Cooper pair in the corresponding resonator. The emission of two photons per tunnelling Cooper pair is also visible near the νJ = 2ν line. The last two spots around νJ = νin +νout ≈ 11 GHz correspond to the emission of one photon in each res- onator per tunnelling Cooper pair. Fig. 2b and c show the emission rate of the input and output resonators, integrated over a 400 MHz bandwidth centred at, respectively, the input and output resonance frequencies, indicated by horizontal dashed lines in Fig. 2a. The lines for Φ = Φ0/2 show the well-defined 3 100 101 102 103 Dark rate (MHz) 100 101 102 103 Dark rate (MHz) 100 101 102 103 Dark rate (MHz) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Probability a Refl. Conv. Trans. Inel. refl. Total Dark rate 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 Probability b 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 Flux ( 0) 0.0 0.5 1.0 Probability c flection probabilities as well as dark count rates for n = 1 (a), 2 (b) and 3 (c) as a function of the flux in the SQUID loop. The vertical dashed lines represent the flux values at which the conversion probabilities are highest. In a, the in- put frequency is 4.773 GHz and the bias voltage is 1.30 GHz. In b, the input frequency is 4.71 GHz and the bias voltage is 7.37 GHz. In c, the input frequency is 4.74 GHz and the bias voltage is 13.37 GHz. For these three plots, the input power of −127 dBm is chosen to have approximately one photon on average in the input resonator. processes discussed above. At larger Josephson energies (fluxes closer to 0), the emission peaks are less well- resolved as more and more complex processes emerge. At the highest Josephson energy, higher order processes involving several Cooper pairs and photons in many modes give rise to emission at nearly all bias voltages. We then bias the SQUID at voltages V such that hνin + 2eV = nhνout, which enables the multiplication of photons in our device. The voltages corresponding to n = 1, 2 and 3 are indicated by vertical dashed lines in Fig. 2. When a microwave signal at frequency ν is applied on the input of the device, the desired converted signal appears centred at a frequency νconv = νout+(ν − νin) /n. For n = 1, its bandwidth is the same as the input signal (modulo the noise coming from DC voltage fluctuations). For n > 1, the converted photons will be spread over the output resonator bandwidth . We measure this con- verted signal by integrating the PSD of the output mode over a ∆ν = 400 MHz bandwidth centred around νconv. We also measure the inelastic reflection, i.e. leakage of the converted signal through the input port, at the same frequency and bandwidth. The input signal can also be reflected (or transmitted) elastically by the sample. We measure these two elastic signals by integrating the PSD of the input (output) mode over a δν = 15 MHz band- width around ν to account for phase noise added by the device. Note that, before integration, the PSD of the spontaneous emission is first subtracted from the desired signals and that the PSDs are divided by hν to obtain PSDs in term of photon rates densities, as in Fig. 2. To obtain the probabilities corresponding to those dif- ferent outcomes, the photon rates obtained after the in- tegration of the different PSDs are divided by the photon rate we apply at the input of the device. In the case of the converted signals, the result is divided by n to ac- count for multiplication. The input rate is calibrated by applying a microwave signal at frequency ν and integrat- ing the PSD reflected by the sample biased at Φ = Φ0/2 and νJ = 2 GHz, where it is essentially an open circuit reflecting all the input power (see App. B for more details on the calibration). These probabilities are presented in Fig. 3, where the input frequency ν is chosen to obtain a maximum of con- version. The input power is kept low to have, on aver- age, less than one photon in the input mode. The sum of the four probabilities is close to 1 at low Josephson energy (flux close to Φ0/2), indicating that elastic scat- tering and the desired conversion process fully explain the device. At larger Josephson energies it drops signif- icantly below 1. The missing signal is likely converted to unmonitored frequencies: with increasing Josephson energy new processes become important , involving several Cooper pairs and photons in different spurious modes of the circuit. Especially low-frequency modes, even if they have low quality factor and low characteristic impedance, may then be strongly driven by the Joseph- son junction and take away arbitrary energy from the conversion process. As seen in Fig. 2, those processes are quite difficult to identify from the measurement back- ground when the Josephson energy and the bias voltage increase. The sum of probabilities can, as in Fig. 3c, also exceed 1. Under the bias conditions used here (νJ = 13.37 GHz, rightmost vertical dashed line in Fig. 2b and c), the spon- taneous emission of the device (dark rates) is higher than for lower n. This indicates that an incoming microwave signal can also be amplified by stimulated emission before being converted or reflected, pushing the observed total probability above 1. The three conversion probabilities (Fig. 3, orange curves) reach a well-defined maximum as a function of the flux, indicated by vertical dashed lines. At this point, the conversion rate matches the loss rate of the input mode, leading to destructive interference in elastic reflection . With increasing n, the position of this maximum shifts towards lower fluxes in the SQUID loop, 4 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Probability a Refl. Conv. Trans. Inel. refl. Total 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.9 5.0 Microwave excitation frequency (GHz) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Conversion probability b 125 120 115 110 105 100 Input power (dBm) 120 110 100 Input power (dBm) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 Conv. at 4.74 GHz Bandwidth and saturation power. a, Reflection, conversion, transmission and inelastic reflection probabilities for the n = 3 process, taken at the flux and voltage values maximising the conversion probability indicated by a dashed vertical line in Fig. 3c. The input power is −127 dBm. b, Conversion probability for the n = 3 conversion for various input powers. The inset shows the conversion probability at 4.74 GHz (maximum of conversion at low input power) as a function of input power. thus higher Josephson energies. This behaviour is well explained by theoretical calculations . Ideally, at this point the conversion probability should be 1 and the reflection probability 0. For the n = 1 case, panel (a), this is almost the case: At Φ = 0.47Φ0, the con- version probability reaches 0.90 while the reflection prob- ability drops below 10−2. For n = 2 at Φ = 0.39Φ0, the conversion probability reaches 0.73 while the reflection probability is still low at 0.018. For n = 3 at Φ = 0.28Φ0, the conversion probability reduces to 0.69 while the re- flection probability increases to 0.20, due to an increase and a shift of the minimum of reflection. This increase in reflection is likely due to the competition between the intended conversion process and spurious amplification processes as discussed above. By changing the input frequency ν as well as the in- put power, we can obtain the bandwidth and saturation power of the photo-multiplier. In Fig. 4, we show those results for n = 3. The same curves for n = 1 and n = 2 can be found in App. E. Fig. 4a shows the reflection and conversion probabilities at low input power, below one photon on average in the input resonator. The maximal conversion efficiency is 0.69 and the full width at half maximum is 116 MHz. This width is set by the band- width of the microwave resonators in the setup . In Fig. 4b the input power is gradually increased towards −100 dBm. The 1 dB compression point is −119 dBm, corresponding to an approximate photon in- put rate of 400 MHz. As the power increases, the shape of the curve changes drastically: it first splits in two max- ima, then it acquires a third maximum. This behaviour arises from the non-linearity of the Josephson Hamilto- nian which, in addition to the desired conversion term has higher order terms which are resonant at the same voltage, but modify the conversion rate as a function of power . The main source of noise added by our device is the spontaneous emission of photons. When operated as a single photon detector, these emitted photons may be interpreted as false positive events, even though they have weaker bunching than the desired converted pho- tons. This spontaneous photon emission rate is plot- ted in grey in Fig. 3. At the operating point of the n = 3 conversion, it is ≈ 400 MHz. It is mainly due to the large Josephson energy needed to efficiently per- form the conversion for the output resonator with char- acteristic impedance ≈ 400 Ω. As seen in Fig. 2c, at flux 0.28Φ0 (operation point for the data of Fig. 4), the spontaneous emission background is dominated by the emission due to higher order processes involving several Cooper pairs and photons. A characteristic impedance closer to h/(4πe2) ∼ 2 kΩ or a lower bandwidth would re- quire lower Josephson energy for optimal conversion . A lower Josephson energy would in turn, as Fig. 3c shows, lead to significantly reduced spontaneous emission rate. In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated multiplication of the photon number of an incoming mi- crowave signal by an integer factor of 3, with efficiency reaching 0.69. The key characteristics of our device are well understood theoretically . Given its compression point, our results could pave the way towards cascading two such devices to achieve a photon number gain of 9, or even more. This gain would be sufficient to discrim- inate photon-numbers at the input by reading out the photo-multiplier with a quantum-limited amplifier , and thus detect and count single photons. Note that in such a scheme the observed spontaneous emission rate does not directly cause an equivalent dark count rate, because detected incoming photons create a bunch of n photons while we expect the photons created spon- taneously to come in smaller bunches depending on the stage at which they are created, so that the can be dis- criminated from incoming photons . Moreover the observed spontaneous emission rate can be significantly reduced by increasing the characteristic impedance of the output mode. It should then be possible to use cascaded multipliers as single photon counters without dead time and able to resolve photon numbers. Such a device would then implement a linear photon number amplifier with minimal added photon noise at the expense of losing, or at least deamplifying phase information. Author contributions: RA designed and fabricated the device based on an idea by MH and performed first measurements. JG performed the final measurements, 5 analysed the data together with RA and NB, and per- formed simulations. All authors contributed to the ex- perimental setup and calibration methods. FB together with RA, MH, UM and JG designed the software for per- forming the experiment. JG wrote the paper together with RA, MH and NB and input from all authors.