Updates to the DScribe Library: New Descriptors and Derivatives Jarno Laakso,1 Lauri Himanen,1 Henrietta Homm,1 Eiaki V. Morooka,1 Marc O. J. J МҲager,1 Milica Todorovi МҒc,2 and Patrick Rinke1 1)Department of Applied Physics, Aalto University, P.O. Box 11100, 00076 Aalto, Finland 2)Department of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, University of Turku, FI-20014 Turku, Finland (Dated: 27 March 2023) We present an update of the DScribe package, a Python library for atomistic descriptors. The update extends DScribeвҖҷs descriptor selection with the Valle-Oganov materials fingerprint and provides descriptor derivatives to enable more advanced machine learning tasks, such as force prediction and structure optimization. For all descriptors, numeric derivatives are now available in DSribe. For the many-body tensor representation (MBTR) and the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Positions (SOAP), we have also implemented analytic derivatives. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the descriptor derivatives for machine learning models of Cu clusters and perovskite alloys. I. INTRODUCTION DScribe is a software library that provides atomistic descriptors to researchers in the natural sciences and engineering.1 Descriptors represent the atomic structure of molecules, nanostructures and materials in machine- readable format. To facilitate machine learning (ML), de- scriptors should be invariant under transformations that conserve physical quantities, such as translations, mirror- ing, rotations and atomic permutations.2 Descriptors are also a powerful tool for defining distance metrics between atomic structures, which is helpful in many ML tasks, such as clustering or kernel-based regression. While ML is one of the main applications of descriptors, their use- fulness is not limited to that. They can also be utilized, for example, in similarity analysis of atomic structures or visualization of atomistic data. In this article we present new features that we have added to DScribe, including a new descriptor and the capability to calculate descriptor derivatives with respect to atomic positions. At the time of its publication in 2019, DScribe included six descriptors: the Coulomb matrix,3 the sine matrix,4 the Ewald sum matrix,4 the Many-Body Tensor Repre- sentation (MBTR),5 the Atom-centered Symmetry Func- tions (ACSF)6 and the Smooth Overlap of Atomic Posi- tions (SOAP).7 The first four descriptors in this list are global descriptors and the remaining two local. DScribe made these descriptors available to a wide community and facilitated a variety of machine learning applica- tions including property prediction,8вҖ“13 global structure search,14 and data analysis and visualization.15вҖ“17 All DScribe descriptors can output the representations in vector form, which makes them compatible with a mul- titude of existing ML methods and algorithms. Thus far, they have been employed, for example, with linear regression models,9,12,13 neural networks,8,9,11,12 random forests,9,12 and Gaussian processes.14 In this work, we present a new descriptor we recently added to DScribe. It is based on a structural finger- print proposed by Valle and Oganov for similarity anal- ysis of crystal structures.18 Since its formulation, it has been adopted for other applications. Bisbo et al. used the Valle-Oganov fingerprint to represent atomic struc- tures in their global structure optimization algorithm.19 Arrigoni et al. combined it with principal component analysis (PCA) for dimensionality reduction to facilitate data analysis.20 According to its original definition, the Valle-Oganov fingerprint is constructed from the inter- atomic distances in an atomic structure. It greatly re- sembles the k=2-term of the MBTR descriptor, but un- like MBTR, it was specifically tailored for periodic sys- tems. The more specific use-case reduces the number of user-defined parameters, which makes the Valle-Oganov descriptor easier to use than MBTR. Other studies have extended on the Valle-Oganov fingerprint by adding an angular term.21 We also included such a higher-order term in our implementation of the Valle-Oganov descrip- tor, but allow the user to decide whether to use it or not. Structural descriptors have facilitated quick and accu- rate property prediction of molecules and materials us- ing ML.4,22,23 Many useful properties are derivatives of other quantities, which means that the same ML models can be used to predict multiple quantities. For atomic structures, gradients of the energy give access to atomic forces. Differentiating an ML model for the energy with respect to atomic positions would therefore also provide force predictions. This is the working principle of ML potentials that are increasingly employed in simulating the dynamics of atomic systems.24вҖ“26 Having access to the derivatives of an ML model also helps with optimiza- tion of the predicted property. Energy minimization, for example, is one of the most common tasks in compu- tational chemistry and physics. Using an ML model to relax atomic positions by optimizing the surrogate po- tential energy surface instead of using a more expensive method such as density functional theory (DFT) saves computational resources. Descriptor derivatives enable these ML tasks but they have not been generally avail- able to date. In this article, we present our work on implementing descriptor derivatives in DScribe, with the arXiv:2303.14046v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 24 Mar 2023 2 goal to make them more accessible to the research com- munity. Descriptor derivatives can be calculated either analyt- ically or numerically. Numerical derivatives are easy to implement and can be transferred to all descriptors in the library. Their disadvantage is the increased numeri- cal cost and potential discretization errors. The number of descriptor evaluations required to calculate the numer- ical derivatives with respect to all atomic coordinates, for example, scales linearly with the system size. Analytical derivatives do not suffer from limited accuracy, and the computational time for calculating all the derivatives of a descriptor analytically is usually comparable to a single descriptor calculation. The downside of analytical deriva- tives is that they need to be implemented separately for every descriptor, which can be very tedious. Here, we have implemented analytical derivatives for SOAP and MBTR and numerical derivatives for all descriptors. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the SOAP derivatives by employing them in a neural network model to fit a sim- ple ML potential. We also showcase the application of MBTR derivatives in a structure optimization task. This article is organized as follows: Section II presents a description of the numerical and analytical descriptor derivatives, as well as the Valle-Oganov descriptor. In Section III, we elaborate on the practical implementation of the new features in DScribe, and provide a guide on their usage. Section IV presents the results for tests that we conducted to make sure that the descriptor derivatives function properly and showcase their usefulness with two demonstrations. Finally, in Section V, we conclude our work. II. METHODS In this section we detail the computational methods behind the features that we added to DScribe. We de- scribe our approach for computing numerical descriptor derivatives with the central difference method and detail our implementations of the analytic SOAP and MBTR derivatives. We then briefly present two ML tasks that demonstrate the effectiveness of our implementation. We close the section by introducing the additional descriptor that is based on the structural fingerprint by Valle and Oganov, and showing how we implemented it with small changes to the existing MBTR implementation. A. Descriptor derivatives 1. Numerical derivatives The derivatives of any atomic representation F(R) with respect to the atomic positions can be approximated using the central finite difference method. вҲӮF(R) вҲӮRij вүҲ F(R + h 2 Eij) вҲ’ F(R вҲ’ h 2 Eij) h , (1) where Eij is a single-entry matrix: (Eij)ab = пҝҪ 1, when a = i and b = j 0, otherwise (2) and h quantifies the magnitude of the atomic displace- ment. The error made by the central difference approxi- mation is proportional to h2, which means that the accu- racy of the numerical derivatives improves quickly with smaller values of h. In practice, however, the limited floating-point accuracy makes the derivatives unstable when h is too small. In order to determine the opti- mal value of h for our implementation, we conducted a test comparing the numerical derivatives computed with different h values to the analytical derivatives that we de- rived for MBTR and SOAP descriptors. We calculated the relative error between the numerical and analytical derivatives using the mean relative percentage difference MRPD = 2 3NM пҝҪ i,j,k пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҲӮa ijFk вҲ’ вҲӮn ijFk |вҲӮa ijFk| + |вҲӮn ijFk| пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ , (3) where i iterates over the atoms in an atomic structure, j runs over the three Cartesian coordinates, and k runs over the components of the representation vector. N is the number of atoms in the structure and M the number of components in the representation vector. вҲӮa ij and вҲӮn ij are the analytical and numerical derivatives with respect to coordinate Rij, respectively. 2. MBTR derivatives In DScribe three MBTR terms are implemented, each corresponding to atomic motifs of a different size. The k = 1 term encodes single atoms, the k = 2 term atomic pairs, and the k = 3 term atom triples. Each term is defined as F(x) = N пҝҪ i widi(x), (4) where the sum runs over the motifs in an atomic struc- ture. N is a normalization term, wi is the weight related to motif i and di(x) is a distribution function. DScribe uses the Gaussian distribution: di(x) = 1 Пғ вҲҡ 2ПҖ exp пҝҪ вҲ’(x вҲ’ gi)2 2Пғ2 пҝҪ , (5) where Пғ is the standard deviation of the distribution and gi is a function that maps atomic motif i to a scalar value. Assuming that N is independent of the atomic positions, 3 55 atomic environments of a Cu cluster are first represented in vector form using SOAP (Pi). Then the dimensionality of these vectors is reduced with PCA. The PCA-reduced SOAP vectors P PCA i are mapped to atomic energies Ei with a feed- forward neural network with two hidden layers. Finally, Ei are summed together to obtain the total potential energy Etot of the Cu cluster. the gradient of the representation function with respect to the coordinates of an atom is вҲҮF(x) = N пҝҪ i di(x) пҝҪ вҲҮwi + wi 1 Пғ2 (x вҲ’ gi)вҲҮgi пҝҪ . (6) вҲҮwi and вҲҮgi depend on the choice of the weighting and geometry functions. The assumption of N being indepen- dent of atomic positions is not true for the normalization option l2 each that normalizes the L2-norm of the rep- resentation vector to one, and analytical derivatives are currently not available for it. For a detailed derivation of the MBTR gradients with the different options for вҲҮwi and вҲҮgi we refer to Section S2.B of the Supplementary Material (SM). To demonstrate the analytical MBTR derivatives, we used them in geometry optimization of perovskite ma- terials. We fitted an energy ML model that combines the MBTR with kernel ridge regression (KRR) for a CsPb(Cl/Br)3 data set. We generated the data set and used the same ML model for an earlier study that con- tains detailed information on model fitting and structure optimization.27 For this demonstration, we optimized the atomic positions of 25 perovskite structures using the ML model and compared the obtained energies and geome- tries to DFT relaxation results. 3. SOAP derivatives The SOAP descriptor represents local atomic environ- ments in a rotationally invariant way by expanding Gaus- sian smeared atomic densities in a basis of spherical har- monics and radial basis functions. In DScribe, SOAP outputs a vector of partial power spectra28 p, where the individual components are defined as pZ1,Z2 nnвҖІl = ПҖ пҝҪ 8 2l + 1 пҝҪ m пҝҪ cZ1 nlm пҝҪвҲ— cZ2 nвҖІlm (7) = ПҖ пҝҪ 8 2l + 1 пҝҪ m пЈ« пЈӯ |Z1| пҝҪ j cj nlm пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ« пЈӯ |Z2| пҝҪ k ck nвҖІlm пЈ¶ пЈё . (8) The complex conjugation in 7 can be omitted, because DScribe uses real spherical harmonics. The summations for j and k run over atoms in the environment with the atomic numbers Z1 and Z2, respectively. Coefficients ci nlm are defined as ci nlm = пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ R3 dV gnl(r)ПҒ(r, Ri)Ylm(Оё, ПҶ), (9) where ПҒ(r, Ri) is the Gaussian smeared atomic density, gnl(r) a radial basis function and Ylm(Оё, ПҶ) a spherical harmonic. The vector p consists of elements pZ1,Z2 nnвҖІl for all unique atomic number pairs (Z1, Z2), and unique com- binations of radial and spherical basis functions (n, nвҖІ, l). The gradient of pZ1,Z2 nnвҖІl with respect to the coordinates of an atom is вҲҮpZ1,Z2 nnвҖІl = ПҖ пҝҪ 8 2l + 1 пҝҪ m пЈ® пЈ° пЈ« пЈӯ |Z1| пҝҪ j вҲҮcj nlm пЈ¶ пЈё |Z2| пҝҪ k ck nвҖІlm + |Z1| пҝҪ j cj nlm пЈ« пЈӯ |Z2| пҝҪ k вҲҮck nвҖІlm пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ№ пЈ» . (10) The final derivative equation depends on the choice of radial basis function. For now, we have implemented the analytical derivatives for spherical primitive Gaussian type orbitals in the non-periodic case. For polynomial radial basis functions and periodic systems, numerical differentiation is used instead. See section S3.B of SM for the full derivation of the SOAP gradients. We tested the SOAP derivatives in an ML potential model that we trained for Cu clusters. We generated data for training and testing the ML potential by run- ning a classical molecular dynamics simulation of a 55- atom Cu cluster at 500 K for 5.0 ns and uniformly picking 10 000 snapshots from the simulation. The simulation used a 5.0 fs timestep, embedded atom method29 (EAM) for the Cu interactions, and Nose-Hoover thermostat30 for the temperature control. It was performed using the LAMMPS simulation tool.31 We built an ML model that first represents all 55 atomic environments in vector form using SOAP, and then uses a feedforward neural network to map the atomic environments to atomic energies, which are summed to the total energy. To make model training easier, we decreased the dimensionality of the SOAP vec- tors with principal component analysis (PCA) following an earlier study by Zhou et al.9 The full ML model ar- chitecture is depicted in Fig. 1. 4 To generate the SOAP vectors we used a radial cut- off of 6.0 МҠA and a basis of 8 radial basis functions and 6 spherical harmonics. These settings result in 252 dimen- sional SOAP vectors. We reduced the dimensionality of these vectors to 50 with PCA. The neural network that we used to map these reduced SOAP vectors to atomic energies had two hidden layers. Both hidden layers had 50 nodes that used the sigmoid activation function. The output layer used linear activation. We implemented the neural network using Keras32 and Tensorflow33 Python packages. The weights of the network were optimized using the Adam algorithm.34 We trained the ML potential on total energies of 8 000 Cu clusters. Then we assessed the quality of the fit by predicting the total energies of the remaining 2 000 clusters and compared the results to the EAM energies. Atomic forces are derivatives of the total energy with respect to the atomic positions. By combining our im- plementation of the SOAP derivatives with the gradients of the neural network, we were able to use the ML model to predict atomic forces. We used the ML model to pre- dict the forces of all 2 000 test set clusters and compared the results to the EAM forces. B. Valle-Oganov descriptor In their article Valle and Oganov defined an atomic structure representation for periodic systems.18 The full representation is a matrix in pairs of elements (A, B) : FAB(x) = пҝҪ AiBj di,j(x) 4ПҖr2 ij(NANB/V ) вҲ’ 1. (11) The index i runs over all atoms of type A and j over all atoms of type B. rij is the distance between atoms i and j, V the volume of the cell and NA and NB the number of atoms of each type. di,j(x) is the Gaussian distribution of equation 5 with the geometry function set to be the distance between the atoms gi,j = rij. Closer inspection of equation 11 reveals close similarity to the MBTR, which is already implemented in DScribe. The only fundamental difference between the two rep- resentation is the constant term вҲ’1 in the Valle-Oganov representation. The constant term, however, is not signif- icant in most use-cases, as it does not affect the distances between the vectors. Furthermore, if the constant term is needed for some application, it can be added to the representation vectors afterwards. We therefore decided to omit the constant term вҲ’1 from our implementation. Now FAB(x) can be cast into the general MBTR for- malism defined in equation 4 by setting the weighting function to wi,j = 1 r2 ij (12) Valle-Oganov descriptor construction. (a) CuO atomic structure. (b) Second-order and (c) third-order Valle- Oganov fingerprints of CuO. The full Valle-Oganov repre- sentation vector is obtained by concatenating the elemental contributions. and the normalization term to NAB = V 4ПҖNANB . (13) The Valle-Oganov descriptor implementation in DScribe therefore only requires the addition of new weighting and normalization options to the already existing MBTR im- plementation. The original article by Valle and Oganov only consid- ers interatomic distances, but the representation has been extended with an angular term by Bisbo and Hammer.21 We define a similar third-order term FABC(x), again uti- lizing the MBTR formalism. Now, the sum in equation 4 runs over atom triplets (i, j, k) and the geometry function in equation 5 is the angle between the atoms gi,j,k = Оёijk. The normalization term is NABC = V 4ПҖNANBNC (14) and the weight function is wi,j,k = fc(rij)fc(rik), (15) where fc(r) = 1 + Оі пҝҪ r rcut пҝҪОі+1 вҲ’ (Оі + 1) пҝҪ r rcut пҝҪОі . (16) The weight function and its derivative approach 0 at the cutoff distance rcut beyond which the atom triplets do not contribute to the representation. Оі controls the sharpness of the cutoff and in our implementation it has a default value of 2. Fig. 2 visualizes the Valle-Oganov fingerprint of CuO. The full representation vector is obtained by concate- nating the different elemental contributions of the sec- ond and third-order terms. Although we use the MBTR framework for the Valle-Oganov descriptor, analytical derivatives have not yet been fully implemented for its normalization and weighting options, and numerical dif- ferentiation is used instead. 5 III. SOFTWARE STRUCTURE Python has solidified its position as a go-to language for several domains, including data science. In order to seamlessly integrate with these Python-based data sci- ence workflows, the main entry point for our software is a Python API through which the descriptors can be con- figured and used. Figure 3 shows an example of the new DScribe interface for calculating derivatives. from ase.build import molecule from dscribe. descriptors import SOAP # Define the atomic systems systems = [molecule("H2"), molecule("O2")] # Setup the descriptor soap = SOAP( species =["H", "O"], rbf="gto", rcut=3, nmax =10, lmax=8, sparse=True ) # Calculate derivatives and descriptor features derivatives , features = soap. derivatives ( systems , positions=None , include = , exclude=None , method="auto", return_descriptor =True , n_jobs =2 ) descriptors have the derivatives-function that can be used to retrieve both derivatives and descriptor features simulta- neously. Only the first argument that specifies the used sys- tems is required and the additional arguments can be used to further control the methodology, parallelization, and with re- spect to which atoms the positional derivatives are calculated for. DScribe works with atomic structures defined using the ase.Atoms-object from the ase package.35 These ob- jects are easy to create from existing structure files or build with the utilities provided by ase. In addition to any descriptor-specific arguments, all descriptors accept the sparse-parameter that controls whether the created output is a dense or a sparse matrix. Especially in large systems where the interactions between atoms and cen- ters of interest are very localized, sparsity provides mem- ory and storage efficiency. Some ML algorithms can use sparse matrix formats directly, but it is also easy to re- store the dense format for other algorithms. All descriptors implement the new derivatives method. The first argument accepts one or multiple atomic structures. The argument positions can be used to define the positions of interest for local descriptors. It defaults to using all individual atoms as centers and can- not be specified for global descriptors. The arguments include and exclude are used to control which atoms are considered in the derivative calculations. By using method, the user can explicitly change between analyti- cal and numerical differentiation. The default value auto will automatically choose the analytical implementation if it is available, and the numerical one otherwise. De- scriptors and their derivatives can be created simulta- neously by setting return descriptor=True as this is often computationally favorable. Finally, descriptor cal- culations can be parallelized over several CPU cores using the n jobs parameter. This parallelization is based on evenly distributing the given atomic structures to differ- ent cores for data parallelism. We have decided to retain as much structure in the derivative output as possible. This approach allows the user to better understand and access the differ- ent components, while it is still relatively easy to re- arrange the output into a lower-dimensional shape if needed. Generally, the output is a multidimensional ar- ray with shape [n systems, n centers, n atoms, 3, n features]. Here the dimension with n systems runs over the different atomic structures, n centers loops through the different centers of interest, n atoms loops through the atoms for which the derivatives were cal- culated, the second-to-last dimension with three compo- nents loops through the x, y, and z components, and the last dimension with n features loops through the dif- ferent descriptor features. Global descriptors effectively have only one region of interest that covers the entire structure, meaning that n centers = 1 and the corre- sponding dimension is not present. Similarly, when cre- ating the derivatives only for one system, n systems = 1, and that dimension is left out. As many of the descriptor calculations require signifi- cant CPU resources, many of the heavier calculations are internally handled by an underlying C++ implementa- tion that is accessed through the Python interface. This hybrid approach is similar to many other common nu- merical Python packages such as numpy36 and scipy.37 The communication between Python and C++ is imple- mented using the pybind1138 library. The source code is structured using an object-oriented programming approach. Each descriptor is represented by its own class which inherits from a generic base class. When adhering to the base class interface, the subclasses can automatically take advantage of the functionality al- ready defined in the base class - such as the numerical derivatives - in addition to ensuring that the user can ex- pect each descriptor to have similar functionality. Each descriptor class is associated with a code test suite that is used to ensure the validity of the implementation. This test suite forms part of a continuous integration pipeline that is performed every time the source code is modified. DScribe is distributed as a Python package and can be installed from the Python package index (PyPI)39 un- der the package name dscribe. Alternatively, the pack- age can be installed using the conda-forge40 ecosystem where it is distributed with the same name. Access to the full source code is also provided through GitHub at https://github.com/SINGROUP/dscribe. The full 6 analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives with different central difference step sizes h. documentation and several tutorials are available on the DScribe homepage https://singroup.github.io/ dscribe/. IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION This section showcases the outcomes of the tests con- ducted on the descriptor derivatives. First, we assessed the accuracy of our numerical derivative implementation by comparing it to analytical derivative values. We used the results of the test to determine the optimal h-value for DScribeвҖҷs numerical derivative implementation. We then present MBTR derivatives for the perovskite struc- tures and the SOAP derivative test for the Cu cluster. A. Numerical descriptor derivatives We tested the accuracy of our numerical descriptor derivative implementation by comparing it to analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives. Fig. 4 shows the relative error between the numerical and analytical derivatives for a water molecule. The errors are at their highest at the higher end of the tested hвҲ’range. With decreasing h the relative error reduces due to the h2 scaling of the central difference error. The MBTR and SOAP errors both reach their minima at h = 1 Г— 10вҲ’4 МҠA, after which they start to increase again due to the limited floating-point accu- racy. For both descriptors the relative error reaches 10вҲ’6 at its lowest. In practical applications, this is likely to be insignificant compared to errors related to model fitting or the underlying data. Based on the results of the test, we fixed h = 1 Г— 10вҲ’4 МҠA for the numerical derivatives of all descriptors in DScribe. The good agreement between the numerical and analytical derivatives shows that the numerical derivative implementation is highly accurate and that our analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives are error-free. utilizing MBTR gradients. a) One perovskite structure opti- mized with both DFT and the ML model. b) Comparison of ML and DFT optimized energies of 25 perovskite structures. B. Perovskite structure optimization with MBTR To showcase the analytical MBTR derivatives, we fit- ted an ML model that combines MBTR and KRR to predict energies of CsPb(Cl/Br)3 perovskite structures. To asses the accuracy of the fit, we used the model to pre- dict the energies and forces of structure snapshots from DFT relaxation of 25 perovskite test structures. The mean absolute error (MAE) of energy predictions was only 0.14 meV/atom while the force prediction MAE was 16.7 meV/ МҠA. We then used the derivatives of the trained ML model to relax the atomic positions of the same 25 CsPb(Cl/Br)3 test geometries. Fig. 5a shows an example of how the ML predicted energy of a perovskite structure decreases during ML relaxation, and how that compares to the DFT relaxation of the same structure. The DFT relaxation reaches the minimum structure in fewer it- erations than the ML model, but the final energies are very close, deviating only by 0.42 meV/atom. The final structures from the two relaxation methods are almost identical with the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of atomic positions between them being only 0.016 МҠA. Fur- thermore, relaxing the structure with the ML model is over four orders of magnitude faster than with DFT. In Fig. 5b, we plotted the relaxed energies of all 25 perovskite test structures. For most structures, the DFT and ML optimized energies are nearly identical, although in some cases the energies differ by up to 0.70 meV/atom. The mean absolute error between the two energies is 0.26 meV/atom and the average RMSD of atomic posi- tions is 0.031 МҠA. The good agreement in terms of both energy and structure demonstrates that an ML approach utilizing descriptor derivatives can effectively accelerate structure optimization computations. 7 a) ML predicted energies energies compared to EAM values. b) Atomic force components compared to EAM forces. C. Cu cluster ML potential using SOAP We assessed the accuracy of the Cu cluster model fit by predicting the total potential energies of 2 000 Cu test clusters and comparing to EAM energies. Fig. 6a shows the results of this comparison. The absolute error of the ML model predictions is only 0.43 meV/atom on average. Next, we tested the force prediction accuracy of the ML model by comparing the ML predicted atomic forces of the same 2 000 Cu clusters to the EAM forces. Fig. 6b depicts atomic force components computed with both methods. The mean absolute error of the predictions is 43 meV/ МҠA. By combining the SOAP descriptor with a simple neu- ral network architecture, we were able achieve good ac- curacy in both energy and force prediction. Here, we trained the ML model on classical MD data for demon- strative purposes, and no speed up was achieved. The same methodology, however, could be applied on data from a more accurate method, such as DFT, in which it would greatly accelerate simulations. V. CONCLUSIONS We have presented an update of the DScribe package. We have introduced a new structural representation, ex- panding DScribeвҖҷs descriptor selection. Additionally, we have extended the capabilities of DScribe by implement- ing descriptor derivatives. We have compared the accu- racy of our numerical derivative implementation to ana- lytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives, and observe rela- tive errors of less than 10вҲ’6. We have also demonstrated the effectiveness of the analytical derivative implementa- tions through two machine learning tasks involving force prediction and structure optimization. Our results show that our derivative implementations are accurate and ef- fective, and we believe that the new version of DScribe will be a valuable tool for researchers applying machine learning to materials science problems. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See supplementary material for the detailed derivation of the analytical MBTR and SOAP derivatives. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge funding from the European UnionвҖҷs Horizon program under the grant agreement No 951786 and the Academy of Finland through project No 334532 and the Center of Excellence Virtual Laboratory for Molecular Level Atmospheric Transformations (VILMA; project No 346377). We further acknowledge CSC-IT Center for Science, Finland, and the Aalto Science-IT project.