Cavitation cloud formation and surface damage of a model stone in a high-intensity focused ultrasound field Luc Biasiori-Poulanges and Outi Supponen∗ ETH Zurich, Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, Institute of Fluid Dynamics, Sonneggstrasse 3, Zurich 8092, Switzerland Bratislav Luki ́c European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, CS 40220, Grenoble F-38043, France (Dated: September 26, 2023) This work investigates the fundamental role of cavitation bubble clouds in stone comminution by focused ultrasound. The fragmentation of stones by ultrasound has applications in medical lithotripsy for the comminution of kidney stones or gall stones, where their fragmentation is widely assumed to result from the high acoustic wave energy. However, high-intensity ultrasound can generate cavitation which is known to contribute to erosion as well and to cause damage away from the target, although the exact contribution of cavitation remains currently unclear. Based on in- situ experimental observations, post-mortem microtomography and acoustic simulations, the present work sheds light on the fundamental role of cavitation bubbles in the stone surface fragmentation by correlating the detected damages to the observed bubble activity. Our results show that not all clouds erode the stone, but only those located in preferential nucleation sites whose locations are herein examined. Furthermore, quantitative characterizations of the bubble clouds and their trajectories within the ultrasonic field are discussed. These include experiments with and without the presence of a model stone in the acoustic path length. Finally, the optimal stone-to-source distance maximizing the cavitation-induced surface damage area has been determined. Assuming the pressure magnitude within the focal region to exceed the cavitation pressure threshold, this location does not correspond to the acoustic focus, where the pressure is maximal, but rather to the region where the acoustic beam and thereby the acoustic cavitation activity near the stone surface is the widest. I. INTRODUCTION Lithotripsy is a non-invasive clinical therapy for nephro- and ureterolithiasis , which consists in the fragmentation of renal and ureteric calculi when exposed to a strong external pressure, such as pulsed shocks as used in extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) [3–6]. The ability of such high-amplitude pulses to fragment stones is believed to be attributed to both the high wave energy and the generation of cavitation bubbles [7–10]. However, given that the cavitation bub- bles are induced by the shock wave, dissociating the con- tribution of the wave energy itself from that of the in- duced vapor bubbles is particularly complicated. In the absence of direct evidence, no consensus has yet been found and the exact physical mechanism resulting in the stone comminution remains unclear. Based on the large amount of work reporting on cavitation-induced damage for decades [4, 11–15], the role of cavitation bubbles in lithotripsy is supposed as follows. Upon exposure to the negative phase of the pulsed shock wave (i.e., the ten- sile component), cavitation bubbles are formed near the stone surface. These bubbles then scatter and absorb the energy of the subsequent pulses until they violently col- lapse. The collapse of individual bubbles initiates a high- speed jet, which develops towards neighbouring bound- ∗ Correspondence email address: outis@ethz.ch aries, that is, in the direction of the stone. The collapse of cavitation bubbles are known to produce shock waves and jets , which both exhibit a high cavitation dam- age potential and are suspected to erode the calculus dur- ing lithotripsy treatments, potentially contributing to the complete ablation of the stone . This belief is further supported by past reports that the damage potential of a lithotripter shock wave on an artificial kidney stone is reduced in degassed water that contains fewer cavitation nuclei compared to a gas-saturated medium . Further- more, another study demonstrated the role of cavitation by applying a two-frequency ultrasound waveform specif- ically designed to amplify the ultrasound-induced cavita- tion bubble cloud collapse, which was found to enhance the stone erosion . Laser-induced cavitation relevant for intracorporeal laser lithotripsy , and especially the shock waves emitted from the asymmetric collapse of the large cavitation bubble , has been demonstrated to represent the major damage mechanism for the model stone instead of photothermal ablation from the laser. Despite these recent advancements and knowledge on the various relevant cavitation-induced mechanisms, which have been extensively reviewed in the context of ESWL in ref. , the exact damage contribution of bubble clouds typical for focused sound waves such as shock waves or HIFU remains challenging to quantify. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy has been shown to result in strong side effects such as the erosion of the healthy neighboring tissues or hemorrhage . In the attempt to limit these injurious adverse effects, arXiv:2304.12091v2 [physics.app-ph] 25 Sep 2023 2 by reducing the source energy, high-intensity focused ultrasound-based lithotripsy has recently been proposed as an alternative method to ESWL [18, 25–30]. It can damage the stone with long bursts of lower-amplitude sound waves compared to ESWL. However, it has been shown that the size of the cavitation bubble cloud gen- erated is in the order of the incident pressure wave- length . Consequently, the cloud strongly scatters the acoustic beam which results in the energy shielding of the stone. This reduces the stone exposure to the incident radiation and so the stone comminution efficiency. This work investigates the fundamental role of cavi- tation bubble clouds in the stone fragmentation through laboratory-scale experiments using a focusing ultrasound transducer and acoustic numerical simulations. We first describe the bubble cloud formation, properties and tra- jectories in the absence of a stone in the acoustic path. We then position a model stone in the focal region of the transducer and characterize its effect on the cloud prop- agation. Observing surface fragmentation and damages at the proximal region of the stone, we eventually cor- relate the reported damages to the bubble activity, and therefore directly evidence the role of bubble cloud in the stone surface fragmentation. Finally, we discuss the optimal source-to-stone distance to maximize the surface damage. II. METHODS The role of cavitation bubbles on the stone fragmenta- tion is addressed by means of experimental observations as well as time-domain acoustic simulations using a k- space pseudospectral method. In this work, results are discussed based on dimension- less parameters. The axial and radial coordinates z and r of the pressure field are normalized by the theoretical acoustic focus γf and the full width at half maximum of the ellipsoidal focal region l1, respectively. Unless other- wise specified, the non-dimensionalization of the pressure magnitude p is done by using the maximum pressure, max{p}, which is the pressure at the acoustic focus. The resulting change in variables is z∗ = z γf , r∗ = r l1 , p∗ = p max{p}, (1) where ( · )∗ denotes a non-dimensional quantity. Approx- imations in the analytical derivation of the acoustic focus with λ being the source wavelength, and a and f the radius and the geometrical focus of the transducer, re- spectively. Details on the analytical derivations used to calculate the theoretical axial coordinate of the physical focal distance γf, which corresponds to the axial coordi- nate of the maximum pressure, are given in Appendix A. A. Experimental set-up A schematic of the experimental set-up is shown in Fig. 1 The high-intensity focused ultrasound (HIFU) field is generated using a single element curved bowl-shaped piezo-ceramic transducer (Precision Acoustics). The nominal central frequency and the acoustic path length are 250 kHz and 67 mm, respectively. The drive signal is generated with an arbitrary wave- form generator (DG1032Z, Rigol) coupled to 200-W radio frequency power amplifier (1020L, Electronics & Innova- tion). The transducer is operated in burst mode where 500 cycles of a sinusoidal signal are applied over a 20- ms period, which corresponds to a 10-% duty cycle. The input voltage is 180 Vpp. The transducer is immersed and centered at the bottom of a square base test cham- ber filled with tap water, which has been here used to increase the cavitation probability. The acoustic radia- tion is directed from bottom to top. The rectangular test chamber is 300 mm × 300 mm × 350 mm and consists in transparent glass walls that allow for optical access. The ultrasound field is measured using a 1-mm piezoelectric needle hydrophone (Precision Acoustics) mounted on a 3- direction micro-translation stage, with the electrical sig- nal recorded by a fast digital oscilloscope (DS1104Z Plus, Rigol). Note that to avoid generating cavitation-induced damages on the hydrophone while measuring the pres- sure field, the transducer has been operated at half the maximum intensity (i.e., 90 Vpp, which corresponds to a peak pressure max{p} ≈ 0.2 MPa.). Note that, in the context of such lab-scale experiments, the HIFU trans- 3 ducer generates relatively weak acoustic waves compared to clinically relevant transducers. However, the acoustic amplitudes suffice to nucleate cavitation in the bulk of the liquid. Model kidney stones are made with BegoStone, which is a superhard plaster composed of Calcium Sulfate Hemihydrate (Ca2H2O9S2), mixed with distilled water to a 15 : 6 weight ratio. The mixture is magnetically stirred during 60 s, before being degassed using a vacuum chamber equipped with a vacuum pump. The mixture is eventually poured into 20-mm-diameter hemispherical silicone moulds where the samples are allowed to cure for 12-24 hours at room temperature. The spherical face of the phantom kidney stones are located at the focal point of the HIFU field and exposed to the incident acoustic beam. The cavitation bubble clouds are imaged with shad- owgraphy recorded with a high-speed camera (Photron Fastcam Nova S12) equipped with a 100 mm f/2.8 2× macro lens (Laowa). The exposure time is 210 ns. The sampling frequency, not constant from one experiment to another, is indicated in the caption of the figures. The backlight illumination is given by a broadband halogen fiber optic illuminator which provides a continuous colli- mated 150-W light operating over the 400-1600 nm range. B. Numerical simulations Acoustic simulations are carried out using the k-Wave MATLAB toolbox, which uses a k-space pseudospectral time domain method to solve the discretized acoustic wave equations in a Cartesian coordinate system. It accounts for a frequency power law absorption of the form α0ωy, where ω is the temporal frequency and α0 is the attenuation coefficient in water that equals to 0.0022 dB/MHzy/cm, with y = 2. The problem is treated in a two-dimensional formulation with axisym- metric conditions. The source is modeled as the injection of mass within the computational domain, where bound- ary conditions account for the tank walls, the hemispher- ical stone (if present) and the concave transducer. This was performed by specifying time-varying source pressure for each grid point meshing the source geometry. The computed pressure field is compared to the ex- perimental measurement in Fig. 2. A very good agree- ment is found between experiments and numerics in both the pressure distribution and amplitude, and the acoustic beam shape near the focus. The geometry of the focal region, near the acoustic focus, is known to shape an elongated ellipsoid with semi-minor, l1, and semi-major axis, l2, given by lk = αkλ(f/2a)k, where l1 is the full width at half maximum of the acoustic beam. Parame- ters α1 and α2 are fitting coefficients that we numerically found to be 1.26 and 8.24, respectively. Comparison of the normalized pressure amplitude measured with the high-speed needle hydrophone (right) against the k-wave numerical simulation (left). C. Influence of the source intensity on the acoustic beam properties As previously mentioned, the pressure field has been experimentally characterized with the transducer run- ning at half of its maximum intensity to prevent cavitation-induced damage on the hydrophone. To eval- uate the change in the acoustic beam shape, it is instruc- tive to evaluate the axial pressure by solving the O’Neil integral , which accounts for the transducer curva- ture and assumes a uniform distribution of the normal vibrational velocity over the transducer surface. 0 1 2 3 4 z⇤ 0 2 4 6 8 10 p/patm 0 2 4 z⇤ 0.0 0.5 1.0 p⇤ Axial pressure computed from the O’Neil integral for normal velocity ranging from 1 to 100 mm/s by step of 10 mm/s. The pressure is normalized to atmospheric pressure patm = 105 Pa. The colormap goes from yellow to dark purple for increasing velocities. The inset plots the corresponding dimensionless axial pressure profiles as defined by Eq. (1). 4 mal velocities ranging from 1 to 100 mm/s by step of 10 mm/s, in both dimensional and dimensionless forms. Not surprisingly, and expected for the pressure magni- tude, it shows no change in the axial pressure profile. The location of the pressure lobes and the focal region remain unchanged. After validation of the numerical simulations against the O’Neil integral solution (Fig. 4), parametric simulations have also demonstrated that l1 and l2 are not affected by the initial transducer intensity. In light of these results, it is assumed that the geometry of the acoustic beam is independent of the intensity of the trans- ducer, while the pressure is not. 0 1 2 3 z∗ 0.0 0.5 1.0 p∗ (circle markers) against the O’Neil integral solution (solid line). III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION In this work, we contribute to elucidating the role of the cavitation bubbles on the calculi fragmentation by correlating the location of the bubble clouds with the ob- servation of the falling stone fragments. To collect the to- tal cloud population in a single experiment which eventu- ally results in the stone surface damage, we compiled time average shadowgraphs by using a minimum intensity pro- jection algorithm (MinIP). The MinIP algorithm consist in selecting pixels of the lowest intensity from every frame f throughout the time sequence to reconstruct a 2-D im- age. The intensity Ir(i, j) of the reconstructed pixel lo- where n is the total number of frames. where 68 frames have been used to compile the recon- structed image of an upward-propagating bubble cloud initially formed from the merging of two subclouds. showing 6 frames out of 68, with a time interval of 333 μs. The sampling frequency is 30 kHz. The framed image on the right- hand side corresponds to the minimum intensity projection (MinIP) of the 68 frames. A. Bubble cloud in a stone-free field We first consider the cavitation nucleation and the propagation of the resulting bubble cloud in the absence of a stone. Figure 6 shows the time history of a bubble cloud over 2 ms of ultrasound excitation. Multiple subclouds (at least five) first cavitate on dif- ferent nucleation sites before merging to form a sin- gle, larger bubble cloud. This latter eventually trav- els upwards, in the direction of the ultrasonic wave. Upon merging, the cloud mostly adopts a spherical shape within a short duration (≈ 10-15 acoustic periods) and then deforms into an umbrella-like shape (see a typical umbrella-shaped cloud on the penultimate frame on the second row in Fig. 6). The umbrella shape consists in a spherical cap with a tail of bubbles. The umbrella shape lasts over 300 acoustic periods before the tail disappears. The remaining spherical cap continues to propagate while expanding its spanwise diameter. It eventually forms a sheet of dispersed bubbles (possibly an annular structure, but shadowgraphs do not allow for an exact description of this final shape). The rise speed of the bubble cloud is constant and found to be 1-1.5 m/s. Both the umbrella shape and the rising speed of the cloud are consistent with the rare previous observations of Ohl et al. Ohl et al. . The underlying physics behind the umbrella shape has not yet been elucidated and, unfortunately, our experi- mental data are not sufficient to address this morphology. It has been hypothesized that the tail below the spher- ical cap is a nucleation site that continuously produces bubbles, which eventually forms a tail by migrating to- wards the head of the cloud. However, the fact the tail suddenly disappears in a region where cavitation is likely to occur while the transducer is still running does not support this hypothesis. Based on acoustic simulations, 5 Time sequence of cavitation bubble cloud in a 250 kHz HIFU field. The first frame corresponds t = 0. The interframe time is 40 μs. we suggest an alternative candidate to explain the um- brella shape. In agreement with previous works , the scattering of the acoustic energy at the interface of a dense, spherical bubble cloud, here modeled as a single bubble, generates aligned pressure lobes as seen in Fig. 7. The envelope of the bubble cloud and the pressure lobes are similar in shape with the umbrella. Assuming that the pressure inside the lobes exceeds the pressure thresh- old for cavitation nucleation (or rather, the tension), an umbrella-like shape cloud could be formed. During the upwards propagation of the cloud, the spherical head of the cloud becomes a sheet of dispersed bubbles that ex- periences a radial expansion, as seen and described in Fig. 6. At this stage, one could suspect the scattering to occur at the interface of the individual bubbles con- stituting the cloud, and not at the cloud interface longer exist. Performing spatially resolved shadowgraphy by means of a long-distance microscope objective (Keyence, VH- Z50L) mounted on the high-speed camera enables to characterize the bubble size distribution and the bub- ence of a spherical bubble cloud, represented by a single bub- ble. ble number density, n, defined as the ratio of number of bubble per unit volume. Figure 8 shows typical distribu- tions observed at two different times: the top graph corre- sponds to the first frame where bubbles are observed (i.e., early stage of the nucleation and bubble cloud formation) and the bottom graph to 1.5 acoustic periods later. Inter- estingly, the bubble size distribution initially has a nega- tive skew with a peak around 150 μm and later becomes bimodal with an additional peak at around 50 μm. This suggests that the first acoustic wave of the ultrasound burst generates vapor bubbles of relatively monodisperse size distribution, and that additional bubbles cavitate when the successive waves reflect at the surface of the initial bubbles. This would also explain the phase shift in the bubble oscillations between different bubbles within the cloud which can be observed in Fig. 6. With regards to the bubble number density computed from the vari- ous imaged clouds, at the early stage before the bimodal distribution shapes, we found n = 32.6 ± 7.3 mm−3. 18 ms of ultrasound excitation using the 250kHz- transducer operating in burst mode at 10% duty cycle (500 cycles, 2 ms). Such reconstructed images illuminate the trajectory traced out by the single bubble clouds. As seen in the red frame, most of the trajectories starts with a dendritic structure drawn by the merging process of the subclouds. The mean rise speed of the hundreds of clouds captured in Fig. 9 is 1.32 m/s. The highest density of clouds is reported near the acoustic focus γf. Inter- estingly, the envelope of the trajectories is a diverging beam which adapts to the shape of the ellipsoidal focal region, as seen in Fig. 2, and where p∗ > 0.46p∗ max (see red dashed lines). This suggests p∗ c ≈ 0.46p∗ max to be the approximate cavitation threshold for the present experi- ments. While we consider positive pressures throughout this study, it should be noted that it is the tensile com- ponent of the ultrasound wave that generates cavitation. 6 25 75 125 175 225 Bubble diameter [μm] 0 1 2 3 4 Frequency 25 75 125 175 225 Bubble diameter [μm] 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Frequency ble cloud nucleating in the focal region. (Top) First frames where bubbles are observed. 75% of the detected volumes have been identified as individual bubbles and used to plot the distribution (22 bubbles). (Bottom) Bubble size distribu- tion 1.5 acoustic periods later. 60% of the detected volumes have been identified as individual bubbles and used to plot the distribution (53 bubbles). iment showing hundreds of ultrasound-driven bubble clouds in a stone-free environment. The camera sampling frequency is 50 kHz. The 250kHz-transducer operated in burst mode at 10% duty cycle (500 cycles, 2 ms). The present projection has been compiled from the first 18 ms. The dashed red lines contours the pressure region where p∗ > p∗ c as extracted from the numerical simulation. B. Bubble cloud near a model stone where the left-hand sides show the initial bubble cloud distribution near the stone surface at t = 0 ms (burst on), and the right-hand sides display the resulting falling stone fragments, after the ultrasound burst is off, for time (a) t = 5 ms and (b) t = 15 ms. The stone diameter is 20 mm with the south-pole located in (r, γf) = (0, 1). The normal projection of the bubble cloud layer on the stone surface shapes a spherical cap whose edge is lo- cated at θb (angle from the vertical axis), so that the cap area reads Ab = 2πR2(1 − cos θb). Similarly, the edge of the normal projection of the falling fragments on the stone surface is located at θd and its area equals Ad = 2πR2(1 − cos θd). Independently of the stone size and z-distance to the transducer, experiments report θb ≈ θd ⇔ Ab ≈ Ad. This suggests that the bubble ham- mers the stone surface by collapsing and jetting against it. an hemispherical stone of 20 mm in diameter 20 μs after the ultrasound burst starts. [(a-b), right panels] Falling fragments of stone captured 4.8 ms and 18.8 ms after the end of the ultrasonic excitation. Furthermore, when plotting the pixel intensity fluctu- ations along the stone surface (see Fig. 11) in both the bubbly and dusty regions, it appears that the polar lo- cation of the bubble clouds matches very well with the location of the clusters of falling fragments. In the discus- sion whether the bubbles contribute, or not, to the stone comminution (in addition to the acoustic energy), this re- sult supports the direct role of cavitation bubbles in the stone fragmentation, at least at the surface erosion level. Speculating on an exclusive contribution of the acoustic wave energy in the stone destruction, one would expect the fragments to form a homogeneous layer rather than the plume structures as observed on the top right image in Fig. 11 and the right image in panels (a) and (b) of Fig. 10. Note that the stone fragments are ejected nor- mal to the stone surface (see the preferential direction 7 of the plume structures), which is consistent with the bubble activity described earlier. One could suspect the bubble hammering to create local pits from where frag- ments are eventually ejected. Furthermore, similarly to cavitation nucleation, the damage area seems to follow more of a thresholding behaviour with pressure rather than direct proportionality that one could expect with direct pressure-induced damage. 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 ✓ [rad] 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 I⇤ 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 ✓ 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ̃I over the polar coordinate θ given in radian. The solid dark line and the red dashed lines have been extracted from the top left and right images, respectively. The left image is 60 μs after the ultrasound burst starts, and the right image is 23.6 ms later. Intensity fluctuations result from bubbles or stone fragments along the optical path. However, comparing the bubble cloud density captured in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10, much fewer clouds are generated in the presence of a stone, and the few clouds generated do not shape the ellipsoidal profile of the focal region as previously observed (where p∗ > p∗ c). To investigate such discrepancies, acoustic simulations are performed and results compared against the experimental obser- vations. field with a half-sphere stone. The computed acoustic pressure field shows that the stone scatters the incom- ing wave which prevents the formation of the ellipsoidal focal region, but instead creates a pattern consisting in pressure lobes. The pressure pattern thus results in suc- cessive high pressure layers whose magnitude decreases with z. The pressure regions where p∗ > p∗ c are con- toured using dark dashed lines. A direct comparison with the experimental shadowgraphs, compiled using the MinIP-algorithm, shows that the cloud nucleation sites are located within these regions. This latter is consis- tent with observations provided on Fig. 9. Figure 12 also shows that only clouds that nucleate within the Π1 high- pressure region, attached to the stone surface, eventually reach the stone surface and are able to generate damage. Clouds that cavitate in the isolated high-pressure regions further away from the stone (Π2-region) are trapped in the acoustic field in-between the high-pressure Π1 and Π2-regions. Bubbles in between the Π1 and the Π2 re- gion result from translation, not nucleation. Note that, in the following, we denote θp the edge of the spherical cap formed by the normal projection of the Π1-region on the stone surface and Ap its area, which equals to 2πR2(1 − cos θp). Comparison of the pressure field computed from the acoustic simulations against the MinIp-compiled shadow- graph of the corresponding experiment run over one burst. The stone is a 20-mm diameter hemisphere. Regions Π1 and Π2 locate the high-pressure regions where the pressure cavi- tation threshold is reached, p∗ > p∗ c. trajectory of bubble clouds that initially nucleate in the Π2-region. Upon turning on the ultrasonic excitation, four subclouds are generated (we refer to these subclouds as Bi with i = 1, 2, 3, 4). Subclouds B1 and B2 first merge to form B12, which eventually merges with B3 around time t/τa = 0.45, where τa is the acoustic period, and forms B123. This merged cloud propagates towards B4 and meets it around t/τa = 0.75. In the end, for time 0.75 < t/τa < 1.0, a single cloud resulting from the four subclouds remains. According to both the x and z- location, this latter cloud stagnates in the acoustic field, that is, its translational motion is zero. This behavior is characteristic of the presence of a stone in the acoustic path. The incident beam is reflected at the stone sur- face. The reflected wave superposes with the incident wave, which creates a standing wave. The bubble cloud generated within the standing wave thus propagates to- wards nodes where they are trapped, i.e., they levitate. We observe that when clouds cavitate sufficiently far from the stone surface, they first stagnate in the acoustic field before travelling in the opposite direction of the stone. This corresponds to the very short time when no more 8 incident waves propagate but the reflected wave is still established. Figure 13 (right-hand side, top and bottom) shows the trajectory of a bubble cloud in the absence of a stone. Upon total merging of the subclouds, and under the action of the primary Bjerknes forces (acoustic radi- ation forces, i.e., translational force resulting from the non-zero time-averaged acoustic pressure gradient due to the volumetric bubble oscillations ), the merged bubble cloud follows a linear trajectory with constant speed (vertical speed, uz ≈ 1.57 m/s). Note that we as- sume that gravity plays no role, as well as the acoustic streaming . By contrast, the rising speed of B4 for t/τa ∈ [0, 0.5] is uz ≈ 2.70 m/s, which is 2.05 more than the mean speed computed from Fig. 9. Rise speeds of the Bi clouds are given in Table I. 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 t/⌧a 0.90 0.92 0.94 z/γf 0.0 0.5 1.0 t/⌧a B2 B1 B3 B4 B4 B3 B2 B1 B4 B123 B123 Trajectory of bubble clouds along the x and z- direction as time proceeds. The physical time is normalized by the acoustic period τa. The two left graphs correspond to experiments with a stone, and the two right plots corre- spond to bubble clouds propagating in a stone-free environ- ment. The Bi with i = 1, 2, 3, 4 refer to the initial subclouds. The cloud denoted B123 is formed from the merging of B1, B2 and B3. tom left plot in Fig. 13. B1234 stands for the ultimate bubble cloud after total merging of all subclouds. The dimensionless speed u∗ z is defined as uz normalized to the mean rise speed computed from Fig. 9. B4 B4 B4 B4 uz (m/s) 0.92 1.02 0.39 2.07 0.019 u∗ z (−) To assess the phenomenology derived from the com- parison given with Fig. 12, we performed a similar simu- lation using a stone with a flat surface, as well as the cor- Comparison of the pressure field computed from the acoustic simulations against the MinIp-compiled shadow- graph of the corresponding experiment run over one ultra- sound burst. The stone has a flat surface of 35-mm side length. Again, regions Π1 and Π2 locate the high-pressure regions where p∗ > p∗ c. responding experiment. Figure 14 shows the comparison of the results. One can observe that only a few bubbles occasionally translate in-between the Π1 and Π2-regions, while hundreds of clouds are captured within these two domains. This indicates that no bubbles nucleate in this low-pressure region nor propagate through, which tends to confirm the phenomenology suggested earlier. C. Prediction of the optimum source-to-object distance In the context of lithotripsy, maximizing the surface damage on the stone surface is of primary interest. Based on the previous observations that the damage happens in the area where cavitation nucleates near the stone, maxi- mizing the damage area would consist in maximizing the spanwise diameter of the Π1-region, which corresponds to the stagnation pressure region. This is achievable by optimizing the source-to-object distance. Based on the theoretical prediction of the on-axis pressure generated by the transducer, given by the O’Neil integral solution, and remembering that the pressure induced by the reflec- tion at a boundary reads pr = 2piI2/(I1 +I2) , where pi is the incident pressure and I1 and I2 are the acoustic impedance of water and the stone, respectively, one can predict the on-axis pressure of the reflected wave. Fig- ure 15 plots the O’Neil integral solution (thick solid line) compared with the theoretical and the numerical pr solu- tions (thick dashed line and circle markers, respectively), and displays a good agreement between the theoretical prediction and the numerics. In addition, it reveals that 9 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 z/γf 0 1 2 3 p/pc 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 A⇤ i2 A⇤ 1 A⇤ 2 A⇤ 3 sure threshold, and surface damage coefficients over the z- direction. Surface damage coefficients are defined with Ta- ble II. The thick solid line corresponds to the O’Neil integral solutions, and the thick dashed line is the theoretical reflected pressure at stone surface. The circle markers shows the sim- ulated reflected pressure. The dotted-dashed line is the geo- metrical focal distance. The dotted line plots the cavitation pressure threshold. even the precursor pressure lobes in the incident pres- sure profile (e.g., at z/γf = 0.5) are likely to generate, upon reflection at the stone surface, high-pressure regions where cavitation may occur. In the following, we compare three surface damage co- efficients, A∗ i∈, representing the relative surface ar- eas for i) pressure beyond the threshold pressure com- puted numerically, ii) cavitation bubble nucleation visible from shadowgraphs and iii) surface damage determined from X-ray tomography. The tomograph is obtained us- ing synchrotron X-rays and an example plane is shown in Fig. 16, while details on the methodology are provided in Appendix A. The exact definitions for each coefficient are provided in Table II where A0 is the initial area of the exposed surface of the stone (= πR2/2). Figure 15 pending on the method: (i) acoustic numerical simulation, (ii) experimental shadowgraph, and (iii) the experimental to- mograph. Method A∗ i∈ Definition Numerics A∗ 1 Ap/A0 = 4(1 − cos θp) Shadowgraphs A∗ 2 Ab/A0 = 4(1 − cos θb) Tomographs A∗ 3 Ad/A0 = 4(1 − cos θd) plots the A∗ i∈ in direct comparison with the theoret- ically and numerically computed pressure fields. Despite a single tomography-based measurement of the surface damage, the A∗ 1, A∗ 2 and A∗ 3 coefficients are found to be in very good agreement. This result indirectly evidences the contribution of cavitation bubbles in the stone surface erosion. In addition, the variation of A∗ 1 and A∗ 2 along the transducer axis shows that the optimum source-to- object distance, z+, to maximize the stone surface dam- mal pole of a 20-mm diameter hemispherical model stone after being exposed to focused ultrasound. The 250kHz-transducer was operated in burst mode at 10% duty cycle (500 cycles, 2 ms) during 2 s. The tomography has been performed at the beamline ID19 of the European Synchrotron Research Facil- ity. Additional details on the optical alignment of the tomo- graph are given in Appendix A. age area is located in γf + l2/2. This corresponds to the center of the ellipsoidal focal region in the z-direction. While intuitive, this optimum distance is only true if pr(z = γf + l2/2) > pc. To be more general, the opti- mum distance ranges as γf < z+ < γf + l2/2 depending on the magnitude of the incident pressure field. More specifically, � z+ = γf if pi(γf) = pc, z+ = γf + l2/2 if pi(γf + l2/2) ≥ pc. (2) It should be noted that this corresponds to the opti- mum for the damage area. What is not investigated here is the damage depth and the contribution to the final fracture of the entire stone, which should be addressed in future studies. D. Discussion on implications The presented results shed light on the location and extent of cavitation activity generated by a laboratory- scale HIFU transducer both in the bulk as well as in the 10 presence of a model stone. It should be noted that nucle- ation characteristics in both scenarios are highly sensi- tive to parameters that we do not systematically control in this study, such as fluid and surface properties. Here we use tap water of which the relatively high level of air saturation and impurity content facilitate cavitation nu- cleation. On the other hand, the nucleation of cavities on the surface of the model stone depends on the surface mi- crogeometry and the state of wetting. Nonetheless, what we learn from the presented results on the fundamental physics of acoustic cavitation are i) how nucleation lo- cations, trajectories and cloud characteristics in focused acoustic fields are linked to the acoustic pressure fields, as demonstrated both within the bulk and in the presence of two differently shaped acoustically reflective objects, and ii) insights to explain the evolution of the bubble cloud shapes, such as the umbrella and cloud shapes as well as changes in bubble size distribution within the cloud. What we have learned with respect to the contribution of cavitation bubble clouds on the model stone damage, on the other hand, is that the area of the surface with ob- servable erosion, which is measured both through visual observations of fragments and X-ray tomography quan- tifying the material removal, closely correlates with the visualised cavitation activity, even when the cavitation bubbles are not directly attached to the stone surface (see Figure 11). The mechanisms in play may, however, differ from the stronger acoustic fields associated to the full-scale medical lithotripters where a full layer of vapor bubbles may cover the entire stone surface. This layer is believed to be responsible for the main stone damage but also shields off subsequent acoustic cycles. However, these findings can be valuable in the effort to understand scaling effects when considering cavitation contributions in acoustic fields produced by full-scale transducers rel- evant for medical lithotripsy. Furthermore, the implica- tions of our results for the cavitation bubble clouds in the bulk may be useful in histotripsy (where HIFU is used to make surgical cuts in biological tissue) or other applications using focused ultrasound to produce cavita- tion bubble clouds in different media where the control of their characteristics is desired. IV. CONCLUSION We investigated the formation and role of cavitation bubble clouds in the surface damage of a model stone in a lab-scale high-intensity focused ultrasound field. We first described the bubble cloud properties and trajec- tories in a stone-free bulk liquid. In agreement with previously published work, we observed umbrella-shaped clouds propagating upwards at a constant mean speed of 1.5 m/s. We complemented these results with original findings on the size distribution and bubble number den- sity. The size distribution initially exhibits a single peak around 150 μm for an approximate mean number density of n = 33 mm−3. The bubble size distribution change for a bimodal profile with peaks at 50 and 150 μm, sug- gesting that secondary cavitation bubbles appeared upon reflection of the acoustic wave at the surface of the initial bubbles. Experimental observations also show that the cloud trajectories adopt the acoustic beam shape, thus diverging in the south pole of the acoustic focal region. Combining experimental and numerical results, we spec- ulated the umbrella shape to be related to the scatter- ing of the acoustic energy at the bubble cloud interface. However, significant research efforts are still required to confirm this hypothesis. Positioning a model stone in the focal region of the transducer, we correlated the bubble activity of the dam- ages reported at the stone surface. We demonstrated that the location of the fragments captured with shad- owgraphs, and the surface erosion observed from to- mographs, matches with the bubble-stone contact sites. Based on acoustic simulations and direct comparison against experimental observations, we identified the nu- cleation sites which contribute to the stone erosion. We eventually defined three surface damage coefficients to evaluate the optimum source-to-object distance, z+, which, depending on the pressure magnitude, has been found to range from γf to γf + l2/2. Future works would now consists to extend such an analysis to transducers and lithotripters with acoustic amplitudes and energies that are directly relevant to the respective applications, and to consider model stones with relevance in terms of geometry, structures and com- position. The relation between surface damages and damage depth, over cycles, is of major interest and still requires research efforts. Also, the transition from sur- face damages to cracks and break-up should be addressed to assess the efficiency of the different ultrasound-based stone-breaking techniques.