Tunneling spectra of impurity states in unconventional superconductors P. O. Sukhachov,1, вҲ— Felix von Oppen,2 and L. I. Glazman1 1Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA 2Dahlem Center for Complex Quantum Systems and Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universit МҲat Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany (Dated: July 10, 2023) We investigate the role of the Bloch functions and superconducting gap symmetries on the for- mation and properties of impurity-induced resonances in a two-dimensional superconductor, and elucidate their manifestation in scanning tunneling spectra. We use and extend a recently de- veloped scattering approach, conveniently formulating the results in terms of the phase shifts of electron scattering off the impurity. We find that the discrete subgap states in a nodeless-gap super- conductor are insensitive to the potential scattering phase shift (common for the two spin species) if time-reversal symmetry (TRS) is preserved. The independence of potential scattering is exact for s-wave superconductors. It remains an accurate approximation over a broad range of subgap energies when the gap function breaks the lattice point symmetry, except for a narrow region below the gap edge. Breaking of TRS makes potential scattering capable of creating spin-degenerate sub- gap states, which may be further split by spin-dependent scattering. In nodal-gap superconductors, impurity-induced resonances are broadened by coupling to the quasiparticle continuum. We identify the conditions allowing for the formation of narrow resonances. In addition to finding the energy spectrum, we evaluate the spin-resolved differential conductance for all of the considered symmetries and gap structures. I. INTRODUCTION Since its invention in 1982 , scanning tunneling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) has developed into an important tool for investigating properties of a wide range of materials, including conventional and unconven- tional superconductors . By applying a voltage bias between tip and superconductor, a tunneling current is measured and translated into a differential conductance. In the weak tunneling regime when the tip is away from the sample, the differential conductance quantifies the density of states (DOS) of the superconductor, provided that the tipвҖҷs DOS is featureless. While a U-shaped profile of the differential conductance is a signature of a nodeless gap as in conventional s-wave superconduc- tors, a V-shaped profile is widely attributed to a nodal superconducting gap as, e.g., in d-wave superconductors. The observation of a V-shaped differential conductance was used to claim unconventional pairing in high-Tc su- perconductors such as, e.g., Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ and YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ . Recently, there has been a new surge of interest in unconventional superconductors related to the experi- mental realization of moir МҒe heterostructures; see Ref. for a review. In particular, superconductivity was re- ported in twisted bilayer (TBG), trilayer (TTG), and multilayer graphene [8вҖ“15]. STS experiments on TBG and TTG observed a V-shaped profile of the differential conductance in the weak tunneling regime. Combined with an enhanced low-bias conductance in the strong-tunneling regime , this was interpreted as a signature of nodal superconductivity. The greater tun- вҲ— pavlo.sukhachov@yale.edu ability of TBG and TTG compared to high-Tc supercon- ductors makes moir МҒe heterostructures a promising plat- form for investigating unconventional superconductivity. A complete understanding of the symmetry of the su- perconducting gap in TBG and TTG, however, remains elusive. Signatures of the symmetry of the superconducting or- der parameter are also provided by investigating how the local density of states (LDOS) is modified by defects or impurities; see Refs. for reviews. Scattering off an impurity may result in the appearance of narrow peaks in the differential conductance as a function of the ap- plied voltage bias, indicative of bound states within a nodeless gap and resonances within a nodal gap. For s-wave superconductors, bound states are induced only by scattering potentials that break time-reversal symme- try (TRS) and are known as Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states [18вҖ“21]. Such a TRS-breaking potential is induced, e.g., by magnetic adatoms, and the corresponding YSR states were probed in Refs. [22вҖ“25]; see also Ref. for a review. Unlike YSR states, resonances in nodal gaps do not necessarily require a TRS-breaking scattering po- tential [27вҖ“30] and can be seen as asymmetric peaks in the conductance . Information on the symmetry of the gap can also be gleaned from the LDOS pattern around the impurity; see, e.g., Refs. for a theoreti- cal analysis. A four-fold impurity-induced LDOS pattern aligned with the nodes of a d-wave superconducting gap was observed via STM in Refs. . In addition to the symmetry of the gap, the spatial profile of a YSR state may also provide information about the shape of the Fermi surface as was exemplified for an s-wave su- perconductor in Ref. . Theoretically, the formation of impurity states in su- perconductors is typically studied by directly solving the Bogoliubov-de Gennes equations , applying the arXiv:2304.06069v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 10 Jul 2023 2 T-matrix formalism , or using the numeri- cal renormalization group . While being power- ful, these approaches can be cumbersome and, for the most part, do not take the structure of the Bloch func- tions into account. Recently, we proposed an alterna- tive approach to the differential conductance in an STM setting . Our method employs the scattering ma- trix formalism to describe point-contact tunneling into a superconductor, accounting for arbitrary symmetries of the gap and the Bloch functions as well as arbitrary transmission coefficients between tip and superconduc- tor. Scattering theory accounts for the single-particle and Andreev-reflection contributions to the conductance in a unified and intuitive way. An additional benefit of the scattering framework is that it readily accounts for the scattering potential induced by the tip through the appropriate phase of the contactвҖҷs scattering matrix. In this work, we apply and extend this framework to describe impurity-induced subgap states and reso- nances in superconductors. Considering two-dimensional (2D) superconductors, we focus on the role of the sym- metries of the superconducting order parameter and of the Bloch functions. To this end, we extend the frame- work of Ref. to scattering off an impurity with arbi- trary scattering potential, as described in terms of phase shifts, while remaining in the regime of weak tunnel- ing between STM tip and superconductor. For nodeless gaps preserving TRS and lattice point symmetry, the en- ergy of YSR states depends only on the spin-dependent scattering phase. This independence on the potential- scattering phase shift becomes approximate but still ac- curate in a broad subgap energy range for superconduc- tors breaking the point symmetry. Deviations appear near the gap edges, where the potential-scattering phase shift affects the nucleation of subgap states. In a su- perconductor with broken TRS, potential scattering can induce spin-degenerate subgap states. The spin degener- acy is lifted when the scattering phase shifts become spin dependent. Resonance states in nodal-gap superconduc- tors exist for any type of scattering but are broadened by the statesвҖҷ вҖңleakageвҖқ into the quasiparticle continuum. If the nodal gap preserves the lattice point symmetry, the resonances are narrow and located near the Fermi level for strong scattering. In the absence of the point sym- metry, the appearance of low-energy resonances requires fine-tuning. Along with the energy spectrum of the res- onances, we evaluate the spin-resolved differential con- ductance for all of the considered symmetries and gaps. While the energies of the resonances are always particle- hole symmetric, their strengths as manifested in the peak heights in the differential conductance develop strong asymmetry for nodal gaps. This asymmetry is explained by the difference between the conductance determined by the full scattering amplitudes and the particle-hole- symmetric density of energy levels. Thus, our results pro- vide complementary information about the symmetry of the gap and the Bloch functions as well as the properties of the impurity. Experimentally, the spin-resolved dif- ferential conductance can be mapped via spin-polarized STM/STS ; see also Ref. for a review of the technique. This paper is organized as follows. We present the ex- tended scattering framework in Sec. II. The bound states for nodeless gaps are analyzed in Sec. III for several sym- metries of the gap. Section IV is devoted to resonance states in nodal-gap superconductors. The results are summarized and discussed in Sec. V. Technical details of the derivation of scattering amplitudes and approxi- mate results for low-energy states are given in Appen- dices A and B, respectively. The dispersion relation of the bound states in a fully-gapped dx2вҲ’y2+idxy supercon- ductor and the differential conductance for above-gap en- ergies are presented in Appendices C and D, respectively. Throughout this paper, we assume zero temperature. II. SCATTERING THEORY FOR STS SPECTRA The hybridization of impurity atom and substrate elec- trons introduces both exchange and potential scatter- ing. Placing the tip above the impurity, the impurity spin is further hybridized with the tip electrons. A Schrieffer-Wolff transformation eliminating empty and doubly-occupied impurity orbitals leads to the effective coupling Hint = пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ Оұ,ОІ ПҲвҖ  Оұ,k,Пғ[VОұОІОҙПғПғвҖІ + JОұОІS В· sПғПғвҖІ]ПҲОІ,kвҖІ,ПғвҖІ. (1) Here, Оұ, ОІ вҲҲ {L, R} refer to the tip (L) and the substrate (R) electrons, Пғ =вҶ‘, вҶ“ denotes the spin projections, s is the electron spin operator, and ПҲОұ,k,Пғ annihilates an electron in the lead Оұ, with the momentum k, and the spin Пғ. The first term involving VОұОІ represents potential coupling, the second term involving JОұОІ is the exchange coupling with the impurity spin S. We treat the impurity spin as classical, S = SЛҶz . Then, for each spin polarization Пғ, the tip-substrate con- tact can be described by a two-channel scattering matrix, with one channel in the tip and the other in the substrate, ЛҶsПғ(Оө) = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ sвҖІ Пғ(Оө) tвҖІ Пғ(Оө) tПғ(Оө) sПғ(Оө) пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё . (2) In writing Eq. (2), we used the locality of the contact between the tip and the 2D material, so that the contact can be considered as a single-mode quantum point con- tact opening into the 2D material. The impurity-induced formation of YSR states or resonances results from the scattering matrix element sПғ(Оө) describing scattering be- tween in- and outgoing particle waves in the 2D system. The transmission matrix elements tвҖІ Пғ(Оө) and tПғ(Оө) deter- mine the transfer rates from the tip into the superconduc- tor and vice versa. Finally, the scattering matrix element 3 sвҖІ Пғ(Оө) at energy Оө describes reflection between incoming and outgoing channels modeling the STM tip. In the absence of tunneling, scattering within the 2D material has |sПғ(Оө)| = 1, but the phase of sПғ(Оө) is non- trivial due to electron scattering off the impurity. For a point-like impurity, these properties are encoded in the scattering phases ОҙПғ, which are in general dependent on the spin direction Пғ due to the exchange coupling , tan ОҙПғ = вҲ’ПҖОҪ0 (VRR вҲ’ ПғJRRS) . (3) Here ОҪ0 is the normal-state DOS at the Fermi level. It will be useful to introduce the scattering phase shifts Оҙs = ОҙвҶ‘вҲ’ОҙвҶ“ and Оҙc = ОҙвҶ‘+ОҙвҶ“, where Оҙs describes spin-dependent and Оҙc potential scattering by the impurity. These phase shifts are related, respectively, to the spin and charge of the impurity by the Friedel sum rule; Оҙs вҲҲ [вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ], Оҙc вҲҲ [0, 2ПҖ]. Electron tunneling into the tip reduces the scattering rections вҲқ |tПғ(Оө)|2 into the scattering phases ОҙПғ. We as- sume that tunneling and image potential induced by the STM tip lead only to weak perturbations. Accounting for nonzero values of |tПғ(Оө)|2 is important in the evaluation of the tunneling current, as the latter is вҲқ |tПғ(Оө)|2. Tun- neling also contributes to the width of peaks in tunneling spectra. Such contributions are вҲқ |tПғ(Оө)|2. We will dis- pense, however, with the effect of tunneling on ОҙПғ. The latter effect leads to shifts of the spectral peaks which are of the order of or smaller than the peak widths (for fur- ther discussion of this effect, see Sec. III). We will also disregard possible effects of the image potential, which can be minimized by a proper choice of tip material . For contacts between a normal-metal tip and a 2D su- perconductor, it is convenient to extend the scat- tering matrix (2) to Nambu space by introducing scat- tering matrices for particles, ЛҶsp,Пғ(Оө) = ЛҶsПғ(Оө), and holes, ЛҶsвҲ— h,вҲ’Пғ(вҲ’Оө) = ЛҶsПғ(Оө). Then, by using the particle-hole sym- metry, one can consider only positive energies Оө > 0. In what follows, we neglect the energy dependence of ЛҶsПғ(Оө), assuming it to be featureless on the energy scale of the superconducting gap, (4) As discussed above, at weak tunneling 1 вҲ’ |s0|2 = |t|2 вүӘ 1, the phases ОҙПғ вҲҲ [0, ПҖ] encode the electron scattering off an isolated impurity in a 2D material. Notice that the spin dependence of the scattering matrix can originate from a magnetic impurity or a magnetized tip. Thus, we do not require TRS of the normal state of the contact . For an impurity embedded in a uniform system, sp,Пғ describes scattering in the zero-angular-momentum chan- nel. An incoming wave ПҲin is scattered into the outgoing wave ПҲout = пҝҪ (ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶP) + sp,Пғ ЛҶP пҝҪ ПҲin (5) with ЛҶP being the projector onto zero angular momen- tum. While the zero-angular-momentum component of Schematic setup with an STM tip placed above an impurity in a 2D superconductor. The symmetric blue arrows denote the particle wave emitted by the tip, which carries information about the symmetry of crystalline lattice as encoded in the Bloch function. Asymmetric green arrows represent the Andreev-reflected hole wave that carries infor- mation about the superconducting gap symmetry. Bound- state and resonance formation result from repeated cycles of scattering from superconductor and impurity. the incoming wave is scattered by the contact (term pro- portional to ЛҶP), nonzero angular momenta remain un- affected (term proportional to ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶP). In a 2D crystal, angular momentum is no longer a good quantum num- ber, and the angular distribution at the position r0 of the impurity is governed by the Bloch function uk(r0). The wave vectors k at a given energy Оө are defined by Оҫ(k) = Оө with Оҫ(k) denoting the dispersion relation mea- sured from the Fermi energy. The projection operator then reads ЛҶPПҲin k = uk(r0)вҹЁuвҲ— kвҖІ(r0)ПҲin kвҖІвҹ©Оө (6) with a properly normalized uk(r0) and вҹЁ. . . вҹ©Оө denoting averaging over the constant-energy contour. To study the transport properties of the contact, we generalize the steps outlined in Ref. , where poten- tial scattering off the tip was considered, see Fig. 1 for a schematic setup. We relegate details to App. A and focus on the main line of argument here. In the scatter- ing framework, an electron tunneling into a 2D material forms an expanding particle wave with amplitude and di- rectional profile determined by the Bloch function uk(r0), see the blue arrows in Fig. 1. The superconductor retrore- flects the particle wave into a counter-propagating hole wave that carries information about the symmetry of superconducting order parameter, see the green ar- rows in Fig. 1. Formally, this information enters through the Andreev retroreflection amplitude Оұp(k, Оө). In the eikonal approximation, which is valid when the coher- ence length of the superconductor is large compared to the Fermi wavelength, the Andreev retroreflection ampli- tude Оұp(k, Оө) depends on the superconducting gap вҲҶ(k) at the same wave vector k. This allows us to use the result of Refs. at each k, see Eq. (A2) for the 4 explicit expression for Оұp(k, Оө). Since the tunneling tip absorbs only a small portion of the returning wave, one needs to sum over many cycles in which the impinging particles undergo Andreev scat- tering processes and scatter off the contact. This multi- ple scattering leads to the formation of the YSR bound states or resonances, which are probed by the tip. For a spin-singlet superconductor, the resulting Andreev- and normal-reflection amplitudes of particles incident from the tip are (see Appendix A for details) rph,Пғ = tвҖІ h,вҲ’Пғtp,Пғ ap DПғ , (7) rp,Пғ = sвҖІ p,Пғ + tвҖІ p,Пғtp,Пғ aph + (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ apah пҝҪ DПғ , (8) where we use the notation ap = 1 2i пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶвҲ—(k) пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ Оө , (9) ah = 1 2i пҝҪ пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ Оө , (10) aph = 1 2i пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 пҝҪ Оө пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 вҲ’ i пҝҪпҝҪ Оө . (11) We also introduced the shorthand DПғ = 1 + (2 вҲ’ sp,Пғ вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) aph + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ apah пҝҪ (12) for the denominator arising from multiple scattering of substrate electrons and holes at the impurity. The ana- lytical continuation to Оө > |вҲҶ(k)| is defined as вҲҡвҲ’z = вҲ’i пҝҪ |z| at z > 0. The averaging вҹЁ|uk(r0)|2 . . . вҹ©Оө over the constant-energy contour in Eqs. (9), (10), and (11) takes the explicit form пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 . . . пҝҪ Оө = пҝҪ d2k Оҙ(Оҫ(k) вҲ’ Оө) |uk(r0)|2 . . . пҝҪ d2k Оҙ(Оҫ(k) вҲ’ Оө) |uk(r0)|2 . (13) The scattering amplitudes for holes rhp,Пғ and rh,Пғ are obtained by replacing ap вҶ” ah, sp,Пғ вҶ” sh,Пғ, sвҖІ p,Пғ вҶ” sвҖІ h,Пғ, tp,Пғ вҶ” th,Пғ, and tвҖІ p,Пғ вҶ” tвҖІ h,Пғ in Eqs. (7) and (8). Similar to Ref. , the spin-resolved differential con- ductance GПғ(V, r0) = dIПғ(V, r0)/dV as a function of the voltage bias V , the position of the tip r0, and the spin projection Пғ reads GПғ(V, r0) = GQ пҝҪ 1 + пҝҪ |rph,Пғ(eV, r0)|2 вҲ’ |rp,Пғ(eV, r0)|2пҝҪ Оё(V ) + пҝҪ |rhp,Пғ(вҲ’eV, r0)|2 вҲ’ |rh,Пғ(вҲ’eV, r0)|2пҝҪ Оё(вҲ’V ) пҝҪ . (14) This expression reflects that two electrons are transferred from tip to substrate in an Andreev reflection, while no electrons are transferred for normal reflections. The scat- tering amplitudes in Eqs. (7) and (8) are used for positive voltage bias V > 0; see the discussion after Eq. (13) for the definition of rhp,Пғ(вҲ’eV, r0) and rh,Пғ(вҲ’eV, r0). The conductance quantum is GQ = e2/(2ПҖД§). In the follow- ing, we omit the explicit arguments V and r0 if this does not lead to confusion. The conductance for arbitrary symmetries of the su- perconducting gap and the Bloch functions is straight- forwardly obtained by substituting Eqs. (7)вҖ“(13) into Eq. (14). As the final expressions are cumbersome, we focus on representative analytical results in Secs. III and IV. To facilitate the calculations, we find it convenient to rewrite the square of the absolute value of the scattering amplitudes given in Eqs. (7) and (8) as |rp,Пғ|2 = пҝҪпҝҪвҲ’sвҲ— p,ПғDПғ + |t|2Np,Пғ пҝҪпҝҪ2 |DПғ|2 , |rph,Пғ|2 = |t|4 |ap|2 |DПғ|2 , (15) where we used sвҖІ p,Пғ = вҲ’sвҲ— p,Пғtp,Пғ/(tвҖІ p,Пғ)вҲ— and |tp,Пғ| = |tвҖІ p,Пғ| = |t|, which follow from the unitarity of the scat- tering matrix (2). Similar expressions can be written for the scattering amplitudes of holes |rh,Пғ|2 and |rhp,Пғ|2, see also the replacement rules after Eq. (13). The term in the numerator is Np,Пғ = aph + (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ apah пҝҪ (16) and Nh,Пғ is obtained by replacing sh,вҲ’Пғ вҶ’ sp,вҲ’Пғ. In what follows, we apply this scattering framework to investigate the formation and properties of bound states as well as resonances in the setup, in which the STM tip is placed over the impurity, see also Fig. 1, and discuss the corresponding differential conductance. According to the general tenets of scattering theory , the energies of bound states and resonances correspond to the poles of the scattering amplitudes rph,Пғ and rp,Пғ, which are given in Eqs. (7) and (8), respectively. Moreover, the differential conductance (14) also contains information about the eigenfunctions of the impurity-induced states, which, as we explain in Sec. IV, can have characteristic symmetry properties. We consider the effects of impurity scattering for an ar- bitrary scattering potential in two characteristic regimes: less gaps and (ii) intermediate energies 0 < Оө < вҲҶmax вүЎ ergies Оө > вҲҶmax is briefly addressed in Appendix D.) In each of these regimes, we pay special attention to the role 5 of time-reversal and lattice point symmetries. III. BOUND STATES WITHIN A NODELESS GAP We start by considering nodeless gaps and subgap en- ergies Оө < вҲҶmin. To determine the position of the bound states, we look for zeros of the denominator of the scattering amplitudes, DПғ(Оө) = 0. For subgap ener- gies, it is important to keep terms of first order in |t|2 in the denominator, which determine the width of the peaks in the differential conductance and are thus cru- cial for describing the resonant tunneling into a super- conductor. The zero- and first-order terms in DПғ(Оө) вүҲ eiПғОҙs пҝҪ D(0) Пғ (Оө) + i|t|2D(1) Пғ (Оө) пҝҪ read D(0) пҝҪ IвҲ’(Оө)IвҲ— +(Оө) пҝҪ , (17) D(1) Пғ (Оө) вүҲ 1 2 (cos Оҙs вҲ’ cos Оҙc) пҝҪ Пғ cos Оҙc sin Оҙs вҲ’ I+(Оө) вҲ’ IвҲ’(Оө) 2 (1 вҲ’ cos Оҙc cos Оҙs) пҝҪ , (18) where IВұ(Оө) = пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶ(k) Вұ Оө пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ Оө , (19) and we used the definitions in Eqs. (9)вҖ“(12). It is straightforward to see that ap = вҲ’aвҲ— h = пҝҪ IвҲ— +(Оө) + IвҲ— вҲ’(Оө) пҝҪ For weak tunneling, the contributions to the denom- inator which are first order in |t|2 are relevant only for energies approaching the bound states. The energy of these states is obtained from the characteristic equation D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0. The expression for D(1) Пғ (Оө) was simpli- fied to the form of Eq. (18) assuming that the equa- tion D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 has a real-valued positive solution 0 вүӨ ОөПғ вүӨ вҲҶmin. The spectrum of bound states in the en- tire energy range [вҲ’вҲҶmin, вҲҶmin] follows by particle-hole symmetry, ОөПғ = вҲ’ОөвҲ’Пғ. This justifies restricting our con- siderations to energies Оө > 0. The differential conductance at Оө < вҲҶmin is determined by Andreev reflections with |Оұp,h| = 1 and |rph,Пғ|2 + (14) reads GПғ(V ) = G2 n 8GQ |I+(eV ) + IвҲ’(eV )|2 Г— пҝҪ Оё(V ) |DПғ(eV )|2 + Оё(вҲ’V ) |DвҲ’Пғ(вҲ’eV )|2 пҝҪ , (20) where Gn = GQ|t|2 is the normal-state conductance and |ap|2 = |ah|2 for subgap energies. It is clear from Eq. (20) that for subgap energies GПғ(V ) вҲј G2 n/GQ, unless the spectrum contains a bound state and the bias |eV | approaches the bound-state en- ergy ОөПғ. The conductance GПғ(V ) exhibits Lorentzian peaks at eV = ОөПғ with maxima вҲј GQ and peak widths вҲј (Gn/GQ)|D(1) Пғ (ОөПғ)]вҖІ|. Dispensing with the width, we may simplify Eq. (20) to GПғ(V ) = ПҖ 2 WПғ(|V |)GnвҲҶminОҙ(eV вҲ’ ОөПғ), (21) WПғ(V ) = 1 Пғ (eV )[D(0) Пғ (eV )]вҖІпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҲ’1 . (22) Accounting for вҲқ |t|2 corrections to the scattering phases Оҙs and Оҙc would lead to a small shift вҲқ Gn/GQ in the resonance energy ОөПғ. Below we neglect this small shift and analyze the effects of the gap symmetry on subgap states. A. Subgap states in an s-wave superconductor To set the stage, we consider nodeless gaps that pre- serve the lattice point and time-reversal symmetries. The simplest example is an s-wave gap вҲҶ(k) = вҲҶ > 0. Then IвҲ’(Оө)IвҲ— +(Оө) = 1, as seen from Eq. (19). This condition makes D(0) Пғ (Оө) as defined in Eq. (17) insensitive to Оҙc, which allows us to simplify the characteristic equation D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 to cos Оҙs вҲ’ Пғ sin Оҙs Оө вҲҡ вҲҶ2 вҲ’ Оө2 = 0 , (23) independent of the Bloch functions uk(r0). The solutions of Eq. (23) reproduce the standard expressions for the energy of YSR states [18вҖ“21], ОөПғ = ПғвҲҶ cos Оҙs , Пғ cot Оҙs вүҘ 0. (24) Subgap YSR states appear only if Оҙs Мё= 0 and are spin polarized, which makes them nondegenerate. The energy of the YSR states is oblivious to the scattering phase Оҙc, emphasizing the effectiveness of the scattering-theory for- mulation. One recovers the familiar expression in terms of the coupling strengths VRR and JRR using the relation (3) [18вҖ“21], ОөПғ = ПғвҲҶ 1 вҲ’ Оұ2 + ОІ2 пҝҪ (1 вҲ’ Оұ2 + ОІ2)2 + 4Оұ2 , (25) 6 where Оұ = ПҖОҪ0JRRS and ОІ = ПҖОҪ0VRR. Physically, the spin scattering phase Оҙs depends not only on JRR, but also on VRR, since the scalar potential modifies the wave- function amplitude at the location of the impurity and hence the strength of spin-dependent scattering. The YSR states with different spin projections lead to symmetric peaks of equal weight in the differential conductance. Indeed, by using Eqs. (17), (18), and (19) in Eqs. (21) and (22), we obtain the conductance GПғ(V ) = ПҖ 2 W(|V |)GnвҲҶОҙ(eV вҲ’ ОөПғ), (26) W(V ) = пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (eV )2/вҲҶ2, (27) where the energy of the YSR state is given in Eq. (24) and is extended to negative values as ОөПғ = вҲ’ОөвҲ’Пғ. A nonvanishing conductance in the weak tunneling regime is explained by the resonant Andreev transfer process whereby a particle virtually tunnels into a YSR state and is retroreflected as a hole. This resonantly trans- fers a Cooper pair into the condensate. In view of the particle-hole symmetry of Andreev processes, the cor- responding peaks in the differential conductance have heights and symmetric positions. It is worth mention- ing, however, that the symmetry of the subgap peaks is a delicate question. Many experimental studies show YSR peaks of different heights in the differential spin- averaged conductance . There are also re- ports of peaks with symmetric heights . According to the theoretical analysis in Ref. , see also Eqs. (26) and (27), the subgap peaks in the conductance should be particle-hole symmetric and have the same height as long as inelastic contributions to tunneling are negligible. This was supported in experiment by showing that for a normal-metal tip, the peaks become more symmet- ric as the tip-substrate tunneling increases and Andreev processes become increasingly important. By using Eqs. (24), (26), and (27), we can clearly see the evolution of the YSR peaks with scattering poten- tial. First, we notice that for a given spin projection Пғ, there is only one YSR peak in the conductance. This is explained by the fact that only particles with spin op- posite to that of the impurity form a bound state. (We assume antiferromagnetic exchange between electron and impurity spins.) As the spin scattering phase Оҙs increases from 0 to ПҖ/2, the YSR peak moves from the gap edge eV = вҲҶ to zero energy, eV = 0. A further increase of Оҙs from ПҖ/2 to ПҖ makes the peak cross eV = 0 and reach the other gap edge eV = вҲ’вҲҶ for Оҙs вҶ’ ПҖ. As follows from particle-hole symmetry, the YSR peak in GПғ(V ) with the opposite spin projection moves in the opposite direction, i.e., it emerges at eV = вҲ’вҲҶ, moves to eV = 0, and disappears at eV = вҲҶ. B. Point-symmetry-breaking gaps YSR states in an s-wave superconductor peel off the gap edge at infinitesimally small spin scattering Оҙs, and are independent of Оҙc, see Eq. (24). Modulations of the gap вҲҶ(k) which break the lattice point symmetry make the energy of the YSR states dependent on Оҙc. Further- more, YSR states appear only once the spin scattering phase exceeds a threshold value. As we discuss below, the latter depends on the gap modulation and on Оҙc. To analyze the effect of TRS-preserving gap modula- tion on YSR states, we write the characteristic equation D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0, see Eq. (17), in the form cos Оҙs + cos Оҙc + ПғIвҲ’(Оө) sin Оҙs One can readily see that the solution of Eq. (28) is in- dependent of Оҙc if I+(Оө)IвҲ’(Оө) = 1. This condition is satisfied at any Оө in an s-wave superconductor, yield- ing Eq. (24). It is also satisfied for Оө = 0, regardless of the point symmetry: a zero-energy state appears at Оҙs = ВұПҖ/2. The appearance of zero-energy bound states for Оҙs = ВұПҖ/2 is a universal property of all nodeless TRS- preserving gaps, irrespective of the presence of spa- tial symmetries. Indeed, according to Bohr-Sommerfeld quantization, a bound state emerges when the total phase accumulated during the Andreev scattering cycle is a multiple of 2ПҖ. For a single cycle (see also App. A for a discussion of the scattering processes), one finds the con- dition sp,ПғОұhsh,вҲ’ПғОұp = 1 for the formation of the bound state. At Оө вҶ’ 0, Оұh = Оұp = вҲ’i for any TRS-preserving nodeless gap, see Eq. (A2) for the definition of Оұp,h. In this case, the scattering phase вҲ’ПҖ/2 for each of the An- dreev retroreflections in the cycle is compensated by the phases acquired in the sequence of particle and hole scat- terings off the impurity. A modulation of the gap, вҲҶmin вүӨ вҲҶ(k) вүӨ вҲҶmax, leads to I+(Оө)IвҲ’(Оө) Мё= 1 and a dependence of the YSR state energy on both Оҙs and Оҙc, cf. Eq. (28). We consider the limit of weak modulation, вҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin вүӘ вҲҶmax + вҲҶmin, and dispense with the effect of the Bloch functions in Eq. (19) to illustrate the appearance of a threshold value of Оҙs for YSR-state formation. As Оө вҶ— вҲҶmin, the function I+(Оө) diverges logarithmically, I+(Оө) = 2N пҝҪ вҲҶmin вҲҶвҖІвҖІ min ln пҝҪвҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin вҲҶmin вҲ’ Оө пҝҪ , (29) while IвҲ’(вҲҶmin) вҲј пҝҪ (вҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin)/(вҲҶmax + вҲҶmin) and, therefore, IвҲ’(вҲҶmin) вүӘ 1. Here N is the number of equivalent minima and вҲҶвҖІвҖІ min вҲј (вҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin) is the second derivative of the gap along the line of averaging in вҹЁ. . . вҹ©Оө. The upper cutoff of the logarithmic function in Eq. (29) is defined up to a factor вҲј 1. Keeping terms linear in Оҙs in Eq. (28) and implementing the described simplifications in solving it, we find ln пҝҪвҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin вҲҶmin вҲ’ ОөПғ пҝҪ = пҝҪ вҲҶвҖІвҖІ min/вҲҶmin 2N 1 + cos Оҙc ПғОҙs вҲ’ Оҙth s , (30) Оҙth s = (1 вҲ’ cos Оҙc) IвҲ’(вҲҶmin) . (31) 7 This shows that at any Оҙc Мё= 0, there is a finite threshold Оҙth s for Оҙs, at which a YSR level peels off from the quasi- particle continuum. For a nascent YSR state, the differ- ence вҲҶmin вҲ’ ОөПғ scales exponentially with вҲ’1/(Оҙs вҲ’ Оҙth s ). Using Eqs. (17)вҖ“(22) and (30), it is easy to see that the corresponding conductance peak weight scales as вҲҶmin вҲ’ ОөПғ, and, therefore, is also exponentially small. Accounting for the Bloch functions in Eq. (19) does not alter these conclusions. The threshold value Оҙth s and the value of вҲҶвҖІвҖІ min/вҲҶmin are sensitive to details of the gap function вҲҶ(k). In ad- dition, the range of applicability of Eq. (30) is severely restricted by the requirement that the logarithmic func- tion therein takes large values. Away from the gap edges where Eq. (30) becomes in- applicable, we find that I+(Оө)IвҲ’(Оө)вҲ’1 is small for almost any energy. This makes the normalized energies ОөПғ/вҲҶmin of the YSR levels obtained from the exact characteristic equation (28) almost insensitive to the scattering phase Оҙc and allows us to rewrite Eq. (28) as 2 cos Оҙs вҲ’ Пғ sin Оҙs [I+(Оө) вҲ’ IвҲ’(Оө)] = 0 , (32) cf., Eq. (23) for s-wave gaps. Its low-energy solution is realized at Оҙs вҶ’ ВұПҖ/2 and is similar to that in Eq. (24), albeit with вҲҶ вҶ’ вҹЁвҲҶ(k)вҹ©0. A similar simplification of D(1) Пғ (ОөПғ) shows that remarkably, it also becomes inde- pendent of Оҙc. This allows us to derive a counterpart of Eqs. (26) and (27), GПғ(V ) = ПҖ 2 W(|V |)GnвҲҶminОҙ(eV вҲ’ ОөПғ), (33) W(V ) = 1 2вҲҶmin [I+(eV ) + IвҲ’(eV )]2 пҝҪпҝҪIвҖІ +(eV ) вҲ’ IвҖІ вҲ’(eV ) пҝҪпҝҪ . (34) To illustrate the appearance of YSR states for gaps breaking the lattice point symmetry, we show numeri- cal results for an s + dx2вҲ’y2 superconductor in Fig. 2. In agreement with Eqs. (30) and (31), there is a thresh- old value for the scattering phase Оҙs when Оҙc Мё= 0. The threshold is larger for more anisotropic gaps. The weak sensitivity to the scattering phase Оҙc in a broad en- ergy region excluding near-edge energies is evident from Fig. 2(b), where the inset shows I+(Оө)IвҲ’(Оө) вҲ’ 1. The smallness of the latter explains the insensitivity to Оҙc away from the gap edges. In STS experiments, the bound states are manifested as peaks of the differential conductance. Figure 3(a) il- lustrates this for an impurity creating a state with energy ОөвҶ‘ = 0.9 вҲҶmin. Even for such close proximity to the gap edge, the dependence on the scattering phase Оҙc is weak; it becomes undetectable for energies ОөвҶ‘ вүІ 0.6 вҲҶmin. The anisotropy of the gap has a much larger effect on the conductance, which is evident from the weight of the peaks shown in Fig. 3(b). While the overall shape re- mains parabolic-like, the weight decreases for anisotropic gaps. Indeed, since the scattering phase Оҙc affects only a narrow near-edge region, in the rest of the energy range the weight resembles the result in Eqs. (26) and (27) with вҲҶ вҶ’ вҹЁвҲҶ(k)вҹ©0. C. TRS-broken gaps To investigate the effects of broken TRS in the charac- teristic equation for bound states, we return to Eq. (17) with IВұ(Оө) defined in Eq. (19). Due to particle-hole sym- metry (ОөПғ = вҲ’ОөвҲ’Пғ), we can still constrain the solutions of D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 to the interval [0, вҲҶmin]. In a superconduc- tor with broken TRS, even a potential scatterer (Оҙs = 0) may nucleate a subgap state. Unlike the YSR level, such a state would be spin degenerate, ОөвҶ‘ = ОөвҶ“. The intro- duction of spin-dependent scattering would split it. At small splitting, both nondegenerate levels may fall into the subgap interval. These results follow from Eq. (17). At Оҙs = 0, D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 takes the form 1 + tan2 пҝҪОҙc 2 пҝҪ Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(Оө)IвҲ— +(Оө) пҝҪ = 0 . (35) As in the TRS-preserving case, I+(Оө) diverges at Оө вҶ— вҲҶmin. This divergence is logarithmic for an anisotropic gap (вҲҶmax Мё= вҲҶmin), and carries over to a divergence of Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(Оө)IвҲ— +(Оө) пҝҪ , Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(Оө)IвҲ— +(Оө) пҝҪ = A{вҲҶ(k)} ln пҝҪвҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin вҲҶmin вҲ’ Оө пҝҪ пҝҪ j |ukj(r0)|2 пҝҪ вҲҶmin |вҲҶj|вҖІвҖІ Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(вҲҶmin) пҝҪ 1 + вҲҶвҲ— j вҲҶmin пҝҪпҝҪ , (36) where j labels equivalent gap minima. Here, the absolute value of the coefficient |A{вҲҶ(k)}| вҲј 1, but its sign is sen- sitive to the structure of the gap вҲҶ(k). (We further elab- orate on this at the end of this section). If A{вҲҶ(k)} < 0, a bound state (albeit an exponentially shallow one) ap- pears at arbitrarily weak potential scattering Оҙc вүӘ 1, ln пҝҪвҲҶmax вҲ’ вҲҶmin вҲҶmin вҲ’ ОөПғ пҝҪ = вҲ’ 1 4 Оҙ2c . (37) Similar to the previous section, the weight of the con- ductance peak associated with this bound state scales as вҲҶmin вҲ’ ОөПғ, and therefore is also exponentially small. 8 О”min/О”max=1 О”min/О”max=0.5 О”min/О”max=0.05 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 2Оҙs/ПҖ ОөвҶ‘ О”min Оҙc=ПҖ/2 (a) Оҙc=0 Оҙc=ПҖ/2 Оҙc=ПҖ 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 2Оҙs/ПҖ ОөвҶ‘ О”min О”min/О”max=0.5 0 0.5 1 0 0.1 0.2 Оө/О”min (b) (a) Normalized energy of subgap states ОөвҶ‘/вҲҶmin as a function of Оҙs for a few вҲҶmin/вҲҶmax at Оҙc = ПҖ/2. (b) Normalized energy of subgap states ОөвҶ‘/вҲҶmin as a function of Оҙs for a few Оҙc at вҲҶmin/вҲҶmax = 0.5. The inset shows that I+(Оө)IвҲ’(Оө) вҲ’ 1 remains small away from the gap edge. In both panels, we assume a circular Fermi surface (parametrized by the angle ПҶ), use Dots mark the threshold values of the spin scattering phase Оҙth s required for the subgap states. The horizontal dashed line in (b) denotes the energy of the subgap state fixed in Fig. 3(a). Оҙc=0 Оҙc=ПҖ/2 Оҙc=ПҖ 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 1.00 0 10 20 30 40 eV/О”min GвҶ‘ Gn О”min/О”max=0.5 (a) О”min/О”max=1 О”min/О”max=0.5 О”min/О”max=0.05 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 eV/О”min W Оҙc=0 (b) (a) Normalized conductance as a function of bias voltage for several values of Оҙc at ОөвҶ‘ = 0.9 вҲҶmin as indicated by the of bias voltage for several values of вҲҶmin/вҲҶmax. In all panels, we assume a circular Fermi surface, consider tunneling into a in panel (a) and Оҙc = 0 in panel (b). In the absence of both, TRS and lattice point sym- metry, there is no general rule controlling the sign of A{вҲҶ(k)}, so that a weak potential scatterer may or may not lead to a subgap state. If point symmetry is pre- served and вҲҶ(k) belongs to its nontrivial representation, then there is at least one bound state for any scattering. To demonstrate this, we first note that the terms in IВұ(Оө) stemming from вҲҶ(k) in the numerators of the respective expressions average to zero, see Eq. (19). As a result, пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ Оө . (38) Returning to the notations ОҙвҶ‘ and ОҙвҶ“, we may rewrite the characteristic equation D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 in the form demonstrating the existence of bound states for any scat- tering. In the two special cases Оҙs = 0 and Оҙc = 0, the state (with Оө > 0) is doubly degenerate. The factorized form of Eq. (39) has a symmetry origin: scattering off the impurity occurs only every other cycle of Andreev reflec- tion, which allows a particle (or a hole) return to the zero angular momentum state. At fixed spin, there are no more than two positive-energy solutions of Eq. (39), Оөp Пғ and Оөh Пғ. 9 The eigenfunction of a spin-up (Пғ =вҶ‘) solution Оөp вҶ‘ ob- tained from setting the first factor in Eq. (39) to zero contains an s-wave component of a spin-up particle. The eigenfunction of a spin-up solution Оөh вҶ‘ obtained from set- ting to zero the second factor in Eq. (39) contains an s-wave component of a spin-down hole. The symmetry of the bound-state eigenfunctions makes them invisible in the maximally-symmetric STM setting, which we con- sider here. To detect these states, tunneling should occur at a point off the impurity site. Even then, the spin selec- tion rules may prevent their observation in a tunneling experiment. For example, if Eq. (39) has two spin-up solutions, only one will show up in GвҶ‘(V ). A weak viola- tion of the point group symmetry would lift the selection rule, while weakly affecting the energies of the localized states. Comparing Eq. (35) with the full equation, D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0 [cf. Eqs. (17) and (19)], we see that the splitting of a spin- degenerate level is linear in Оҙs. We illustrate this effect in Fig. 4 for the dx2вҲ’y2+idxy gap вҲҶ(k) = вҲҶmine2iПҶ; see also Appendix C for the exact dispersion relation. Notice that since the differential conductance for a dx2вҲ’y2 +idxy gap vanishes for symmetry reasons, we added a small admix- ture of an s-wave component breaking point symmetry in Fig. 4(b). The weight of the peaks becomes larger at smaller energies, which agrees with the behavior in Fig. 3(b) for TRS-preserving gaps. D. Topology and bound states Before ending our discussion of bound states within a nodeless gap, we comment on the interplay between a superconductorвҖҷs topology and bound states. A cel- ebrated consequence of a materialвҖҷs nontrivial topology is the bulk-boundary correspondence dictating the pres- ence of edge states at interfaces with topologically trivial materials. It was conjectured in Ref. that an im- purity necessarily creates a bound state in a topological TRS-preserving superconductor. A straightforward application of our formalism allows us to check whether this conjecture carries over to TRS- breaking superconductors. The answer is in general neg- ative: Depending on the momentum dependence of the gap вҲҶ(k), a 2D topological superconductor may or may not carry impurity-induced bound states. Below we pro- vide two respective examples. In a superconductor with вҲҶ(k) = вҲҶ0 + вҲҶ1e2iПҶ (exem- plifying an s+dx2вҲ’y2 +idxy gap), the sign of A{вҲҶ(k)} in Eq. (37) and therefore the presence of the subgap states correlate with a nontrivial topological invariant |C|. Here, the topological invariant equals |C| = 2 if |вҲҶ0| < |вҲҶ1| and C = 0 if |вҲҶ0| > |вҲҶ1|; see, e.g., Refs. . This corre- lation is, however, nonuniversal. To demonstrate this, we consider the gap function вҲҶ(ПҶ) = вҲҶ0eвҲ’a cos ПҶei(ПҶвҲ’sin ПҶ), (40) which is topologically nontrivial, but need not support bound states. Here, вҲҶ0 is a dimensionful parameter, while a > 0 is a dimensionless parameter that deter- mines the minimal value of |вҲҶ(ПҶ)|, i.e., вҲҶmin = вҲҶ0eвҲ’a; at a вҶ’ вҲһ, вҲҶmin вҶ’ 0. It is straightforward to check that the Chern number for the gap in Eq. (40) is nontrivial for any value of a. In- deed, assuming the BCS approximation, the Chern num- ber reads C = пҝҪ 2ПҖ 0 dПҶ 4ПҖ пҝҪ вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dОҫ вҲҶ2 0eвҲ’2a cos ПҶ (cos ПҶ вҲ’ 1) (вҲҶ2 0eвҲ’2a cos ПҶ + Оҫ2)3/2 = пҝҪ 2ПҖ 0 dПҶ 2ПҖ (cos ПҶ вҲ’ 1) = вҲ’1, (41) see, e.g., Ref. for details. For a gap that has a single type of minima вҲҶmin, the criterion of the appearance of bound states discussed in Sec. III C, see Eqs. (36) and (37), reduces to the sign of A{вҲҶ(k)}, sgn ( Re {IвҲ’(вҲҶmin)}). Bound states exist if Re {IвҲ’(вҲҶmin)} < 0. By using Eqs. (19) and (40), we obtain Re {IвҲ’(вҲҶmin)} = пҝҪ 2ПҖ 0 dПҶ 2ПҖ eвҲ’a cos ПҶ cos (ПҶ вҲ’ sin ПҶ) вҲ’ eвҲ’a вҲҡ eвҲ’2a cos ПҶ вҲ’ eвҲ’2a . (42) Here, for simplicity, we assumed a circular Fermi sur- face and tunneling into a high-symmetry point with determined by the numerator, cos (ПҶ вҲ’ sin ПҶ) вҲ’ 1 вүӨ 0. Therefore, bound states are allowed for a вҶ’ 0. In the op- posite limit, a вҶ’ вҲһ, we have limaвҶ’вҲһ Re {IвҲ’(вҲҶmin)} = 2ПҖJ1(1) > 0, where Jn(x) is the Bessel function of the first kind. Since Re {IвҲ’(вҲҶmin)} as a function of a changes sign only once at aвӢҶ вүҲ 0.9, bound states disap- pear at a > aвӢҶ. Thus, the gap function (40) provides a counterexample supporting our statement that there is no general relation between the Chern number of the gap and the number of subgap states. IV. RESONANCES IN NODAL-GAP SUPERCONDUCTORS We can also apply our scattering approach to inves- tigate impurity-induced resonances near the Fermi level in nodal-gap superconductors. Such resonances remain narrow as long as their energy is small, Оө вүӘ вҲҶmax. The energies of the resonances, of course, satisfy the particle- hole-symmetry condition. However, the strength of the resonances as manifested in the differential-conductance peak amplitudes develops strong asymmetry. The scat- tering theory, along with the condition Оө вүӘ вҲҶmax, al- lows us to provide an intuitive interpretation of this ef- fect. The asymmetry of the tunneling DOS persists to higher energies , albeit its description becomes more involved. For a nodal gap, the denominator of the scattering amplitudes DПғ(Оө) is a complex-valued function of en- 10 ОөПғ, Оҙs=0 ОөвҶ‘, Оҙs=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 ОөвҶ“, Оҙs=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 2Оҙc/ПҖ ОөПғ О”min О”(ПҶ)=О”mine2iПҶ (a) GПғ, Оҙs=0 GвҶ‘, Оҙs=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 GвҶ“, Оҙs=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 eV/О”min 104Г—GПғ/Gn Оҙc=1.25Г—ПҖ/2 О”min/О”max=0.998 (b) (a) Normalized energy of the subgap states ОөПғ/вҲҶmin as a function of Оҙc for Оҙs = 0 (solid red line) and Оҙs = 0.4 ПҖ/2 (blue and green lines). Spin-dependent scattering splits the spin-degenerate level (red line) into two states ОөвҶ‘ (blue line) and ОөвҶ“ (green line). Dashed lines denote solutions of Eq. (38) with the same spin polarization, see also Appendix C for the exact dispersion relation. (b) Normalized conductance as a function of bias voltage for several values of Оҙs. We fix Оҙc = 1.25 ПҖ/2, see the vertical dashed line in panel (a), and Gn/GQ = 0.05. We assume a circular Fermi surface and tunneling into a high panel (a) and вҲҶmin/вҲҶmax = 0.998 in panel (b). ergy. The poles of the scattering amplitudes, deter- mined by the characteristic equation D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0, shift away from the real axis, implying a finite width of the conductance peaks. This allows us to take the limit |t| вҶ’ 0 in the full expression for DПғ(Оө) and replace it with D(0) Пғ (Оө). At energies Оө вүӘ вҲҶmax, the quasiparticle DOS remains small, leading a parametrically small Im D(0) Пғ (Оө) compared to Re D(0) Пғ (Оө), apart from the vicinity of the poles. Therefore, we can evaluate D(0) Пғ (Оө) iteratively. We first determine the position of the resonances by solv- ing Re D(0) Пғ (Оө) = 0. We subsequently expand Re D(0) Пғ (Оө) around the solutions (Оө = ОөПғ) and evaluate Im D(0) Пғ (ОөПғ). The latter allows us to determine the width О“Пғ of the resonances. In performing the first task, we may still use Eq. (17), after judiciously taking the limit Оө вҶ’ 0. The resulting expression for Re D(0) Пғ (Оө) depends crucially on the pres- ence of lattice point-group symmetry. In its absence, the characteristic equation takes the form cos Оҙs + cos Оҙc + (cos Оҙs вҲ’ cos Оҙc) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶ(k) пҝҪ 0 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ 2 вҲ’2Пғ sin Оҙs пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ = 0 . (43) Here the term |вҹЁ. . . вҹ©0|2 Мё= 0 is allowed by the bro- ken symmetry. The average вҹЁ. . . вҹ© in the last term is performed only over the part of the Fermi line where |вҲҶ(k)| вүҘ Оө, see Appendix B for details. Because of the nodal gap structure, this average scales with energy as вҹЁ. . . вҹ© вҲқ Оө ln (вҲҶmax/Оө). For Eq. (43) to have a solution at Оө вүӘ вҲҶmax, spin scattering must be present, sin Оҙs Мё= 0. In addition, the scattering phases must satisfy the stringent condition cos Оҙc cos Оҙs вүҲ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ 0 пҝҪпҝҪ2 + 1 . (44) The left- and right-hand sides depend, respectively, on the properties of the impurity and the host material. It is thus difficult to expect this relation to hold without fine-tuning. Therefore, we conclude that, in the absence of point-group symmetry, the appearance of low-energy resonances is improbable. This prompts us to focus on the symmetric case in the remainder of this section. If lattice point symmetry is preserved and вҲҶ(k) belongs to its nontrivial representation, then пҝҪ пҝҪ 0 = 0, and the correspond- ing characteristic equation takes a form similar to Eq. (39), пҝҪ cos ОҙвҶ‘ вҲ’ Пғ sin ОҙвҶ‘ пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ пҝҪ (45) Г— пҝҪ cos ОҙвҶ“ + Пғ sin ОҙвҶ“ пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ пҝҪ = 0. Upon evaluation of the averages вҹЁ. . . вҹ© with logarithmic accuracy, see Appendix B, we find the positive-energy solutions ОөПғ,О· = ОөвӢҶПғО· cot ОҙО· ln |вҲҶmax/(ОөвӢҶ cot ОҙО·)| , ОөвӢҶ = ПҖ пҝҪ j |ukj(r0)|2/|вҲҶвҖІ j|, ОөвӢҶ| cot ОҙО·| вҲҶmax вүӘ 1 , ПғО· cot ОҙО· вүҘ 0 . (46) 11 Here О· =вҶ‘, вҶ“, the derivative вҲҶвҖІ j is taken over a dimen- sionless vector tangential to the Fermi line, and j la- bels the gap nodes. As before, particle-hole symmetry ОөПғ,О· = вҲ’ОөвҲ’Пғ,О· allowed us to focus on solutions in the in- terval [0, вҲҶmax]. If the last condition in Eq. (46) is not fulfilled, then the bound state is located in the interval [вҲ’вҲҶmax, 0]. For a given direction of spin Пғ, there are at most two solutions of Eq. (45), see the last condition in Eq. (46). The typical value of the energy scale in- troduced in Eq. (46) is ОөвӢҶ вҲј вҲҶmax. Therefore, for a resonance to be close to the Fermi level, the correspond- ing scattering phase shift should satisfy the condition |ОҙО· вҲ’ ПҖ/2| вүӘ 1. Expanding the denominator D(0) Пғ (Оө) in the vicin- ity of the resonance Оө = ОөПғ,О·, it is straightfor- ward to obtain the width of the resonance О“Пғ,О· = Im D(0) Пғ (ОөПғ,О·)/Re пҝҪ D(0) Пғ (ОөПғ,О·) пҝҪвҖІ , О“Пғ,О· = ПҖ 2 |ОөПғ,О·| ln |вҲҶmax/ОөПғ,О·|. (47) Here, the imaginary part of the average is free of diver- gence, Im пҝҪ пҝҪ ОөвүҘ|вҲҶ(k)| = ПҖОө/(2ОөвӢҶ). As one can see, О“Пғ,О· вүӘ ОөПғ,О· for ОҙО· вҶ’ ПҖ/2 leading to well- defined low-energy resonances in the strong-scattering regime. We note in passing that the condition ОҙО· вҶ’ ПҖ/2 corresponds to resonant scattering in the absence of su- perconductivity, as well. However, in the normal state, the resonances are typically broad (with the width sub- stantially exceeding вҲҶmax) . As mentioned at the beginning of this section, the en- ergies of the impurity resonances are particle-hole sym- metric. This symmetry, however, is not manifested in the differential conductance. The reason is due to a crucial difference between the conductance GПғ(V ) determined by the full scattering amplitudes, which depend on both energies and wave functions of the resonant states, and the particle-hole-symmetric density of energy levels de- termined by the structure of the poles of these ampli- tudes. To show this, we evaluate the conductance assum- ing strong scattering, point-symmetry preserving gaps, and tunneling into high-symmetry points. Expanding the numerator and denominator of the conductance in the vicinity of the resonance and within logarithmic ac- curacy, we obtain GПғ(V ) = ПҖGn 2 ln2 |вҲҶmax/ОөПғ,Пғ| |eV |ОөвӢҶ (eV вҲ’ ОөПғ,Пғ)2 + О“2Пғ,Пғ , (48) see Eqs. (14) and (15) for the conductance expressed in terms of scattering amplitudes as well as Eqs. (46) and (47) for the definitions of ОөПғ,Пғ and О“Пғ,Пғ. In the con- ductance (48), the energies of the bound states given in Eq. (46) were extended to negative values by particle-hole symmetry, ОөПғ,О· = вҲ’ОөвҲ’Пғ,О·. As one can see from Eq. (48), one of the two poles of the energy denominator D(0) Пғ (Оө), cf. Eqs. (45) and (46), was canceled by the numerator representing the eigenfunction of the state. This demon- strates the crucial role of the resonance-state structure. The conductance in Eq. (48) is manifestly particle- hole asymmetric, with the strongest asymmetry achieved for potential scattering ОҙвҶ‘ = ОҙвҶ“. There is a single spin- degenerate peak in the conductance in this case, as one may see from Eq. (48). Spin-dependent scattering lifts the degeneracy and splits the peaks with different spin polarizations, ultimately leading to two symmetric peaks at ПҖ/2 вҲ’ ОҙвҶ‘ = ОҙвҶ“ вҲ’ ПҖ/2. We illustrate the splitting of the peaks in Fig. 5 for the d-wave gap вҲҶ(k) = вҲҶ cos (2ПҶ). We end this section by emphasizing the different na- ture of the subgap conductance in superconductors with nodeless and nodal gaps. In the former case, an elec- tron incoming from the STM tip is reflected as a hole at |eV | вүӨ вҲҶmin. This process is inevitably particle-hole symmetric, resulting in the symmetry of the differential conductance, GПғ(V ) = GвҲ’Пғ(вҲ’V ), see Sec. III A. On the contrary, electron tunneling in a nodal-gap superconduc- tor turns into (to the first order in Gn) a quasiparticle propagating into the superconductor. In this case, the symmetry of the conductance may be violated, but only at biases |eV | вүӨ вҲҶmax, see also the Supplemental Ma- terial in Ref. for the detailed calculations and Ap- pendix D for the results at |eV | вүҘ вҲҶmax. The origin of this symmetry violation is in the interference between processes responsible for the conversion of an impinging particle in the tip into a quasiparticle propagating in the superconductor. There are direct conversion processes and processes in which the particle completes a few An- dreev scattering cycles before propagating into the su- perconductor as a quasiparticle. Both types of processes are allowed for nodal gaps. V. SUMMARY In this paper, we studied the role of the gap and Bloch- function symmetries in the formation and properties of impurity-induced states in a 2D superconductor, and in- vestigated manifestations of these states in scanning tun- neling spectra. We applied the scattering approach de- veloped by us in Ref. to treat weak tunneling between the STM tip and the superconductor, extending it here to arbitrarily strong scattering off an impurity in the super- conductor. We consider both spin-independent and spin- dependent scattering. The framework is conveniently for- mulated in terms of the phase shifts of electron scattering off the impurity and is summarized in Sec. II, see Eqs. (4) and (7)вҖ“(14). Our work provides an intuitive approach to calculating the spectrum of impurity-induced states and the differential conductance in an STM setting. In addition, it complements and clarifies previous studies of impurity resonances. In agreement with the literature, the bound states for nodeless gaps that preserve TRS and lattice point sym- metry are found only for spin-dependent scattering and are independent of the potential scattering phase Оҙc, see 12 GвҶ‘ GвҶ“ GвҶ‘+GвҶ“ -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0 2 4 6 8 10 eV/О” GПғ Gn О”(ПҶ)=О”cos(2ПҶ) ОҙвҶ‘=0.75Г—ПҖ/2 ОҙвҶ“=0.75Г—ПҖ/2 (a) GвҶ‘ GвҶ“ GвҶ‘+GвҶ“ -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 0 2 4 6 8 10 eV/О” GПғ Gn О”(ПҶ)=О”cos(2ПҶ) ОҙвҶ‘=0.9Г—ПҖ/2 ОҙвҶ“=0.6Г—ПҖ/2 (b) Differential conductance as a function of voltage bias for several values of the scattering phases. (a) Spin-independent scattering ОҙвҶ‘ = ОҙвҶ“ = 0.75 ПҖ/2 leads to a single spin-polarized peak in (GвҶ‘ + GвҶ“)/Gn. (b) The peak is split by adding a spin-dependent scattering phase with ОҙвҶ‘ = 0.9 ПҖ/2 and ОҙвҶ“ = 0.6 ПҖ/2. Solid red and dashed blue lines correspond to spin-up (GвҶ‘/Gn) and spin-down (GвҶ“/Gn) conductances, respectively. Dash-dotted green lines denote the conductance summed over and consider tunneling into a high symmetry point. Secs. III A as well as Eqs. (24) and (26). These YSR states are particle-hole symmetric, spin-polarized, and lead to peaks of the same weight in the differential con- ductance summed over both spin projections, see also Eq. (26) and the subsequent discussion. The modulation of a nodeless gap resulting from the breaking of the lattice point symmetry makes YSR states dependent on the potential scattering phase Оҙc. In this case, a YSR state appears near the gap edge once the spin scattering phase exceeds a threshold value determined by Оҙc and the anisotropy of the gap, see Eqs. (30) and (31) as well as Fig. 2. Away from the narrow energy range near the gap edges, the bound state becomes almost insensi- tive to the scattering phase Оҙc and resembles the YSR state for an s-wave gap. In STS experiments, the weight of the peaks of the differential conductance decreases to- ward the gap edges, where it becomes sensitive to Оҙc, see Eqs. (33) and (34), and Fig. 3. Breaking of TRS in a superconductor makes poten- tial scattering capable of creating spin-degenerate sub- gap states, see Sec. III C and Eq. (37). Introducing spin- dependent scattering lifts the degeneracy, leading to two spin-polarized states, as is illustrated in Fig. 4. At small splitting, both states may fall into the subgap interval and result in two peaks of different weights in the dif- ferential conductance. The predicted bound states can be probed by spin-polarized STM/STS . While the corresponding superconducting gaps may be topo- logical, as we discussed in Sec. III D, bound states for pointlike impurities generically do not enjoy topological protection. For nodal gaps, well-pronounced resonances appear at low energies for strong scattering potentials of any type if the gap preserves lattice point symmetry, see Eqs. (46) and (47). The observation of low-energy resonances in the absence of point-group symmetry might require fine- tuning, see Eq. (44). The resonance states are spin de- generate (spin polarized) for potential (spin-dependent) scattering and always respect particle-hole symmetry, see Eq. (46). Contrary to the density of energy levels, the differential conductance (48), determined by the full scat- tering amplitudes rather than their poles, is particle-hole asymmetric. The strongest asymmetry is found for po- tential scattering leading to a single spin-degenerate peak in the conductance. Spin-dependent scattering lifts the degeneracy and splits the peaks with different spin po- larizations as is illustrated in Fig. 5. The theory presented in this work combines the gen- eral scattering formalism with the eikonal approximation for quasiparticles scattering off an impurity in a super- conductor. It offers a convenient and intuitive scheme for investigating the impurity-induced resonances in the ex- citation spectrum of superconductors. In this work, we exemplified the theory on single-band superconductors with nontrivial scalar gap functions. This provides the foundation for considering materials with multiple bands and multicomponent superconducting order parameters, which would extend its applicability to iron pnictides [57вҖ“ 59] and twisted bilayer graphene . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to Alexander Balatsky, Eduardo H. da Silva Neto, and Pavel Volkov for discussions and comments. The work was supported by NSF Grant No. DMR-2002275 and by the Office of Naval Re- search (ONR) under Award No. N00014-22-1-2764 at 13 Yale University, and by Deutsche Forschungsgemein- schaft through CRC 183 and a joint ANR-DFG project (TWISTGRAPH) at Freie Universit МҲat Berlin. P.O.S. ac- knowledges support through the Yale Prize Postdoctoral Fellowship in Condensed Matter Theory. L.I.G. thanks Freie Universit МҲat Berlin for hosting his stay as a CRC 183 Mercator fellow. Appendix A: Details of the scattering theory 1. Scattering cycles To derive the scattering amplitudes given in Eqs. (7) and (8), we use the same approach as for a spin- unpolarized STM tip developed in Ref. . The model of the contact between STM tip and 2D superconductor as well as key approximations are outlined in Sec. II. In this appendix, we focus on the technical details of the derivation. The tip emits the particle wave ПҲ(1) p,k,Пғ = tp,Пғuk(r0) into a 2D superconductor, where uk(r0) is the Bloch function at the tunneling point r0 and tp,Пғ is the transmission ma- trix element. We assume that the tip is spin polarized along or opposite to the direction of the spin of the im- purity and denote the projection of the spin of impinging particles as Пғ =вҶ‘, вҶ“. The gap anisotropy becomes im- printed in the retroreflected hole wave, ПҲh,k,вҲ’Пғ = Оұp(k, Оө)ПҲ(1) p,k,Пғ. (A1) Here, the Andreev retroreflection amplitudes for particles Оұp(k, Оө) and holes Оұh(k, Оө) are Оұp,h(k, Оө) = exp пҝҪ Вұi arg пҝҪ Оө вҲҶ(k) пҝҪ вҲ’ i arccos пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оө вҲҶ(k) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ . (A2) The analytical continuation to Оө > |вҲҶ(k)| is determined by the requirement |Оұp,h| вүӨ 1 and the sign +(вҲ’) corre- sponds to the particle-to-hole (hole-to-particle) conver- sion. In addition, we assume spin-singlet superconduc- tors with вҲҶ(k) being a scalar. Only part of the wave (A1), i.e., ЛҶPПҲh,k,вҲ’Пғ, can interact with the tip, while the other part, пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶP пҝҪ ПҲh,k,вҲ’Пғ is oblivious to its presence. Here, the single-channel nature of the electron scattering of an incoming state is effected by the projection operator ЛҶPПҲin k,Пғ = uk(r0) пҝҪ Оҫ(kвҖІ)=Оө uвҲ— kвҖІ(r0)ПҲin kвҖІ,Пғ вүЎuk(r0)вҹЁuвҲ— kвҖІ(r0)ПҲin kвҖІ,Пғвҹ©Оө; (A3) the unit operator is denoted by ЛҶI. The averaging is per- formed over the Fermi contour Оҫ(k) = Оө with Оҫ(k) being the energy dispersion relations measured from the Fermi energy; see Eq. (13) for the explicit definition. Therefore, the hole wave scattered off the tip is ПҲ(1) h,k,вҲ’Пғ = пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ ПҲh,k,вҲ’Пғ, (A4) where sh,вҲ’Пғ is the scattering matrix element for holes associated with a single impurity in the absence of the tip. Within the 2D material, the hole wave ПҲ(1) h,k,вҲ’Пғ is retroreflected as a particle wave Оұh(k, Оө)ПҲ(1) h,k,вҲ’Пғ. After interacting with the tip, the scattered particle wave is ПҲ(2) p,k,Пғ = пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ Оұh(k, Оө)ПҲ(1) h,k,вҲ’Пғ = пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ Г— Оұp(k, Оө)tp,Пғuk(r0). (A5) The particle wave ПҲ(2) p,k,Пғ can be again retroreflected as a hole wave Оұp(k, Оө)ПҲ(2) p,k,Пғ. This closes a single Andreev scattering cycle in which the impinging particle interacts with the tip and is retroreflected as a hole. For particles to be retroreflected as particles, an additional half cycle should be added. By summing over cycles, we derive the following scat- tered hole and particle wave functions: ПҲout h,k,вҲ’Пғ = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 ЛҶLn ПғОұp(k, Оө)tp,Пғuk(r0), (A6) ПҲout p,k,Пғ = Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ ПҲout h,k,вҲ’Пғ,(A7) where the Andreev cycle operator is defined as ЛҶLПғ = Оұp(k, Оө) пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ Г— Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ . (A8) Finally, by using the outgoing wave functions (A6) and (A7), we derive the Andreev and normal scattering am- plitudes for particles with the spin projection Пғ: rph,Пғ = tвҖІ h,вҲ’Пғtp,Пғ пҝҪ uвҲ— k(r0) вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 ЛҶLn Пғ Оұp(k, Оө)uk(r0) пҝҪ Оө вүЎ tвҖІ h,вҲ’Пғtp,Пғ вҹЁuвҲ— k(r0)MПғ(k)вҹ©Оө , (A9) rp,Пғ = sвҖІ p,Пғ + tвҖІ p,Пғtp,Пғ пҝҪ uвҲ— k(r0)Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ЛҶP пҝҪ MПғ(k) пҝҪ Оө , (A10) 14 where the normal reflection amplitude includes also a scattering matrix element in the tip sвҖІ p,Пғ. 2. Scattering amplitudes Let us perform the summation over all scattering cycles in Eqs. (A9) and (A10), and derive the expressions for the scattering amplitudes rph,Пғ and rp,Пғ. Symbolically, we have the following relation in Eq. (A9): (A11) which can be rewritten as an integral equation пҝҪ ЛҶI вҲ’ ЛҶLПғ пҝҪ MПғ(k) = Оұp(k, Оө)uk(r0). (A12) Since the operator ЛҶLПғ defined in Eq. (A8) has a separa- ble kernel, the integral equation (A12) can be brought to a set of algebraic equations; see, e.g., Ref. for a generic approach. Indeed, the action of the operator ЛҶLПғ on MПғ(k) reads вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) Оұp(k, Оө)Оұh(k, Оө)uk(r0)M1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) Оұp(k, Оө)uk(r0)M2 Г— пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө M1, (A13) where M1 = вҹЁuвҲ— k(r0)MПғ(k)вҹ©Оө , M2 = вҹЁuвҲ— k(r0)Оұh(k, Оө)MПғ(k)вҹ©Оө . (A14) By substituting Eq. (A13) into Eq. (A12), we find the following expression for MПғ(k) in terms of M1 and M2: MПғ(k) = uk(r0)Оұp(k, Оө) uk(r0)Оұp(k, Оө) 1 вҲ’ Оұp(k, Оө)Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө M1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) uk(r0)Оұp(k)Оұh(k, Оө) 1 вҲ’ Оұp(k)Оұh(k, Оө) M1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) uk(r0)Оұp(k, Оө) 1 вҲ’ Оұp(k, Оө)Оұh(k, Оө)M2. (A15) Then, by using this result in Eq. (A14), we obtain the set of algebraic equations for M1 and M2: пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) ap пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө + (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) aph пҝҪ M1 + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) apM2 = ap, (A16) (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ ah вҲ’ [1 + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) aph] пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө пҝҪ M1 + [1 + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) aph] M2 = aph. (A17) Here, we used shorthand notations ap, ah, and aph given in Eqs. (9), (10), and (11), respectively. By solving the system of algebraic equations (A16) and (A17), we obtain M1 = ap 1 + (2 вҲ’ sp,Пғ вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) aph + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ apah пҝҪ, (A18) M2 = aph + (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ ap пҝҪ ah вҲ’ пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө пҝҪпҝҪ 1 + (2 вҲ’ sp,Пғ вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) aph + (1 вҲ’ sp,Пғ) (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) пҝҪ a2 ph вҲ’ apah пҝҪ. (A19) The above equations allow us to derive the Andreev and normal reflection amplitudes rph,Пғ = tвҖІ h,вҲ’Пғtp,ПғM1, (A20) rp,Пғ = sвҖІ p,Пғ + tвҖІ p,Пғtp,Пғ пҝҪ M2 вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ sh,вҲ’Пғ) Г— пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2Оұh(k, Оө) пҝҪ Оө M1 пҝҪ . (A21) 15 The final expressions are given in Eqs. (7) and (8). Appendix B: Low-energy properties of averages In this section, we discuss the averages in the coeffi- cients ap,h and aph defined in Eqs. (9), (10), and (11) at small energies Оө вүӘ вҲҶmax. The case of nodeless gaps is straightforward and is covered in the main text. There- fore, we consider small-energy expansion for nodal gaps. Due to the presence of the nodes, the coefficients ap,h and aph + 1/2 have real and imaginary parts even in the presence of TRS. The corresponding approximate expres- sions can be estimated by linearizing вҲҶ(k) in the vicinity of the nodes вҲҶj = 0 and performing the integration over the small intervals of the Fermi line in the vicinity of the nodes at Оө вүҘ |вҲҶ(k)| (imaginary part) or away from the nodes at Оө вүӨ |вҲҶ(k)| (real part). We find the leading asymptote for the integral in aph+ 1/2 at Оө вүҘ |вҲҶ(k)|: пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ вүҲ i пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ вүҲ i ПҖОө 2ОөвӢҶ , (B1) where ОөвӢҶ = ПҖ пҝҪпҝҪ j |ukj(r0)|2/|вҲҶвҖІ j| пҝҪвҲ’1 , the sum runs over all nodes kj of the gap, and вҲҶвҖІ = вҲӮвҲҶ(k)/вҲӮП„ is the deriva- tive of the gap over a dimensionless vector tangential to the Fermi line. A similar analysis for the integral in ap,h shows that пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶвҲ—(k) пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ вүҲ O пҝҪ Оө ОөвӢҶ пҝҪ2 . (B2) Unlike Eq. (B1), the above integral is nonzero only if вҲҶ(k) violates the lattice symmetry or if r0 is not a high- symmetry point. In the case Оө вүӨ |вҲҶ(k)|, aph/Оө is logarithmically diver- gent at Оө вҶ’ 0 with the leading asymptote scaling as пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 Оө пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ вүҲ Оө ОөвӢҶ ln пҝҪвҲҶmax Оө пҝҪ . (B3) Similar to Eq. (B2), the integral over the Fermi line in ap,h at Оө вүӨ |вҲҶ(k)| vanishes if the gap вҲҶ(k) or the tip position r0 does not violate the respective symmetries. We estimate the corresponding integral as пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶвҲ—(k) пҝҪ |вҲҶ(k)|2 вҲ’ Оө2 пҝҪ вүҲ пҝҪ |uk(r0)|2 вҲҶвҲ—(k) пҝҪ 0 + O пҝҪпҝҪ Оө ОөвӢҶ пҝҪ2 ln пҝҪвҲҶmax Оө пҝҪпҝҪ . (B4) The leading-order expansions given in Eqs. (B1), (B3), and (B4) are used in Sec. IV. Appendix C: Bound states for a dx2вҲ’y2 + idxy gap In this section, we discuss subgap bound states for the dx2вҲ’y2 + idxy gap вҲҶ(ПҶ) = вҲҶmine2iПҶ used in Sec. III C in more detail. This gap preserves the lattice point symme- try but, obviously, breaks TRS. The dispersion relation of the subgap states with positive energies can be obtained exactly, Оөp,h Пғ = вҲҶmin cos пҝҪПғОҙs Вұ Оҙc 2 пҝҪ , cot (ПғОҙs Вұ Оҙc) вүҘ 0; (C1) see Eqs. (38) and (39). Here, Оҙs = ОҙвҶ‘вҲ’ОҙвҶ“ and Оҙc = ОҙвҶ‘+ОҙвҶ“. The particle-hole symmetry dictates Оөp,h Пғ = вҲ’Оөh,p вҲ’Пғ. Per- haps, the most noticeable feature of Eq. (C1), is the pres- ence of two spin-polarized subgap states due to the spin- dependent scattering if Оҙs вүӨ Оҙc and two states with the same spin polarization at Оҙs вүҘ Оҙc. The bound states are spin polarized and doubly degenerate at Оҙc = 0. We illus- trate the dispersion relation of the bound states in Fig. 6, where a pair of spin-polarized states at Оҙs вүӨ Оҙc evolves into a pair of states with the same spin polarization at Оҙs вүҘ Оҙc; cf. Fig. 4(a). The observability of these states in STS is discussed after Eq. (39). ОөПғ, Оҙc=0 ОөвҶ‘, Оҙc=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 ОөвҶ“, Оҙc=0.4Г—ПҖ/2 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 2Оҙs/ПҖ ОөПғ О”min О”(ПҶ)=О”mine2iПҶ Normalized energy of the subgap states ОөПғ/вҲҶmin as a function of Оҙs for Оҙc = 0 (red line) and Оҙc = 0.4 ПҖ/2 (blue and green lines). The presence of spin-dependent scattering splits the spin-degenerate level (red line) into two states ОөвҶ‘ (blue line) and ОөвҶ“ (green line) at Оҙs вүӨ Оҙc. The bound states have the same spin polarization for Оҙs вүҘ Оҙc. Solid and dashed lines show two different branches of bound states with the same spin polarization, see Оөp вҶ‘ and Оөh вҶ‘ in Eq. (C1). We assume a circular Fermi surface (parametrized by the angle ПҶ), consider tunneling into a high symmetry point, and use the dx2вҲ’y2 + idxy gap вҲҶ(ПҶ) = вҲҶmine2iПҶ. Appendix D: Role of scattering potentials for above-gap energies For the sake of completeness, let us address the role of impurity scattering for the above-gap energies Оө > вҲҶmax = max{|вҲҶ(k)|}. While there are no bound states 16 in this case, it is instructive to show how the impurity scattering potential affects the differential conductance. By using Eqs. (14)вҖ“(16) and Eq. (19), and assuming the tunneling limit |t|2 вүӘ 1 in which the Andreev scatter- ing amplitudes can be neglected, we obtain the following conductance for above-gap energies: GПғ(V ) = Gn 64|DПғ|2 i Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(|eV |)IвҲ— пҝҪпҝҪ cos (Оҙc вҲ’ ПғОҙs) + Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(|eV |)IвҲ— пҝҪ + 1 пҝҪ , (D1) where the analytical continuation to Оө > |вҲҶ(k)| in IВұ(|eV |) given in Eq. (19) was defined as вҲҡвҲ’z = вҲ’i пҝҪ |z| at z > 0. Notice that, for momentum-dependent gaps, the spin degeneracy of the above-gap conductance is lifted. In this case, the last term in the curly brackets may remain nonvanishing if Re пҝҪ IвҲ’(|eV |)IвҲ— пҝҪ Мё= 1. For the s-wave gap вҲҶ(k) = вҲҶ, the conductance (D1) is simplified as GПғ(V ) = Gn|eV | пҝҪ (eV )2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 (eV )2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 cos2 (Оҙs/2). (D2) This conductance is spin-degenerate and is unaffected by potential scattering. At Оҙs = 0, the conventional ex- pression for impurity-free superconductors with a square- root divergency вҲқ 1/ пҝҪ (eV )2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 at |eV | вҶ’ вҲҶ is re- produced. On the other hand, for spin-dependent scat- tering cos (Оҙs/2) Мё= 1, the conductance (D2) vanishes as вҲқ пҝҪ (eV )2 вҲ’ вҲҶ2 at |eV | вҶ’ вҲҶ. G. Binnig, H. Rohrer, C. Gerber, and E. Weibel, Surface Studies by Scanning Tunneling Microscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 57 (1982). G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Scanning tunneling mi- croscopyвҖ”from birth to adolescence, Rev. Mod. Phys. G. Deutscher, AndreevвҖ“Saint-James reflections: A probe of cuprate superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 109 (2005), arXiv:cond-mat/0409225v1 [cond-mat]. Гҳ. Fischer, M. Kugler, I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Berthod, and C. Renner, Scanning tunneling spectroscopy of high- temperature superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 79, 353 (2007), arXiv:cond-mat/0610672 [cond-mat]. C. Renner and O. Fischer, Vacuum tunneling spectroscopy and asymmetric density of states of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Phys. Rev. B 51, 9208 (1995). I. Maggio-Aprile, C. Renner, A. Erb, E. Walker, and Гҳ. Fischer, Direct Vortex Lattice Imaging and Tunnel- ing Spectroscopy of Flux Lines on YBa2Cu3O7вҲ’Оҙ, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 2754 (1995). E. Y. Andrei and A. H. MacDonald, Graphene Bi- layers with a Twist, Nat. Mater. 19, 1265 (2020), Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Unconventional super- conductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices, Na- ture 556, 43 (2018), arXiv:1803.02342. M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. Young, and C. R. Dean, Tuning superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, Science 363, 1059 (2018), arXiv:1808.07865. X. Lu, P. Stepanov, W. Yang, M. Xie, M. A. Aamir, I. Das, C. Urgell, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, G. Zhang, A. Bachtold, A. H. MacDonald, and D. K. Efetov, Super- conductors, Orbital Magnets, and Correlated States in Magic Angle Bilayer Graphene, Nature 574, 653 (2019), Y. Cao, D. Rodan-Legrain, J. M. Park, F. N. Yuan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. M. Fernandes, L. Fu, and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nematicity and Competing Or- ders in Superconducting Magic-Angle Graphene, Science M. Oh, K. P. Nuckolls, D. Wong, R. L. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, and A. Yazdani, Evidence for unconventional superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 600, 240 (2021), arXiv:2109.13944. H. Kim, Y. Choi, C. Lewandowski, A. Thomson, Y. Zhang, R. Polski, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea, and S. Nadj-Perge, Spectroscopic Signa- tures of Strong Correlations and Unconventional Su- perconductivity in Twisted Trilayer Graphene (2021), G. Di Battista, P. Seifert, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. C. Fong, A. Principi, and D. K. Efetov, Revealing the Thermal Properties of Superconducting Magic-Angle Twisted Bilayer Graphene, Nano Lett. 22, 6465 (2022), Y. Zhang, R. Polski, C. Lewandowski, A. Thomson, Y. Peng, Y. Choi, H. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea, F. von Oppen, G. Refael, and S. Nadj-Perge, Promotion of superconductivity in magic-angle graphene multilayers, Science 377, 1538 (2022), arXiv:2112.09270. A. V. Balatsky, I. Vekhter, and J.-X. Zhu, Impurity- induced states in conventional and unconventional super- conductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 373 (2006), arXiv:cond- mat/0411318 [cond-mat]. H. Alloul, J. Bobroff, M. Gabay, and P. J. Hirschfeld, Defects in correlated metals and superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 45 (2009), arXiv:0711.0877. L. Yu, Bound State in Superconductors with Paramag- netic Impurities, Acta Phys. Sin. 21, 75 (1965). H. Shiba, Classical Spins in Superconductors, Prog. Theor. Phys. 40, 435 (1968). A. I. Rusinov, Superconductivity near a Paramagnetic Impurity, ZhETF Pisma 9, 146 (1968). A. Rusinov, On the Theory of Gapless Superconductivity in Alloys Containing Paramagnetic Impurities, Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 29, 1101 (1969). A. Yazdani, B. A. Jones, C. P. Lutz, M. F. Crommie, and D. M. Eigler, Probing the Local Effects of Magnetic Im- 17 purities on Superconductivity, Science 275, 1767 (1997). S.-H. Ji, T. Zhang, Y.-S. Fu, X. Chen, X.-C. Ma, J. Li, W.-H. Duan, J.-F. Jia, and Q.-K. Xue, High-Resolution Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy of Magnetic Impurity Induced Bound States in the Superconducting Gap of Pb Thin Films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 226801 (2008). S.-H. Ji, T. Zhang, Y.-S. Fu, X. Chen, J.-F. Jia, Q.-K. Xue, and X.-C. Ma, Application of magnetic atom in- duced bound states in superconducting gap for chemical identification of single magnetic atoms, Appl. Phys. Lett. K. J. Franke, G. Schulze, and J. I. Pascual, Competition of Superconducting Phenomena and Kondo Screening at the Nanoscale, Science 332, 940 (2011). B. W. Heinrich, J. I. Pascual, and K. J. Franke, Single magnetic adsorbates on s-wave superconductors, Prog. Surf. Sci. 93, 1 (2017), arXiv:1705.03672. P. J. Hirschfeld, P. W МҲolfle, and D. Einzel, Consequences of resonant impurity scattering in anisotropic supercon- ductors: Thermal and spin relaxation properties, Phys. Rev. B 37, 83 (1988). A. V. Balatsky, M. I. Salkola, and A. Rosengren, Impurity-induced virtual bound states in d -wave super- conductors, Phys. Rev. B 51, 15547 (1995). M. I. Salkola, A. V. Balatsky, and D. J. Scalapino, The- ory of Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Probe of Impurity States in a d-Wave Superconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, M. I. Salkola, A. V. Balatsky, and J. R. Schrieffer, Spec- tral properties of quasiparticle excitations induced by magnetic moments in superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 55, A. Yazdani, C. M. Howald, C. P. Lutz, A. Kapitulnik, and D. M. Eigler, Impurity-Induced Bound Excitations on the Surface of Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 176 (1999), arXiv:cond-mat/9906001 [cond-mat]. S. H. Pan, E. W. Hudson, K. M. Lang, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Imaging the effects of in- dividual zinc impurity atoms on superconductivity in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Nature 403, 746 (2000). E. W. Hudson, K. M. Lang, V. Madhavan, S. H. Pan, H. Eisaki, S. Uchida, and J. C. Davis, Interplay of mag- netism and high-Tc superconductivity at individual Ni impurity atoms in Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+Оҙ, Nature 411, 920 M. Uldemolins, A. Mesaros, and P. Simon, Quasipar- ticle focusing of bound states in two-dimensional s- wave superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 105, 144503 (2022), F. von Oppen, Y. Peng, and F. Pientka, Topological su- perconducting phases in one dimension, in Topol. Asp. Condens. Matter Phys. (Oxford University Press, Ox- ford, 2017) pp. 387вҖ“450. H. Shiba, K. Satori, O. Sakai, and Y. Shimizu, Numer- ical renormalization group study of the Kondo effect in superconductors, Phys. B Condens. Matter 186-188, 239 J. Bauer, A. Oguri, and A. C. Hewson, Spec- tral properties of locally correlated electrons in a BardeenвҖ“CooperвҖ“Schrieffer superconductor, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 19, 486211 (2007), arXiv:0707.4368. P. O. Sukhachov, F. von Oppen, and L. I. Glazman, An- dreev Reflection in Scanning Tunneling Spectroscopy of Unconventional Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, L. Schneider, P. Beck, J. Wiebe, and R. Wiesendanger, Atomic-scale spin-polarization maps using functionalized superconducting probes, Sci. Adv. 7, eabd7302 (2021), D. Wang, J. Wiebe, R. Zhong, G. Gu, and R. Wiesendan- ger, Spin-Polarized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov States in an Iron- Based Superconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 076802 R. Wiesendanger, Spin mapping at the nanoscale and atomic scale, Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 1495 (2009). The classical model of impurity-tip contact is valid for large easy-axis anisotropy. A detailed discussion of mag- netized impurity in classical and quantum approxima- tions can be found in Ref. . A. Yazdani, (private communication). C. W. J. Beenakker, Quantum transport in semiconductor-superconductor microjunctions, Phys. Rev. B 46, arXiv:cond-mat/9406083 [cond-mat]. Y. Nazarov and Y. Blanter, Quantum Transport: In- troduction to Nanoscience (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2009) p. 590. For a magnetic tip, we assume, however, that the magne- tization is collinear with that of the magnetic impurity. A. F. Andreev, The Thermal Conductivity of the Inter- mediate State in Superconductors, Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Phys. 19, 1228 (1964). G. E. Blonder, M. Tinkham, and T. M. Klapwijk, Tran- sition from metallic to tunneling regimes in supercon- ducting microconstrictions: Excess current, charge im- balance, and supercurrent conversion, Phys. Rev. B 25, A. I. BazвҖҷ, Y. B. ZelвҖҷdovich, and A. M. Perelomov, Scat- tering, Reactions, and Decays in Nonrelativistic Quan- tum Mechanics (Israel Program for Scientific Transla- tions, Jerusalem, 1969) p. 239. M. Ruby, Y. Peng, F. von Oppen, B. W. Hein- rich, and K. J. Franke, Orbital Picture of Yu-Shiba- Rusinov Multiplets, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 186801 (2016), U. Thupakula, V. Perrin, A. Palacio-Morales, L. Cario, M. Aprili, P. Simon, and F. Massee, Coherent and Inco- herent Tunneling into Yu-Shiba-Rusinov States Revealed by Atomic Scale Shot-Noise Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. M. Ruby, F. Pientka, Y. Peng, F. von Oppen, B. W. Hein- rich, and K. J. Franke, Tunneling Processes into Local- ized Subgap States in Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. I. Martin and D. Mozyrsky, Nonequilibrium theory of tunneling into a localized state in a superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 90, 100508(R) (2014), arXiv:1312.2602. R.-j. Slager, L. Rademaker, J. Zaanen, and L. Balents, Impurity-bound states and GreenвҖҷs function zeros as local signatures of topology, Phys. Rev. B 92, 085126 (2015), G. E. Volovik, On edge states in superconductors with time inversion symmetry breaking, J. Exp. Theor. Phys. Lett. 66, 522 (1997), arXiv:cond-mat/9709084 [cond- mat]. G. A. Volovik, The Universe in a Helium Droplet (Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, 2003) p. 536. T. K. Ng and Y. Avishai, In-gap bound states induced by 18 nonmagnetic impurities in two-band sВұ-superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 80, 104504 (2009). P. J. Hirschfeld, M. M. Korshunov, and I. I. Mazin, Gap symmetry and structure of Fe-based superconductors, Reports Prog. Phys. 74, 124508 (2011), arXiv:1106.3712. R. Beaird, I. Vekhter, and J.-X. Zhu, Impurity states in multiband s-wave superconductors: Analysis of iron pnictides, Phys. Rev. B 86, 140507(R) (2012), arXiv:1209.3835. E. Lake, A. S. Patri, and T. Senthil, Pairing symmetry of twisted bilayer graphene: A phenomenological synthesis, Phys. Rev. B 106, 104506 (2022), arXiv:2204.12579. P. Morse and H. Feshbach, Methods of Theoretical Physics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1953) p. 1978. F. von Oppen and K. J. Franke, Yu-Shiba-Rusinov states in real metals, Phys. Rev. B 103, 205424 (2021),