Terahertz spin conductance probes of coherent and incoherent spin tunneling through MgO tunnel junctions R. Rouzegar1,2, M.A. Wahada3,4, A.L. Chekhov1,2, W. Hoppe4, J. Jechumtál5, L. Nádvorník5, M. Wolf2, T.S. Seifert1, S.S.P. Parkin3, G. Woltersdorf4, P.W. Brouwer1, T. Kampfrath1,2 1. Department of Physics, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany 2. Department of Physical Chemistry, Fritz Haber Institute of the Max Planck Society, 14195 Berlin, Germany 3. Max Planck Institute for Microstructure Physics, Weinberg 2, 06120 Halle, Germany 4. Institut für Physik, Martin-Luther-Universität Halle, 06120 Halle, Germany 5. Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, Ke Karlovu 3, 121 16 Prague, Czech Republic Abstract. We study femtosecond spin currents through MgO tunneling barriers in CoFeB(2 nm)|MgO(d)|Pt(2 nm) stacks by terahertz emission spectroscopy. To obtain transport information independent of extrinsic experimental factors, we determine the complex-valued spin conductance G̃d(ω) of the MgO layer has an instantaneous and delayed component that point to (i) spin transport through Pt pinholes in MgO, (ii) coherent spin tunneling and (iii) incoherent resonant spin tunneling mediated by defect states in MgO. A remarkable signature of (iii) is its relaxation time that grows monotonically with d to as much as 270 fs at d = 6 Å, in full agreement with an analytical model. Our results indicate that terahertz spin conductance spectroscopy will yield new and relevant insights into ultrafast spin transport for a wide range of materials. Fig. 1. Spin conductance spectroscopy of a layer X. (a) A F|X|H stack is excited by a femtosecond laser pulse. The resulting transient spin voltage μs(t) in the ferromagnetic layer F (here CoFeB) drives a spin current jS through X (here MgO). The spin current arriving in the heavy metal layer H (here Pt) is converted into an in-plane charge current jC that is measured by detecting the THz pulse it emits. The dynamics of μS(t) is determined using a sample with d = 0, which exhibits a spectrally flat interface spin conductance gref. (b) Considered spin-transport channels through MgO: flow through conducting pinholes (PH), coherent tunneling (CT) and incoherent resonant tunneling (IRT). For IRT, γFXe−z/λ is the probability of an electron to tunnel from F = CoFeB to a defect at position z in X = MgO, whereas γXHe−(d−z)/λ refers to the tunneling probability from z to H = Pt. H = Pt F = CoFeB fs pump X = MgO(d) Gd jS d(t) (a) (b) γ −(d−z)/λ CoFeB MgO Pt 0 z d γFHe−d/λ γFXe−z/λ γXHe−(d−z)/λ g e CT IRT PH jC μS signals d(t) odd in the CoFeB magnetization M for various MgO thicknesses of d = 0, 3.0, 4.5 and 6.0 Å. The signal for d = 0 is the reference signal ref = |d=0. (b) Fourier amplitude spectra normalized to their maximum of the signals shown in panel (a). Fig. 3. Frequency-domain THz spin conductance G̃d(ω) of MgO layers with various thicknesses d. (a) line shows the Fourier transformation δ̃exp(ω) of the experimental δ-function. (b) Spectral phase a g G̃d(ω). (a) FM MgO NM 20 Å d 20 Å (b) MgO thickness d=0 Å 3.0 Å 4.5 Å 6.0 Å d=0 Å 6.0 Å -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 -5 0 5 10 THz signal (arb. units) Time t (ps) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Fourier amplitude (arb. units) Frequency ω/2π (THz) 3.0 Å 4.0 Å 4.5 Å 6.0 Å (a) (b) δ̃exp(ω) 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Spin conductance G̃d ω /gref Frequency ω/2π (THz) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 a g G̃d ω Frequency ω/2π (THz) 3.0 Å 4.0 Å 4.5 Å 6.0 Å Fig. 4. THz spin transport through MgO layers. (a) Measured time-domain THz spin conductance of MgO films for various thicknesses d (thin solid lines). The spin conductance Gd(t) can be understood as the current that is driven through the MgO layer by a δ(t)-like spin voltage in the CoFeB layer. Due to the finite time resolution, the δ-function is broadened to the fictitious impulsive spin voltage δexp(t) (dashed black line). Accordingly, the extracted conductivity curves are also broadened and display Gd ∗ δexp. Thick solid lines are fits based on Eq. (3). (b) Amplitude Ad ≈ fd PH of the instantaneous, i.e., δexp(t)- IRT/gref of the delayed current component vs MgO thickness (blue circles). The red solid line is a fit based on Eq. (5) with λ = (1 2 ± 0 1) Å. (d) Decay time τd of the IRT current component vs MgO thickness (blue circles). The red solid line is a fit based on Eq. (5) with Γ−1 = (50 ± 5) fs. (b) (c) 3.0 Å 4.0 Å 4.5 Å 6.0 Å 3 30 λ = 1 2 ± 0 1 Å Γ−1 = 50 ± 5 (a) -0.2 0 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 -2 -1.5 -1 0 0.5 1.0 Time domain spin conductance (Gd ∗ δexp) t /gref Time t (ps) 0 0.2 0.6 0.8 1.0 Ad 0 0.1 0.2 Bd/(1 − Ad) 0 2 4 6 8 0 100 300 Decay time τd (fs) MgO thickness (Å) Exp. Model Exp. Model d = 2.0 Å δexp(t) Motivation. Transport of electron spin angular momentum is of central importance for future spintronic devices. To keep pace with other information carriers such as electrons in field-effect transistors and photons in optical fibers , spintronic transport needs to be pushed to terahertz (THz) bandwidth and, thus, femtosecond time scales. Interesting applications of ultrafast spin transport include emission of broadband THz pulses and generation of spin torque for ultrafast magnetization switching. To better understand and optimize THz spin transport, we need tools to adequately characterize it. An important quantity is the spin conductance G = IS/ΔμS, which quantifies how much spin current IS is obtained when a spin-voltage drop ΔμS is applied across a conductor [Fig. 1(a)]. We focus on longitudinal spin transport, which can be described by populations of spin-up and spin-down electron states. At frequencies ≪1 THz, spin transport measurements typically rely on contacts . At THz frequencies, however, measurement procedures of G still need to be developed. In this work, we introduce an approach to measure the spin conductance of a thin film X between a ferromagnetic metal layer F and a heavy-metal layer H [Fig. 1(a)]. Using THz emission spectroscopy , we obtain the complex-valued spin conductance G̃(ω) at frequencies ω/2π = 0.5-8 THz. In the time domain, G(t) vs time t can simply be understood as the spin current that would be obtained for a δ(t)- like spin-voltage pulse. Our procedure is demonstrated for the ubiquitous tunnel-barrier material X = MgO and reveals dynamic signatures of coherent and incoherent spin tunneling. We expect that THz spin conductance spectroscopy will provide important insights into ultrafast spin transport in a wide range of materials. THz spin-conductance spectroscopy. The general idea of THz spin-conductance spectroscopy is shown in Fig.1. It relies on a F|X|H stack, where the ferromagnetic layer F (here CoFeB) serves as spin- current source, X is the layer under investigation, and the heavy-metal layer H (here Pt) acts as detector. First, a femtosecond laser pulse induces an ultrafast generalized spin voltage μS(t) in F = CoFeB that drives a spin current through X = MgO. Second, the spin current jS(t) arriving in the F = Pt detection layer is converted into an in-plane charge current jC(t) ∝ jS(t) by the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE). Third, jC(t) gives rise to the emission of a measurable ultrashort THz electromagnetic pulse with electric field E(t) . In the frequency domain, the spin conductance of MgO is given by an Ohm-type law, j̃S(ω) = G̃d(ω)μ̃S(ω), where d is the thickness of X. The spin voltage in Pt is neglected owing to the short spin lifetime in Pt . To determine μ̃S(ω), we conduct a reference measurement on a sample without interlayer (i.e., d = 0), where j̃S ref(ω) = G̃ref(ω)μS(ω) with known G̃ref. In our experiment, we measure electrooptic signals (t) and ref(t) rather than the emitted THz electric field E(t). However, and E are related by an instrument response function that cancels in the frequency domain when the reference measurement is considered . As derived in Supplemental Note 1, the X spin conductance G̃d normalized to the frequency-independent reference conductance G̃ref is fully determined by the observables ̃ and ̃ref through G̃d(ω) gref = j̃S(ω) j̃S ref(ω) = ̃(ω) ̃ref(ω) (1) In the last step of Eq. (1), we took advantage of the facts that (i) the measured optical absorptance and THz impedance of all the samples of our experiment are the same and, thus, cancel, and that (ii) the spin conductance G̃ref(ω) = gref of the F|Pt interface is constant over the frequency interval considered here (see Supplemental Note 2). Experimental details. As spin conductor X, the nonmagnetic insulator MgO is chosen. It is extensively used as a tunnel barrier in magnetic tunnel junctions, which provide large tunneling magnetoresistance for applications in nonvolatile memory devices . MgO thicknesses of 0 ≤ d ≤ 15 Å. The sample with d = 0 is the reference sample. All layers are grown on an MgO substrate (sub) by DC magnetron sputtering in ultrahigh vacuum at a base pressure of 10−3 mbar, except the MgO layer, which is grown in the same vacuum chamber by radio-frequency sputtering using an off-axis gun tilted 90° from the substrate plane . Atomic force microscopy shows a roughness <2 Å of all layers . In the THz emission experiments [Fig. 1(a)], the F magnetization M of F = CoFeB is saturated by an external magnetic field of about 10 mT. The sample is excited by a train of linearly polarized ultrashort laser pulses (central wavelength 790 nm, nominal pulse duration 10 fs, pulse energy 2 nJ, repetition rate 80 MHz) from a Ti:Sapphire laser oscillator, focused to a spot of 30 μm full width of half maximum (FWHM) of intensity. The emitted THz pulse is detected by electro-optic sampling in a GaP(110) crystal (thickness 250 μm) using linearly polarized probe pulses (0.6 nJ) from the same laser. This procedure yields the THz signal (t) as a function of delay t between probe and THz pulse . THz signals. Figure 2(a) and Fig. S1 show THz emission signals (t) odd in M from CoFeB|MgO|Pt stacks for various MgO thicknesses d. Signal components even in M are minor. The signal for d = 0 is known to be dominated by ultrafast spin transport from CoFeB into Pt with G̃d=0(ω) = gref = con tω . When d is increased from 0 Å to 6.0 Å, the signal amplitude decreases by a factor of 60 [Fig. 2(a)]. One can show that, in this range, the THz signal is dominated by spin transport from F through MgO into H and the ISHE in H, consistent with the signal origin for d = 0 (see Supplemental Material). Interestingly, with increasing d, the signal amplitude not only drops, but the initially sharp temporal features become smoother [Fig. 2(a)]. This trend suggests the emergence of slower components in the spin-current dynamics jS(t). It is confirmed by the normalized Fourier spectra [Fig. 2(b)], whose width decreases with increasing d and whose maximum shifts to lower frequencies. Frequency-domain spin conductance. To gain more intrinsic insight into the spin transport through MgO from the signals of Fig. 2, we make use of Eq. (1) to determine the normalized spin conductance Fig. 3(a). It consists of a frequency-independent component and an additional contribution below 3 THz. As expected from Fig. 2(a), we observe a drastic overall amplitude reduction with increasing d. At the same time, spectral weight is shifted to frequencies below 3 THz. The spectral phase a g G̃d(ω) [Fig. 3(b)] of the spin conductance and its slope vs ω increase with d, indicating an increasingly non- instantaneous response. Time-domain spin conductance. To obtain the time-domain spin conductance Gd(t), we inversely Fourier-transform G̃d(ω). The resulting normalized Gd(t)/gref is shown in Fig. 4(a) for all MgO thicknesses. Note that Gd(t) can be considered as the spin current through MgO that is induced by an impulsive spin voltage. Therefore, Gd(t) for d = 0 would ideally equal a δ(t)-type signal. However, as the bandwidth of our setup is finite, the extracted Gd(t) is the response to a broadened δ-like pulse δexp(t). To achieve a unipolar δexp(t), which is as short as possible and free of oscillations, we apply a suitable window approaches zero at 12 THz. The resulting δ(t)-type spin-voltage pulse δexp(t) has a FWHM of 90 fs [dashed line in Fig. 4(a)] and defines the time resolution of Gd(t). For d > 0, the extracted Gd(t) traces [Fig. 4(a)] consist of an initial instantaneous response with a shape similar to δexp(t) plus a subsequently decaying component, whose relative weight increases with d. This result is fully consistent with the spectra of Fig. 3(a), where the broad background and feature below 3 THz correspond to the instantaneous and slower time-domain response [Fig. 4(a)]. Interpretation. Thin MgO films have been studied extensively in the past. For d < 10 Å, structural imperfections are reported, in particular oxygen vacancies and pinholes connecting F and H . Accordingly, we consider 3 possible contributions to the total spin current through MgO in film , (ii) coherent off-resonant electron tunneling (CT) through the MgO tunnel barrier and (iii) incoherent resonant tunneling (IRT) through intermediate defect states in the vicinity of the Fermi the spin conductance is the sum Gd = Gd PH + Gd CT + Gd IRT (2) While the PH and CT processes are instantaneous on the time scale of our experimental resolution of 90 fs [dashed black line in Fig. 4(a)], the IRT mechanism may require more time to proceed. We briefly discuss each mechanism in more detail. Regarding GPH, one expects that, for d < 6 Å, MgO grows in islands or exhibits pinholes . The pinholes are filled with Pt of the subsequently grown Pt layer and, thus, provide a conductive channel between the CoFeB and Pt layer [Fig. 1(b)]. Gd PH depends on the in-plane areal fraction fd PH of pinholes according to Gd PH ∝ greffd PH. Thus, for fd PH = 1, the reference situation (d = 0) is recovered. Because the PH contribution is instantaneous analogous to the reference sample, we obtain Gd PH(t) = fd PHgrefδ(t). CT [Fig. 1(b)] through the entire MgO barrier is instantaneous on the scale of our time resolution . Therefore, Gd CT(t) = gd CT(1 − fd PH)δ(t), where the coefficient gd CT is the amplitude of the impulsive spin current in the absence of pinholes. Regarding IRT, oxygen vacancies are known to provide localized electronic states within the MgO band gap and, thus, open up a resonant transport channel . In the simplest IRT realization, an electron tunnels from F into a MgO vacancy and, subsequently, into H [Fig. 1(b)], similar to resonant tunneling in quantum wells . One can quantify the resonant tunneling as Gd IRT(t) = gd IRT(t)(1 − fd PH), where gd IRT(t) is the IRT-related spin conductance of an MgO barrier without pinholes. Based on Fig. 1(b), we model gd IRT(t) by a single-sided exponential decay gd,0 IRTΘ(t)e−t/τd, where Θ(t) is the Heaviside step function and τd can be considered as the characteristic time of IRT. With these specifications, Eq. (2) turns into Gd(t) gref = Adδ(t) + BdΘ(t)e−t/τd, (3) where Ad = fd PH + (1 − fd PH) gd CT gref , Bd = (1 − fd PH) gd,0 IRT gref ( ) We fit the convolution of Gd [Eq. (3)] and our time resolution δexp to the time-domain data of Fig. 4(a), where τd, Ad, Bd and possible deviations t0 from time zero [i.e., t → t − t0 in Eq. (3)] due to substrate thickness variations are fit parameters (see Supplemental Material). The model fits [Fig. 4(a)] describe our data excellently. The resulting amplitude Ad of the δ(t)-like contribution [Fig. 4(b)] decreases monotonically with MgO thickness d. One can show that Ad ≈ fd PH (see Supplemental Material). This assignment and Fig. 4(b) are consistent with previous work in which fd PH was found to decrease with increasing MgO thickness d on a scale of 2 Å . According to calculations , MgO layers close to the CoFeB and Pt interface are slightly metallic. They have a total thickness of about 4 Å and can be understood to have a large PH fraction. This effect may explain the pronounced drop of Ad from d = 3.0 Å to 4.0 Å [Fig. 4(b)]. Using Ad ≈ fd PH, we can now determine gd,0 IRT/gref ≈ Bd/(1 − Ad), i.e., the peak amplitude of the IRT contribution [Eq. (3)], which is found to decrease strongly with increasing d [Fig. 4(c)]. Remarkably, the characteristic IRT time τd is found to grow with d [Fig. 4(d)], consistent with the increase of the slope of a g G̃d(ω) vs ω [Fig. 3(b)]. Model of dynamic IRT. Qualitatively, we suggest the following dynamic scenario for the IRT conductance gd IRT(t) = gd,0 IRTΘ(t)e−t/τd. At time t = 0, a δ(t)-like spin voltage in CoFeB drives instantaneous tunneling of spin-polarized electrons from CoFeB to MgO defect states. Simultaneously, spin-unpolarized electrons from Pt are transferred to maintain local charge neutrality. The subsequent tunneling events from occupied defect states to CoFeB or Pt are stochastic. Their rate ∂tNσ is proportional to the number Nσ of spins σ =↑ or ↓ occupying the defect state. Accordingly, we obtain a (i) simple temporal exponential decay of Nσ and, thus, the σ-current from defects to Pt. (ii) The characteristic time of this process increases with increasing d because the tunneling from defects to Pt becomes less likely as d and, thus, the average distance of defect and Pt grow. Finally, as two tunneling events over distance d are involved, (iii) the spin current from CoFeB to Pt decreases with increasing d. The implications (i), (ii), (iii) of our model are fully consistent with the experimental results of Figs. 4(a), 4(c) and 4(d), respectively. More quantitatively, a rate-equation treatment and the assumption of vanishing out-of-plane charge current (see Supplemental Material) reproduce the relationship gd IRT(t) = gd,0 IRTΘ(t)e−t/τd with gd,0 IRT ∝ de−d/λ, τd −1 = Γ 1 − e−d/λ d/λ (5) Here, Γ−1 quantifies the spin lifetime in a defect state for an infinitely thin MgO layer, and λ is the spin decay length in a MgO barrier. Eq. (5) provides good fits to the data of Fig. 4(b), (c) and yields Γ−1 = (50 ± 5) fs and λ = (1 2 ± 0 1) Å in good agreement with theoretical predictions . Discussion. Measurement of the THz spin conductance relies on the measurement of just two THz emission signals, without having to know any instrument response functions, in contrast to extraction of the charge source current. This approach can be extended to, in principle, any layer X other than MgO, if the following conditions are fulfilled: (1) The signal exclusively arises from the spin current jS arriving in H. (2) jS solely originates from the spin voltage μS. (3) The presence of the layers X and H|X does not change the μS dynamics of F. because the ISHE of Pt dominates spin-to-charge conversion of the metal stack (see Supplemental Material). (2) is fulfilled for the reference sample and, thus, for d ≠ 0, too. (3) is fulfilled because the presence of X in F|H stacks was shown to leave the spin-voltage dynamics unchanged . If X has a large optical and THz refractive index, the modified pump-propagation and current-to-THz-field conversion need to be accounted for (see Supplemental Material). In conclusion, we demonstrate THz conductance spectroscopy for the example of MgO barriers. In the time domain, we find ultrafast signatures of IRT, i.e., an exponentially decaying spin current with a relaxation time that increases with the MgO layer thickness. This behavior arises because the tunneling probability decreases with increasing thickness of the tunneling barrier. We anticipate that our method can be used to measure the spin conductance of a large set of materials, ranging from simple metals to complex materials such as antiferromagnets , potentially also involving a transverse spin- current component.