Main text 1 Experimental Evidence for Defect Tolerance in Pb-Halide Perovskite Naga Prathibha Jasti1,2, Igal Levine3, Yishay (Isai) Feldman2, Gary Hodes2, Sigalit Aharon2* and David Cahen1,2* 1Bar Ilan University, Ramat Gan, 5290002, Israel 2Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel 3Division Solar Energy, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und Energie GmbH, Berlin, 12489, Germany *david.cahen@weizmann.ac.il, sigalit.aharon@weizmann.ac.il Abstract The term defect tolerance (DT) is used often to rationalize the exceptional optoelectronic properties of Halide Perovskites (HaPs) and their devices. Even though DT lacked direct experimental evidence, it became a “fact” in the field. DT in semiconductors implies that structural defects do not translate to electrical and optical effects (e.g., due to charge trapping), associated with such defects. We present the first direct experimental evidence for DT in Pb-HaPs by comparing the structural quality of 2-dimensional (2D), 2D-3D, and 3D Pb- iodide HaP crystals with their optoelectronic characteristics using high-sensitivity methods. Importantly, we get information from the materials’ bulk, because we sample at least a few hundred nanometers, up to several micrometers, from the sample’s surface, which allows for assessing intrinsic bulk (and not only surface-) properties of HaPs. The results point to DT in 3D, 2D-3D, and 2D Pb-HaPs. Overall, our data provide an experimental basis to rationalize DT in Pb-HaPs. These experiments and findings can guide the search for, and design of other materials with DT. Significance For progress in science, distinguishing between ideas or suggestions and solid experimental facts is critical, especially if it concerns a key issue. Such is the case for the widespread use of “defect tolerance” (DT) to explain the exceptionally good properties of Halide Perovskites (HaPs) for solar cells, LEDs and detectors. Although often invoked for HaPs, DT lacked till now direct experimental evidence (and had mixed support from computational theory). We find the missing experimental evidence for DT by comparing the structural quality, as a measure of structural defects, with its optoelectronic properties, as a measure of optoelectronic (active) defects, that normally result from structural defects. Our direct evidence for DT can guide the search for, and design of new materials with DT. Keywords: Self-healing, Single crystal, Structural quality, Electronic defects Main text 2 Introduction Halide perovskite (HaP) semiconductors hold significant potential for applications in several optoelectronic device types due to their excellent relevant properties, which express fascinating fundamental materials chemistry and physics (1–6). Remarkably, also HaP polycrystalline layers, even if deposited at near-room temperature and ambient pressure from solution or by printing, can show such excellent optoelectronic material properties and yield highly efficient devices (7, 8). This behaviour is notable because film preparation under these conditions should result in high structural, crystallographic defect concentrations, which appears incompatible with the high level of crystallographic order that such films can show. Structural defects are distortions or dislocations of atoms (ions) from the unit cell of the theoretical crystal structure, and include 0D (point), 1D (line), 2D (planar) and 3D (bulk) defects. This result is surprising as it is quite different from what is the case with “classical semiconductors”, (9–12) where surfaces and grain boundaries need to be carefully passivated and structural defects eliminated or mitigated in post-synthesis steps, to reach a similar performance. Such a combination of preparation/properties/performance combination is unheard of for today’s commercially used, as well as non-commercial emergent inorganic semiconductors, and till now, seems unique for HaPs. Thus, it has created enormous interest in understanding what causes this combination (13–16). Commonly this unique feature of HaPs has been explained by defect-tolerance (DT), (17–22) based on theoretical models and computations, i.e., the materials were “declared” to be “defect tolerant” semiconductors (10) (see next paragraph). A recent high-level computational electronic structure study concluded, though, against DT (23). Strong computational theory support for DT came from combining molecular dynamics with DFT computations, showing large (up to 1 eV) picoseconds fluctuations in in-gap defect levels (24, 25), which facilitates a DT mechanism. Another rationalization is the coupling of the electronic carriers to low-frequency phonon modes (resulting in small bulk moduli and therefore a soft lattice), making non-radiative recombination a multi-phonon process (26–28). While experimental evidence for DT remained indirect or absent (specifically as an intrinsic property of the bulk material) (29), such evidence for self-healing (SH) of defects in HaP materials (single crystals and poly-crystalline films) has been accumulating, from our group and others (30–36). Recently we compared the two explanations (DT vs. SH) for the exceptional qualities of HaPs and concluded that DT alone cannot explain HaP behavior (37). We noted that especially transient DT, acting in conjunction with SH, cannot be excluded, and, as a caveat, that, as yet clear experimental results for DT (beyond “consistent with”) remain lacking. As pointed out, e.g., in ref. 37 (37), experimentally showing defect tolerance is challenging, in part because the term ‘defect tolerance’, as used in the context of the optoelectronic properties of HaPs, is somewhat ambiguous. In a theoretical work on chalcopyrites (CIGS), the Main text 3 “electrically benign nature of structural defect pairs” that those materials can sustain due to “structural tolerance to large off-stoichiometry” was noted (11). For HaPs, DT has been justified by their high dielectric constant (∼ 3) times larger than for CIGS or CdTe thin films), because it reflects their ability to effectively screen electrostatic perturbations. Defect-defect interactions were central in those works, as they were thought to change in-gap defect levels to resonances in the bands (38). There are other definitions for the term ‘DT’, but the most operational one (meaning, one that translates directly to device performance) is the following: Semiconductors such as HaPs (especially Pb-HaPs), are ‘defect tolerant’ if they show good optoelectronic quality, even if they (are expected to) have a high structural defect density (including 0D, 1D, 2D, and/or 3D structural defects) (10). The rationale for such a definition is that high optoelectronic quality normally reflects a low density of intrinsic structural defects because such defects can act as efficient electronic charge traps or recombination centers. Notably, the direct implication of this operative definition is that one must provide both structural evidence (from evaluating the structural quality of the material, bulk, or bulk and surfaces) and optoelectronic evidence (assessed via a material’s properties, such as optical absorption or emission, electronic transport, etc.) to test proposed defect tolerance of HaPs. In fact, this is correct also when referring to other definitions of DT, as the term relates the effects of existing intrinsic structural defects to the optoelectronic characteristics of HaPs (38–40). To yield direct experimental evidence for DT in Pb-HaPs, we report and compare the structural quality of pure 3D, 2D, and 2D-3D Pb-HaP single crystals to optoelectronic characteristics that are sensitive to structural defects. We compare a family of Pb-iodide HaPs: - pure 2D HaP - (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 or BA2PbI4 (C4N1), and (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)2Pb3I10 or BA2MA2Pb3I10 (C4N3), and the widely studied, archetypical - 3D HaP - (CH3NH3)PbI3 or MAPbI3 (MAPI). While most of the HaP-based potential applications use polycrystalline thin films, fundamental understanding requires at least to start with more controllable samples, wherever possible, i.e., high-quality single crystals or epitaxial films. As the latter is not (yet) readily available in macroscopic sizes, if at all, we, as others, have turned to single crystals for fundamental studies. Thus, single crystals of Pb-HaPs with different dimensionalities were grown and are analyzed here, to try to assess possible differences between them in terms of the relationship between structural and optoelectronically active imperfections, if any (also building on earlier studies of ours concerning self-healing differences between 2D and 3D HaPs (33)). Main text 4 To assess the quality of such single crystals, one normally relies heavily on X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements with the θ-2θ Bragg-Brentano (θ-2θ, for short) geometry, by identifying the presence of a single set of peaks, corresponding to a single phase with one clear crystallographic orientation. While certainly a necessary condition, it is far from being a sufficient one, as the common θ-2θ XRD experiments are insufficiently sensitive to slight structural inhomogeneities. We evaluate the single crystal quality of these materials using additional XRD measurements, apart from the qualitative results from θ-2θ geometry, namely quantitative rocking curves (RC, see Figure S1, SI). The RC experiments include repetitions at different φ values (see Figure S1, SI). These extra measurements inform on possible tilts of crystallographic planes with respect to the single crystal surface (out-of-plane rotations), as well as on twists about the substrate normal (in-plane rotations). In addition, the tails of the RC also reflect point defects at > 1013/cm3 densities (estimate for single crystal Si; cf. ref. 41 (41)), i.e., 1-3 orders of magnitude above the doping /trap densities that have been deduced for high quality HaP single crystals. Overall, the RC width, specifically its full width at half maximum (FWHM), as well as any differences between the RC shapes at different φ values (cf. SI, Fig S5 b, for HQ MAPI), and also the widths of the RC tails, inform on the single crystal’s quality (41). As a result, the XRD analysis done here allows the tracing of 1D line defects (like edge or screw dislocations), 2D planar defects (like stacking faults or grain boundaries), and/or 3D bulk defects (like voids and impurities), as these structural defects directly affect the orientation of a lattice plane, and, thus, result in changes that can be detected experimentally by comparing RCs. For 0D defects, which are reflected in RC tails, the higher dimensional defects can be viewed as including some and/or resulting from arrays of 0D defects with potential optoelectronic activity, while the higher dimensional defects can also have such activity by themselves (9, 42–44). Our measurements do not inform on the intrinsic defect levels that are thermodynamically dictated, and that, as in any ordered solid, cannot be avoided in HaPs (45, 46). In parallel, easily applied, quick experimental methods for the preliminary assessment of the crystal quality are described. We then describe how FWHM values of the steady-state photoluminescence (PL) peak, the transient PL decay curves, and a semi quantitative analysis of the sub-bandgap surface photovoltage (SPV) response, are used to assess the optoelectronic quality of the same crystals. All the methods applied here provide bulk information; the X-ray penetration depth in HaPs is 4 μm (33), and the depth of carrier/exciton generation by supra-bandgap illumination in those materials is between 100s to a few 1000s of nanometers (see section II C below) (47, 48). In the context of detecting possible sub- bandgap defects, this volume extends deeper, because of the (much) weaker absorption of sub-bandgap photons. Main text 5 This combined approach yields experimental evidence for DT in the 3D, 2D-3D, and 2D HaPs crystals, i.e., the differences in density of structural defects does NOT translate into the corresponding differences in optoelectronically active defects. Results and Discussion 2D HaP BA2PbI4 (C4N1), and 2D-3D HaPs BA2MAPb2I7 and BA2MA2Pb3I10 (C4N2 and C4N3, respectively) single crystals were prepared by using the slow cooling method (see Section S1, supplementary information, SI) (33). 3D HaP MAPbI3 (MAPI) single crystals were prepared by using a modified inverse temperature crystallization method (Section S1, SI) (49, 50). The phase purity of the C4N1, C4N2, C4N3, and MAPI single crystals was verified by powder XRD on pulverized single crystals (see experimental details in Section S2, SI, and the corresponding XRD diffractograms in figure S2, SI). A. Structural Quality: Quantitative Evaluation To check the structural quality of the intact single crystals, we performed θ-2θ XRD scans directly on the crystals. The phase purity of the crystals was verified by grinding them and excluding traces of any secondary phases (see Fig. S2 in the SI). For the C4N1 crystal, diffraction peaks of the (00n) family of planes were observed (Figure 1a) (51). The narrow full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the diffraction peaks in the θ-2θ XRD scan indicates high- quality periodicity, as expected for single crystals. To assess the degree of single crystallinity and quantify it, an omega (ω) scan is required (see Figure S1, SI); the resulting θ vs. intensity plot is called ‘rocking curve’ (RC). An RC analysis evaluates the perfection of a single crystal. The wider is the curve, the less perfect is the crystal and the higher is its so-called mosaicity. RCs reflect the extent of out-of-plane misorientation with regards to the specific set of planes that dominate the θ-2θ diffractograms. The extent to which those crystallographic planes deviate from being perfectly oriented with respect to one another will be manifested in the RC. The appearance of several peaks reflects the existence of sufficiently misoriented single crystalline domains so that their diffraction becomes distinguishable beyond widening the RC. Note that, being a diffraction method, only periodic structural defects are sampled, which, in the case of HaPs are likely to be of more than one kind, due to the low free activation energies for formation and decomposition of the Pb-iodide perovskites. For C4N1 the RCs will show orientation deviations for the {00l} family of planes. RCs for the two different C4N1 crystals (from Figure 1a) are shown in Figure 1b. The average FWHM values of the RCs of these two crystals differed widely: 0.08° vs. 0.57°, for crystals 1 and 2, respectively (the average FWHM value of each crystal represents the RC-FWHM taken at φ = 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270° of a specific crystal, see more in the next paragraph). Therefore, the corresponding SCs will be referred to as ‘Higher Quality C4N1’ (C4N1 HQ, instead of ‘crystal 1’), and ‘Lower Quality C4N1’ (C4N1- LQ, instead of ‘crystal 2’), respectively. Main text 6 rectangle is the diffraction angle (25.75°), at which the rocking curves, RCs, by ω scan, are recorded. b. RC at 2θ = 25.75° and at φ = 180° for crystal 1 (black) with a narrow rocking curve i.e., higher quality (HQ) (average FWHM ≈ 0.08°) and for crystal 2 (red) with a wide rocking curve i.e., lower quality (LQ) (average FWHM ≈ 0.57°). c. RC for higher-quality C4N1 (C4N1-HQ) crystal performed at four different φ values (inset: illustration of the angle φ). d. RC for lower-quality C4N1 (C4N1-LQ) crystal at four different φ values. From RC measurements that were performed at different φ values (see Figure 1c and Figure S1), we observe that the FWHM for the HQ crystal (Figure 1c) varied from 0.04° at φ = 0° and 180° to 0.13° at φ= 90° and 270°. For the C4N1-LQ crystal, dramatic differences in shape and FWHM values of the RCs were found at different φ values (Figure 1d). We note that due to the soft nature of the HaP single crystals, and technical limitations (laboratory, rather than synchrotron measurements), the shifts in peak positions of RCs at different φ values are NOT considered. The wide FWHM values and dissimilar diffraction patterns seen in the RCs of C4N1-LQ indicate significant lattice imperfections, not seen in the θ-2θ measurements. According to Dolabella et al. and Masiello et al., wider RCs indicate more out-of-plane misorientations, while variations in the RC shape and width while changing φ (in our case, from 0° to 90 ° to 180° to 270°) indicate in-plane misorientations (41, 52). In other words, the reason for the dominant variations between the different RCs of C4N1-LQ is that, while the stacked C4N1 crystalline flakes have similar crystallographic orientation relative to the Z axis (the direction normal to the crystal’s surface, as seen from the θ-2θ XRD scan, Figure 1a), they do not have the same over-all orientation. Such can be the case when on average all the Main text 7 planes are orthogonal to the Z axis, but there are slight tilts between individual planes, parallel and perpendicular to the crystal’s surface (the X-Y, Y-Z planes). Importantly, Kim et al. reported that for GaN epitaxial films, complex peaks (spreads) seen in RC originate from the presence of multi-domain structure (53). This indicates that (i) the HQ crystal has only slight periodic disorder compared with the LQ crystal, and that (ii) measuring the RC at different φ values is crucial for evaluating the degree of single crystallinity. Thus, even though the C4N1- HQ crystal is not a perfect single crystal, it is of much higher crystalline quality than the LQ one. On similar lines, in the θ-2θ XRD scans of 2D-3D C4N2 (Figure S3a, SI) and C4N3 crystals (Figure S4a, SI), as well as 3D MAPI crystals (Figure S5a, SI), diffraction peaks belonging to the {h00} planes are observed with narrow FWHM (for both HQ and LQ crystals), indicating high periodicity. But, in an RC measurement (ω-scan) at different φ values (like for C4N1) there is a clear difference between HQ and LQ crystals (see Figures S3b-c, S4b-c, S5b-c, SI). Overall, these results show clearly that measuring only a single crystal’s θ-2θ XRD scan is insufficient to gauge the structural quality of HaP single crystals. It is worth noting that the C4N1, C4N2, and C4N3 crystals, either HQ and LQ, were formed in the same crystallization system, whereas the MAPI HQ crystals were synthesized by optimizing temperature control in the inverse temperature crystallization method. B. Structural Quality: Qualitative Evaluation While the RC analysis was found to provide a quantitative evaluation of the single crystal quality, we find that a quick physical examination can qualitatively indicate about the single crystal quality. For 2D and 2D-3D single crystals, crystal quality can be assessed from simple mechanical exfoliation. After a scotch-tape exfoliation, for HQ crystals, a clean and crack-free surface is observed (C4N1-HQ, Figure 2a), while for the LQ crystals, a stepped or cracked surface is observed (C4N1-LQ, Figure 2b). Apart from that, we note that the ability to exfoliate the 2D and 2D-3D crystals is a valuable tool for exposure of a pristine surface, crucial for surface-sensitive measurements. Main text 8 exfoliated C4N1-LQ (right) and its exfoliated flake (left). c. Cleaved MAPI-HQ crystal. d. Cleaved MAPI- LQ crystal. In addition to mechanical exfoliation, imaging the crystal with a transmission optical microscope under polarized light allows a clear and quick qualitative evaluation of crystal quality. The imaging reveals that while the transmission of polarized light for C4N1-HQ is uniform throughout the sample (Figure S6b, SI), it appears nonuniform for C4N1-LQ (Figure S6d, SI). This is because due to anisotropy, the polarized light travels at different velocities through the material and takes different pathways depending on the light beam’s orientation, relative to the crystallographic orientation of the crystal. In this method, which is used widely in mineralogy and gemology (56), the resulting color contrast for polarized light transmission reflects differently oriented volumes in the crystal. Here the contrasting features across the C4N1-LQ crystal confirm that it is more heterogeneous than the C4N1-HQ crystal. For 3D MAPI crystals, a quick qualitative indication can be observed by cleaving the crystal parallel to a crystal plane. If a clean cleavage along a particular crystallographic plane is achieved (which leads to the exposure of mirror-like crystal faces of the two freshly exposed surfaces), it indicates a high-quality single crystal, corresponding to the HQ single crystal (Figure 2c and Supplementary Video 1). Instead, if the crystal breaks into many fragments while cleaving, it indicates that this is a LQ single crystal (Figure 2d and Supplementary Video 2). While this physical examination of the 3D crystals is destructive (to some degree, Main text 9 depending on the quality of the parts after cleavage), for 2D crystals the scotch tape exfoliation examination can be considered (almost) non-destructive. Thus, for 2D crystals, this physical examination can be easily applied. C. Optoelectronic Quality: Qualitative and Semi-quantitative Evaluation Now that we have established the structural differences between HQ and LQ crystals of various compositions, we further look at two properties that can show evidence for opto- electronically active defects in the C4N1 (2D), C4N2 (2D-3D) and MAPI (3D) crystals: photoluminescence (PL), and surface photovoltage (SPV) measurements. Our hypothesis is that, in the absence of DT, for a given composition and structure, a crystal of higher structural quality (i.e., HQ) will have: 1) a narrower FWHM of the main PL emission peak, indicating a smaller density of band tail states, or, more generally, of shallow defect states near the band edges, 2) longer carrier lifetimes, and 3) smaller sub-bandgap SPV response (indicating a lower density of deep defect states within the forbidden gap) than those of a LQ crystal, i.e., one of poorer structural quality. The reasoning is that, as for common semiconductors, structural disorder implies structural defects, which can be traced to 0D point defects (where a single point in the actual lattice differs from the perfect lattice structure) (57). The electronic activity of these defects leads, in turn, to charge/discharge states with energy levels between the band edges, i.e., within the forbidden gap (bandgap). Mostly theoretical, and some experimental (for 2D defects) data have shown that structural defects in HaPs are effectively the most attractive channels for the migration of point defects and that the 0D defects preferably form at 2D defects, via grain boundaries and surfaces (58, 59). The presence of such sub-bandgap states will affect the (opto)electronic quality of the crystal. Direct experimental identification of 0D structural point defects (i.e., different from inferring their presence from interpreting spectra or diffraction data), is non-trivial and has, to the best of our knowledge not been attempted for HaPs at levels below full atomic percentages of foreign material (e.g., Bi “doping”) (58, 59). Specifically, XRD-based evidence for a ~0.2% (~1 pm) CsPbI2Br lattice shrinking upon doping with Zn(II) or Sb(III) at 1 at.% Pb was shown on polycrystalline films with at least a few 100s of nm grain size (to exclude surface doping) (60). Another study of Sm(II) (0.7-3.5 at.% Pb) doping of MAPI showed that bulk dopant incorporation led to 0.5 pm increase in lattice parameter for all Sm levels, suggesting Sm(II)→ Sm(III) oxidation (61). The doping of FAPbI3 with Nd(III) (5 at.% Pb), ended up in ~1.4% change in lattice parameter, with similar results for doping with Ca(II) and Na(I) (62). Furthermore, in one case, doping of MAPbBr3 single crystals by 1 at.% Pb of Bi(III) gave a 1000 fold increase in (n-type) conductivity, with ~0.01 % lattice parameter decrease, but some increase in diffraction peak widths (63). The presence of such sub-bandgap states will affect the (opto)electronic quality of the crystal. We find that for a given composition, the FWHM of the PL emission peak is essentially not affected by the structural quality of the crystal (Figure S7, SI). This finding already suggests Main text 10 that with respect to tail states, no correlation is found between the presence of structural defects and the emergence of PL-detectable densities of shallow defects near the band edges. Although time-resolved PL, TRPL, is widely used for assessing the optoelectronic quality of HaP samples, accumulating experimental evidence suggests that, while extracting a single PL lifetime value may be useful for comparing different samples in the same lab (as we tried to do in this study) (64), absolute PL lifetime values should be viewed with care. The reason is that they can vary significantly between laboratories, due to factors such as sample preparation, surface passivation, excitation parameters, measurement atmosphere, and the models used for the data analyses (65–70). This point is further supported by the results of a recent meta-analysis by Yuan et al., who studied TRPL data measured on HaPs from many published papers (70). They find that the extraction of lifetimes is very problematic when it comes to HaPs, and that accordingly, the same holds for conclusions based on those values. In addition, surface states and crystals’ geometry were shown to have a primary influence on TRPL results of HaPs (71–75). Still, TRPL data of HQ and LQ single crystals of 2D, 2D-3D, and 3D HaPs were collected (see figures S8 and S9, as well as table S1 in the SI) to evaluate if the results can be used as comparative tool. We used two different systems for this, a home-built and a commercial one with comparable results. To remove some of the problems inherent in TRPL lifetime measurements the results that we report here were measured by the commercial system, i.e., the same instrument, for all samples, and using identical excitation conditions for any given set of HQ and LQ HaP samples. We used a low excitation intensity, with photon pulse flux of ~2.5 x 109 photons/cm2 (5 x 1010 photons/cm2 for the home-built system). As a result of the overlap between the times of the C4N1 TRPL decay and that of the excitation beam (system response), those data cannot be analyzed meaningfully (see figure S8a). The C4N2 samples were not measured because of technical problems. We tried to obtain values for lifetimes by fitting the decay data for each of the C4N3 and MAPI single crystals, using both mono- and bi-exponential functions (see SI, Figs. S8 b, d and c, e). Neither mono- nor bi-exponential decay functions produced a good fit for the collected data. With this caveat in mind, the values for the HQ samples are about half those for the LQ ones (see Table 1 and SI Table S1). Slow decay time, τ2, values, obtained from using the bi- exponential function, range for both HQ and LQ crystals from tens to over a hundred ns, comparable to those reported in the literature for single crystals of MAPI and C4N3 (see Fig. S9, SI) (64, 72–74, 76–79). Composition Crystal-Quality PL lifetimes (nsec) τ1 / τ2 * Main text 11 C4N3 (2D-3D) HQ 1.4 / 14 LQ 2.5 / 24 MAPI (3D) HQ 7.5 / 46 LQ * See caveat re. the bi-exponential fit to the TRPL decay curves in the text. The raw TRPL data are shown in SI Figs. S8 and S9 and given in more detail in Table S1 Furthermore, PL quantum yield measurements, which theoretically would be a good measure for the evaluation of the SCs’ qualities, are commonly not used for HaP single crystals as indicator for crystal quality (72–74, 76, 77). Probably, this is, at least in part because the systems used for this measurement rely on the assumption that the sample is optically thin (negligibly reabsorbing the emitted light), while such is not the case for single crystals and for most PV-quality thin films of HaPs, materials that are known for their high absorption coefficients. For SPV, we focus solely on sub-bandgap SPV photons and the sample’s response. SPV is a technique that, in contrast to the more commonly used PL, does not rely on radiative recombination processes. An SPV signal is observed in cases where the photogeneration of charge carriers results in charge carrier separation in space. Because HaPs are high-quality (i.e., low optoelectronically active defect density) semiconductors, detecting defect-related signals poses a challenge. To meet that challenge, light-modulated SPV measurements in combination with lock-in detection were employed, in order to significantly increase the sensitivity and S/N ratio. In addition to the challenge of detection, there is the as yet unsolved issue of quantifying the defect densities that give rise to the SPV signal. In our case, we propose a comparative semi-quantitative assessment of the defect densities by integrating the area below the SPV curve, at energies less than the bandgap (see more about this in the SI, section S4). Such an approximation was previously employed to compare defect densities in Halide Perovskites from photoemission measurements by Lee et al (80). Optical absorption coefficients for photon energies below the bandgap energy are orders of magnitude lower than those above (at higher photon energies than the) bandgap, at 450 nm for the 2D and 2D-3D samples, or at 640 nm for MAPI, the excitation wavelengths that we used for the TRPL experiments with home-built system (see SI, section S2). This implies that sub-bandgap absorption, and, therefore, any possible carrier generation/release occurs orders of magnitude deeper into the crystals than carrier generation due to photons with energies above the bandgap (which will be limited to a few 100 nm). For sub-bandgap absorption in MAPI, any carrier generation/ release (from traps) will occur up to 104 nm, and for C4N1 up to 3x103 nm into the sample (48). Therefore, with sub bandgap photon excitation the change in contact potential difference, ΔCPD, due to photon absorption, i.e., the SPV, reflects also what happens in the bulk of the crystals (47, 81, 82). Main text 12 As extracting defect densities from SPV spectra is still a challenging task (82), we approximate the relative density of defects in the sample volume that is measured (which is constant for all samples) by integrating the area under the curve of the sub bandgap SPV response (above the background signal; cf. figure 3 and see SI, section 4 for further calculation details). We note that, sub bandgap SPV responses with and without crystal surface exfoliation prior to the measurement are almost similar (see Figure S10, SI, for C4N1-HQ crystal). From comparing the integration results (between HQ and LQ crystals), we find that, in line with the PL results, there are NO consistent differences between their sub-bandgap SPV responses. For C4N1, C4N2, C4N3 and MAPI, the integrated SPV spectral areas for the HQ vs. LQ are either the same or almost identical, as the minor differences between them are close to 3 times the experimental error (Figure 3, see also figure S12 in which we show that this conclusion is based on spectra of multiple samples). Furthermore, these differences in SPV between HQ and LQ crystals are indeed minor, because, using the same technique, a clear and significant change in SPV was reported for a systematic and slight change in extrinsic defect density by doping HaP with Bi. (83) Therefore, the results presented here that indicate the DT of intrinsic structural defects of Pb-HaPs are genuinely factual ones. Importantly, the type of sub-bandgap SPV in the fixed capacitor arrangement used in this study is one of the most sensitive contact-less techniques available today for detecting signals related to opto- electronically active defects (84). Main text 13 a. C4N1 b. C4N2 c. C4N3 d. MAPI. Area represents the area under the curve (grey zone), calculated between the limits of the rectangle edges, (dx) (yellow zone), with the baseline (lower limit on y scale) set at the SPV noise level. For clarity only one such grey zone is shown for each pair of (black and red) spectra. On the x (= photon energy) axis the upper limit corresponds to the cut-on energy of the respective long-pass filter used for each composition and the lower limit is around 0.5 eV, the photon energy, where any SPV signal disappears in the noise level. In the legends dx is the difference between the low and high photon energy limits, used to calculate the Area. See SI, section 4 for further error calculation details. D. Comparison of Structural and Optoelectronic Quality The results show that there is no correlation between structural defects and opto- electronically active defects in the 2D, 2D-3D, 3D HaPs that we studied (cf. Table 2 SPV integrated areas and FWHM of RCs). It is this absence that provides straightforward experimental evidence for defect tolerance, DT. This indicates that DT is related to the inorganic lattice, i.e., the sheet(s) of PbI6 octahedra, a common component for all the HaPs studied in this work. Our results can be explained by the following reasons that are connected to each other: 1. The relative softness of the perovskite lattice has been used to invoke formation of large polarons that would then result in efficient columbic screening of structural Main text 14 defects, to explain the optoelectronic quality of HaPs (85, 86). If correct, it could result in the lack of measurable optoelectronic effects that reflect electron-hole (non- radiative) recombination due to the relative increase in structural defects (from HQ to LQ crystals) (27, 28, 87, 88). However, some reproducible experimental results are clearly inconsistent with this view (89). 2. More fundamentally, the low deformation energy of Pb-HaPs, as expressed also in their soft lattice, could allow the material to tolerate structural defect-induced strain fields, which will mitigate the effects of the structural defects on the Pb-HaP optoelectronic characteristics (45, 90). 3. In addition, the dynamic local disorder resulting in a dynamic electronic landscape in HaPs, possibly masks the effects of the densities of structural defects at doping density levels (24, 91, 92). Following our experimental observations, the plausible mechanism for DT in Pb-HaPs seems to be associated with reasons -2- and -3-, the low lattice deformation energy and dynamic local disorder of Pb-HaPs, which is in line with the conclusions drawn from the computational studies that were reported earlier (24, 28). We note that, while our experimental results do not yet include all-inorganic 3D HaPs, the apparently central role of the Pb-halide lattice, suggests that all Pb HaPs, will show some degree of DT (28). On a side note, the exceptional self-healing of Pb-HaPs is also ascribed to one or more of the above-mentioned features, in addition to hydrogen bonding between halides and organic cation for hybrid Pb-HaPs. The FWHM values of the RC were extracted from the data presented in figures S11b-c, S3b-c, S4b-c, and S5b-c for C4N1, C4N2, C4N3 and MAPI, respectively. The SPV values were extracted from the data presented in figure 3 while considering the bandgap energies of C4N1, C4N2, C4N3 and MAPI. The error of the integrated SPV values is in the third digit after the decimal point; thus, it is negligible here; for more details see Section S4 in the SI. Composition Crystal-Quality RC-FWHM (a.u.) SPV (Area) (a.u.) C4N1 (2D) HQ 0.18 0.26 LQ 1.02 0.25 C4N2 (2D-3D) HQ 0.08 0.16 LQ 0.78 0.20 C4N3 (2D-3D) HQ 0.10 0.16 LQ 0.43 0.13 MAPI (3D) HQ 0.04 0.10 LQ 5.68 0.12 Main text 15 As noted elsewhere (37), the effect of DT on materials (and, thus, on device) stability, must reach a limit if defects accumulate. SH capability keeps the defect density at a “tolerable” level. By having both DT and SH, DT will be an important stabilizing effect in those HaPs that have a slower rate of SH (e.g., CsPbBr3 compared to FAPbBr3) by enabling a wide range of SH rates to be effective for material stability. Conclusion Overall, our results of rocking curve XRD (RC-XRD) analysis, as a measure of structural quality, and PL and sub-band gap SPV response as a measure of optoelectronic quality, show a lack of correlation between the RC-XRD and the PL/SPV results, for the 2D (C4N1), 2D-3D crystals (C4N2, C4N3) and 3D MAPI crystals. We suggest that the reason for this is the soft and highly dynamic (around a well-defined average) structure of the HaP lattice, especially the inorganic PbI6 octahedra component, the structural backbone of the lead HaPs studied in this work. Such dynamic lattice affects the electronic landscape, to overshadow or compensate electronic effects to an extent that any effects are below the detection limits of the highly sensitive technique/s employed in this work. This result also implies that for Pb-HaPs, the structural quality of crystals is, as far as we can measure by the means employed here, a poor predictor for optoelectronically active defects. We purposely focus on macroscopic-sized single crystals, instead of on polycrystalline films with sub-mm grain sizes (i.e., high surface/volume ratios). Thus, our results do not inform on the relation between surface defects and their effect on the optoelectronic properties of HaPs of various dimensionalities, which requires also the use of specifically surface- vs. bulk-sensitive characterization tools. We posit that the absence of correlation between evidence for defects from structural experiments on the one hand and optoelectronic ones on the other hand provides the first clear experimental evidence for defect tolerance in Pb-iodide HaPs, as DT appears the most obvious (Ockham’s razor) interpretative explanation. As such, we look forward to results from high-level computations, including the lattice dynamics, and from higher level (synchrotron- based) RC measurements, possibly complemented by other measurements that can match the sensitivity of SPV, to test our interpretation, and with experimentally-testable predictive power. The present results add to our level of understanding of the fascinating science of Pb- HaPs. The results can furthermore be viewed also in light of our earlier self-healing studies on 2D, 2D-3D, and 3D HaPs. A clear direction for future fundamental experimental work is to design experiments that can test the possible co-existence of defect tolerance and self- healing in HaPs. In summary, defect tolerance in Pb-HaPs suggests that the dynamic columbic screening in intrinsically “soft” and polarizable materials provides a design principle to achieve some co- existence of structural imperfections and close-to-optoelectronic perfection in materials. As Main text 16 such, DT can bridge any time lag between damage and self-healing to minimize effects of imperfections, to make materials more sustainable. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS NPJ and SA thank Dr. Davide Raffele Cerrati for providing the MAPI-LQ crystals, Dr. Sujit Kumar for help with PL measurements, and Dr. Anna Kossoy for assistance in the XRD measurements. IL, SA and DC thank Prof. Lioz Etgar and Tal Binyamin for their help with the TRPL measurements. NPJ acknowledges funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 MSCA Innovative Training Network MAESTRO under grant agreement no. 764787. At Bar-Ilan University work was supported also by the Israel Ministry of Energy as part of the Solar ERAnet PerDry consortium. At the Weizmann Institute of Science (DC) the work received support from the Minerva Centre for Self-Repairing Systems for Energy & Sustainability and the Sustainability and Energy Research Initiative, SAERI. IL thanks the AiF project (ZIM- KK5085302DF0) for financial support and Dr. Thomas Dittrich for fruitful conversations. Declaration of Interest: The authors declare no competing interests. Author contributions: NPJ, SA, and DC designed the research; NPJ, IL, YF and SA performed the experiments; NPJ, IL, YF, SA, and DC analyzed the data; NPJ, IL, SA, and DC wrote the manuscript. GH contributed to the data analysis and manuscript review. DC supervised this research work. All authors discussed and finalised the manuscript.