arXiv:2305.11179v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 16 May 2023 Spectral form factors of unconventional superconductors Sankalp Gaur1 and Victor Gurarie1 1Department of Physics and Center for Theory of Quantum Matter, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA We show that spectral form factors of unconventional gapped superconductors have singularities occurring periodically in time. These are the superconductors whose gap function vanishes some- where in momentum space (Brillouin zone) but whose fermionic excitation spectrum is fully gapped. Many, although not all, of these superconductors are topologically nontrivial. In contrast, conven- tional fully gapped superconductors have featureless spectral form factors which are analytic in time. Some gapless superconductors may also have singularities in their spectral form factors, but they are not as ubiquitous and their appearance may depend on the details of the interactions among fermionic particles which form the superconductor and on the underlying lattice where the particles move. This work builds on the prior publication where Loschmidt echo of topological supercon- ductors, related but not identical to spectral form factors, was studied. It follows that spectral form factors could be used as a test of the structure of the superconducting gap functions. Spectral form factor is a way to characterize the energy spectrum of quantum systems. It is defined as a trace of the evolution operator Z = tr eвҲ’i ЛҶ Ht = пҝҪ n eвҲ’iEnt, (1) and can be written as a sum over all the energy levels En of a quantum system. It is closely related to the thermal partition function of a quantum system, coinciding with its formal analytic continuation to the complex values of temperature. Fourier transform of the absolute value square of the spectral form factor produces the correlation between en- ergy levels of the system пҝҪ dt eiПүt |Z|2 = 2ПҖ пҝҪ nm Оҙ (Пү вҲ’ En + Em) . (2) Behavior of the spectral form factors in quantum many body systems attracted some attention recently . Here we show that spectral form factors in unconven- tional gapped superconductors have singularities which occur periodically in time, while their conventional coun- terparts have featureless spectral form-factors. More pre- cisely, consider the gap function вҲҶ(p), where p is the (quasi)momentum. In unconventional and especially in topological superconductors it cannot be nonzero every- where. Rather it vanishes at points, lines or surfaces in the momentum space or in the Brillouin zone. Consider the spectrum of Bogoliubov quasiparticles E(p) for those values p where вҲҶ(p) = 0. Suppose EвҲ’ is the minimum of Ep for all such p. If вҲҶ(p) vanishes at a single point, then we obviously cannot minimize Ep and instead take EвҲ’ to be equal to E(p) calculated at this point. Then the singularities occur at times tn = ПҖ(1 + 2n)/(2EвҲ’) where n is an arbitrary integer. We show that the nature of the singularities depends on the dimensionality of space and is given by вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј ln |t вҲ’ tn| (3) in two dimensional superconductors and вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј пҝҪ |t вҲ’ tn| (4) in three dimensional superconductors. For superconductors whose underlying fermionic parti- cle move on a lattice, the singularities could also occur at excitation spectrum computed where вҲҶ(p) = 0 (if E+ is different from EвҲ’). The existence of these singularities is not as ubiquitous as that of the ones associated with EвҲ’. Let us now demonstrate this by first studying the ex- ample of the two dimensional px + ipy (often abbrevi- ated as p + ip) superconductor. Specifically, we have in mind attractively interacting identical fermions with the Hamiltonian H = пҝҪ p З«(p)ЛҶaвҖ  pЛҶap вҲ’ О» V пҝҪ p,k,q k В· q ЛҶaвҖ  p 2 +kЛҶaвҖ  p 2 вҲ’kЛҶa p 2 вҲ’qЛҶa p 2 +q. (5) Here З«(p) = p2 2m вҲ’ Ој (6) is the kinetic energy of these interacting spinless fermions, О» is the interaction constant and V is the vol- ume of the system. These fermions are known to form a px +ipy paired fermionic superfluid, which for brevity we will refer to as a p-wave superconductor. It is a class D superconductor which is topological if Ој > 0 and has a gap as long as Ој Мё= 0. The Bogoliubov-de-Gennes (BdG) Hamiltonian of this superconductor takes the following standard form ЛҶH = пҝҪ p, py>0 пҝҪ ЛҶaвҖ  p ЛҶaвҲ’p пҝҪ пЈ« пЈӯ З«(p) вҲҶ(p) М„вҲҶ(p) вҲ’З«(p) пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ« пЈӯ ЛҶap ЛҶaвҖ  вҲ’p пЈ¶ пЈё . (7) are the gap functions. вҲҶp and М„вҲҶp are the magnitudes of 2 the gap functions (the subscript p emphasizes that these are p-wave gap functions). To avoid double counting, the summation over p is restricted to py > 0. Below all the sums over p for p-wave superconductors will be restricted in this way. Let us use the BdG Hamiltonian to calculate the spec- tral form factor. To do that, we diagonalize the BdG Hamiltonian for each p. Its eigenvalues ПүВұ(p) are ПүВұ(p) = ВұE(p), (8) where пҝҪ З«(p)2 + p2 М„вҲҶpвҲҶp. (9) Therefore the trace of its evolution operator is Z = пҝҪ p (10) Before proceeding to study Z, let us briefly discuss its analytic properties. Each factor Sp is obviously an ana- lytic function of time t. However, if Sp vanishes for some values of p at some critical time t = tc with all Sp re- maining nonzero if t deviates from tc, this could make Z nonanalytic at tc (we postpone the discussion whether Sp can indeed behave in this way until later). Indeed, sup- pose Sp vanishes at t = tc if p = pc. Quite generally we should expect that in the vicinity of p = pc and t = tc, Sp has the following expansion Sp вүҲ C пҝҪ t вҲ’ tc + Оұ |p вҲ’ pc|2пҝҪ , (11) where Оұ and C are some complex constants (we will see later that, even though it may not be obvious right now, the factors Sp are generally complex valued). This im- mediately leads to вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt = пҝҪ p вҲӮ ln Sp вҲӮt вүҲ пҝҪ p 1 t вҲ’ tc + Оұ |p вҲ’ pc|2 . (12) On the right hand side above the approximate expression for Sp valid with p in the vicinity of pc and tвҲ’tc small is substituted. The sum above is obviously a singular func- tion of time at t = tc, with the details of the singularity dependent on the dimensionality of space and on whether pc is zero or nonzero. This makes ln Z as well as Z itself a nonanalytic function of time at t = tc (note an obvi- ous similarity between the thermal free energy and ln Z introduced above). Let us now go back to Eq. (10). For a Hamiltonian (7) with given вҲҶp, М„вҲҶp, and З«(p), Eq. (10) gives the answer for its spectral form factor. However, in a superconductor, вҲҶp and М„вҲҶp are not fixed beforehand but must be deter- mined self-consistently, by matching the Hamiltonian (5) with the BdG Hamiltonian (7). To understand how to do it, let us recall that to calculate thermal partition func- tion tr exp(вҲ’ ЛҶH/(kBT )), we must determine вҲҶp and М„вҲҶp by solving the gap equation. In a p-wave superconductor, it takes the form 1 V пҝҪ p p2 tanh пҝҪ E(p) 2kBT пҝҪ E(p) = 1 О», (13) where T is the temperature and kB is the Boltzmann constant. This equation is solved for the product М„вҲҶpвҲҶp which enters E(p). The solution to this equation can be used for example to calculate the thermal parti- tion function of the superconductor. In order to adapt this to calculating the spectral form factor, we replace 1/(kBT ) вҶ’ it, with the result i V пҝҪ p p2 tan пҝҪ tE(p) 2 пҝҪ E(p) = 1 О». (14) This should be understood as an equation to determine М„вҲҶpвҲҶp, which should then be substituted into Eq. (10). In principle, there could be many solutions of the equa- tion (14). To find the one we should use we should first find the solution of equation (13) for the temperatures T where the solution М„вҲҶpвҲҶp is nonzero, and then analyti- cally continue it to the imaginary values of T . Now observe that this equation predicts that М„вҲҶpвҲҶp must not be real. Indeed, if it is real, the left hand side of this equation is necessarily imaginary, while the right hand side is real. Similar situation occurs in evaluation of the Loschmidt echo where one also finds that М„вҲҶ and вҲҶ are not complex conjugates of each other. With М„вҲҶpвҲҶp being complex, E(p) is also generally complex. As a result, the factors cos (tE(p)) generally do not vanish at any t. The exception to that is p = 0 where remarkably, this takes us to the previously discussed sce- nario given by the Eq. (11) with pc = 0. Specifically, for t close to any of the values tn given by tn = ПҖ 2 |Ој| (1 + 2n) , (15) with an arbitrary integer n, we can write Sp = 2 cos(tEp) вүҲ C пҝҪ t вҲ’ tn + Оұp2пҝҪ . (16) Here C = 2(вҲ’1)n+1 |Ој| , (17) and Оұ = ПҖ пҝҪ1 2 + n пҝҪ М„вҲҶpвҲҶpm вҲ’ Ој 2Ој2|Ој|m . (18) Importantly, Оұ is complex due to М„вҲҶpвҲҶp being complex. Note that this matches the conjectured form (11). 3 Working in the large V limit and replacing summation over p with integration we find 1 V вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt = 1 4ПҖ пҝҪ p dp t вҲ’ tn + Оұp2 . (19) The integral above is taken over p varying from 0 to infin- ity, although we must remember that only the approxi- mate value for the expression being integrated is written above valid for small p only. In particular, that means that the integral above can be cut off at some momen- tum scale, avoiding any divergencies at large p. It is then straightforward to see that the leading singularity is 1 V вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вүҲ вҲ’ 1 8ПҖОұ ln |t вҲ’ tn| . (20) The expression here is approximate, valid when t is in the vicinity of tn. Therefore we arrive at a conclusion advertised earlier. The spectral form factor for the 2D p-wave chiral su- perconductor has periodic logarithmic singularities which occur at times tn, defined above in Eq. (15). It is important for this argument that Оұ is complex and is not real, which in turn is related to М„вҲҶpвҲҶp being complex. Let us contrast this behavior with that of a conven- tional s-wave superconductor. Its Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian takes the form ЛҶH = пҝҪ p пҝҪ ЛҶaвҖ  pвҶ‘ ЛҶaвҲ’pвҶ“ пҝҪ пЈ« пЈӯЗ«(p) вҲҶs М„вҲҶs вҲ’З«(p) пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ« пЈӯ ЛҶapвҶ‘ ЛҶaвҖ  вҲ’pвҶ“ пЈ¶ пЈё . (21) Here вҲҶs, М„вҲҶs are momentum-independent s-wave gap functions. The spectral form factor takes the same form (10) but with the spectrum Es(p) = пҝҪ З«(p)2 + М„вҲҶsвҲҶs. (22) Here М„вҲҶsвҲҶs is controlled by the gap equation almost iden- tical to the one for the p-wave superconductor, given by i 2V пҝҪ p tan пҝҪ tEs(p) 2 пҝҪ Es(p) = 1 О». (23) The main point is that, just like in case of Eq. (14), the solution of this equation necessarily corresponds to М„вҲҶsвҲҶs being complex. As a result, Es(p) is complex. Unlike in case of the p-wave superconductor, Es(p) is complex for all p without exceptions. As a result, none of the factors Sp defined in Eq. (10) vanish for any time t, and the spectral form factor Z is analytic at all times. We see that the key distinction between s-wave and 2D p-wave superconductors was the presence in case of the latter of a point p = 0 in the gap function вҲҶ(p) = (px + ipy)вҲҶp where it vanishes. Furthermore, despite having to analytically continue the solution of the gap equation (13) to imaginary temperature 1/T вҶ’ it, we expect that the analytically continued gap function must also vanish as p вҶ’ 0. Indeed, from the structure of the Hamiltonian (5) the p-wave gap function must satisfy вҲҶ(p) = вҲ’вҲҶ(вҲ’p). (24) This enforces that the gap function must always vanish at p = 0 even if it is a solution of the analytically continued gap equation (14). More generally, the key necessarily condition for a nonanalytic spectral form factor is the gap function вҲҶ(p) which vanishes at certain values of p, not only at finite temperature, but also when analytically continued to imaginary values of temperature. A good second example of a p-wave superconductor is class DIII 3D topological superconductor (Helium III B phase) with the the Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamilto- nian ЛҶH = пҝҪ p пҝҪ ЛҶaвҖ  p ЛҶaвҲ’p пҝҪ пЈ« пЈӯ З«(p) ipОјПғyПғОјвҲҶp) вҲ’ipОјПғОјПғy М„вҲҶp вҲ’З«(p) пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ« пЈӯ ЛҶap ЛҶaвҖ  вҲ’p пЈ¶ пЈё , (25) where Пғy and ПғОј are Pauli matrices acting on the spin indices of the operators ЛҶap and ЛҶaвҖ  p. Its spectrum is also given by the equation (9), but with p being the 3D vector. By analogy with the previous analysis leading to equation (19), we immediately find 1 V вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt = 1 2ПҖ2 пҝҪ p2 dp t вҲ’ tn + Оұp2 вҲј пҝҪ |t вҲ’ tn|. (26) On the other hand, let us examine 2D spin-singlet chi- ral d-wave superconductor, which belongs to the sym- metry class C. The corresponding Bogoliubov-de-Gennes Hamiltonian is ЛҶH = пҝҪ p пҝҪ ЛҶaвҖ  pвҶ‘ ЛҶaвҲ’pвҶ“ пҝҪ пЈ« пЈӯ З«(p) вҲҶ(p) М„вҲҶ(p) вҲ’З«(p) пЈ¶ пЈё пЈ« пЈӯ ЛҶapвҶ‘ ЛҶaвҖ  вҲ’pвҶ“ пЈ¶ пЈё , (27) What sets this example apart from others is that while the gap function vanishes at p = 0, it is not automat- ically obvious that the gap function analytically con- tinued to imaginary temperature would still vanish in this limit. To elucidate this further, we suppose that the gap function consists of both d-wave and s-wave pieces, With rotationally invariant interactions, the gap equa- tion should decouple into two separate equations for вҲҶs, М„вҲҶs and for вҲҶd, М„вҲҶd. If вҲҶs is equal to zero for any temper- ature T , its analytic continuation to imaginary values of T should also be zero. At the same time, just as earlier, М„вҲҶdвҲҶd becomes a complex number, with the spectrum given by E(p) = пҝҪ З«2(p) + p4 М„вҲҶdвҲҶd/2. leading to the fol- lowing singularity in the spectral form factor (below ОІ is 4 real, while Оұ is complex) 1 V вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt = 1 2ПҖ пҝҪ p dp t вҲ’ tn + ОІp2 + Оұp4 вҲј ln |t вҲ’ tn| . (28) However, if вҲҶs is nonzero at some range of temperature, then it may still be nonzero after the analytic continu- ation 1/(kBT ) вҶ’ it. Then the superconductor will have a non-singular spectral form factor. To decide whether a particular superconductor of this form will have sin- gularities in its structure factor we need to examine the original Hamiltonian of the interacting fermions which led to this superconductor and see if any s-wave pairing is possible in addition to the d-wave pairing. Therefore, the singularities in this case are not as ubiquitous as in the p-wave case. All superconductors that we looked at so far were gapped to fermionic excitations. Let us now look at an example of a gapless superconductor. As an example, consider a 3D p-wave spin-triplet superconductor which has the Bololiubov-de-Gennes equation (7) with the gap function which behaves as вҲҶ(p) = (px + ipy) вҲҶp. (29) This gap function vanishes if px = py = 0, for all pz. Furthermore, given З«(p) = p2/(2m) вҲ’ Ој with Ој > 0, the excitation spectrum пҝҪпҝҪ p2 2m вҲ’ Ој пҝҪ2 + пҝҪ p2x + p2y пҝҪ М„вҲҶpвҲҶp (30) vanishes at px = py = 0, pz = вҲҡ2mОј. Suppose just as in the previous examples, once the temperature is made imaginary, М„вҲҶpвҲҶp becomes complex, but otherwise no other terms appear in the gap function. However, unlike the previous examples of gapful super- conductors, setting px = py = 0, we find that E(pz) now ranges from zero to infinity. As a result, the spectral form factor Z(t) is now an analytic function of time t. Now it is further possible to imagine that the fermions which formed this superconductor move on a lattice, as opposed to a continuous space. If so, then E(pz), at px = p0 now has a maximum somewhere as pz is varied. Denoting the maximum E+ it is straightforward to see that this would lead to a singularities in the spectral form factor occurring at times tn = ПҖ(2n + 1)/(2E+). These arguments show that singularities are possible even in gapless superconductors, but they are not as ubiquitous and their existence requires some assumptions. Note however that if Ој < 0, then the resulting super- conductor is gapful, although not topological. It will still have singularities controlled by EвҲ’ = |Ој|. Coming back to the gapful (topological) superconduc- tors, we can rely on the classification of the topologi- cal superconductors to see that there are five distinct classes of topological superconductors of interest, three in the two dimensional space and two more in the three dimensional space. We can summarize the behavior of their spectral form factors in the following table. Class Gap function Spectral Form Factor D, 2D (px + ipy) вҲҶp вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј ln |t вҲ’ tn| C, 2D (px + ipy)2 вҲҶd вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј ln |t вҲ’ tn| DIII, 2D (Пғzpx + ipy) вҲҶp вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј ln |t вҲ’ tn| DIII, 3D ipОјПғyПғОјвҲҶp вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј пҝҪ |t вҲ’ tn| CI, 3D vanishes on surfaces вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј пҝҪ |t вҲ’ tn| The first three entries in the table above were already worked out above. In particular, class D and class DIII superconductors are p-wave and the singularities in their spectral form factor are ubiquitous. The class C super- conductor may have singularities in their spectral form factor if its gap equation excludes the possibility of an additional s-wave gap function. The last entry refers to the class CI topological spin-singlet superconductor in three dimensions . It is in the same class as the conven- tional s-wave spin-singlet superconductor and therefore will have singularities in the spectral form factor only if its gap equation excludes the possibility of an additional s-wave gap function. If this is excluded, then working out its singularities relies on the understanding that its gap function vanishes on 2D surfaces in its 3D Brillouin zone. Starting from the point on the surface where E(p) has its minimum, following the arguments given here it is easy to see that вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј пҝҪ d2q1dq2 t вҲ’ tn вҲ’ Оұq2 1 вҲ’ ОІq2 2 . (31) Here q1 is the coordinate parametrizing the surface and q2 is the direction perpendicular to the surface, Оұ is real while ОІ is complex. By analogy with (26) we find вҲӮ ln Z вҲӮt вҲј пҝҪ |t вҲ’ tn|, (32) just as stated in the table above. Therefore, we see that the type of the singularity in the spectral form factor which occurs in topological super- conductors depends only on the dimensionality of space. Finally, we would like to remark that spectral form fac- tors nowadays are accessible to measuring in experiment, using the techniques of the atomic physics. For example, if the superconductor is realized by means of cold ions , its spectral form factor could in principle be mea- sured by directly evolving a random initial product-state up to some time, projecting it back to the inital state, and averaging over the random initial state. Therefore, spectral form factors can be used as a probe of the struc- ture of the superconducting order parameter. 5 Acknowledgement: We would like to thank E. Yuzbashyan for inspiring discussions. VG was supported by the Simons Collaboration on Ultra-Quantum Matter, which is a grant from the Simons Foundation (651440). S. Gaur, V. Gurarie, and E. A. Yuzbashyan, Phys. Rev. B 106, L220506 (2022). L. K. Joshi, A. Elben, A. Vikram, B. Vermersch, V. Gal- itski, and P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. X 12, 011018 (2022). J. S. Cotler, G. Gur-Ari, M. Hanada, J. Polchinski, P. Saad, S. H. Shenker, D. Stanford, A. Streicher, and M. Tezuka, J. High Energ. Phys. , 118 (2017). V. Gurarie and L. Radzihovsky, Ann. Phys. 322, 2 (2007). S. Ryu, A. P. Schnyder, A. Furusaki, and A. W. W. Lud- wig, New Journal of Physics 12, 065010 (2010). A. P. Schnyder, S. Ryu, and A. W. W. Ludwig, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 196804 (2009). A. Shankar, E. A. Yuzbashyan, V. Gurarie, P. Zoller, J. J. Bollinger, and A. M. Rey, PRX Quantum 3, 040324 (2022).