arXiv:2305.00958v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 1 May 2023 Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires Laxmipriya Nanda1, Bidyadhar Das1, Subhashree Sahoo1, Pratap K Sahoo1,2, and Kartik Senapati1,2 1School of Physical Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research, An OCC of Homi Bhabha National Institute, Jatni-752050, Odisha, India. 2Center for Interdisciplinary Sciences (CIS), NISER Bhubaneswar, Jatni-752050, Odisha, India. E-mail: kartik@niser.ac.in Abstract. We present results of magnetoresistance (MR) measurements in granular NiBi3 nanowires in the resistive state below the superconducting transition temperature. MR of 100 nm wide nanowires fabricated by focused Ion beam lithography from granular films of NiBi3 with and without magnetic Ni impurity were compared. The nanowire containing high concentration of Ni impurity showed oscillations in MR and also exhibited a negative MR in certain temperature and field range. None of these effects were observed in the nanowire with no Ni impurities. Therefore, we argue that this effect is a result of the random Josephson couplings realized across superconducting NiBi3 grains via magnetic inter grain regions. Such random couplings can cause local fluctuations in the density and sign of supercurrent, which can lead to negative MR and oscillations in MR, as proposed by Kivelson & Spivak [Kivelson et al. Phy. Rev. B. 45, 10490 (1992)]. Keywords: Superconducting grains, Magnetic inhomogeneity, Josephson coupling Submitted to: Supercond. Sci. Technol. Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 2 Introduction Transport in granular superconducting films is often interpreted in terms of a coupled network of Josephson junctions, where individual grains with well defined superconducting order parameters couple across the grain boundaries. Abeles has shown that in such an aggregate, the inter-grain charging energy arising from a finite inter-grain capacitance is of paramount importance for determining the critical response of the system. In multiply connected superconducting grains the distribution of inter- grain charging energy (equivalently, the distribution of capacitance) naturally brings in mesoscopic phase fluctuations into play. Since the phase and the number of Cooper pairs are conjugate variables inside a superconducting grain, phase fluctuations translate to Cooper pair number fluctuations in a reciprocal manner. In fact, Al’stuler and Spivak have shown that in disordered SNS junctions, mesoscopic fluctuations in current can completely dominate the transport, especially in the limit of suppressed current across the junction. Such a situation can be realised when superconducting grains are separated by inter grain regions of magnetic nature. Interestingly, the amplitude as well as the sign of the local order parameter can exhibit significant local variations inside the proximity coupled magnetic regions. It has been demonstrated in hybrid ferromagnet-superconductor systems that the coupling between two superconducting banks can be ”Zero” or ”π” type depending on the thickness and magnetic exchange energy in the barrier. While the ”Zero” type coupling corresponds to a forward current the ”π” coupling corresponds to a reverse current across the barrier. In a random network of multiply connected superconducting grains one can expect a range of inter grain spacing leading to large fluctuations in the sign as well as amplitude of the local order parameters. Kivelson and Spivak have analyzed the consequence of fluctuations in the sign and amplitude of superfluid density on the average superconducting property of an ensemble of superconducting grains. They have shown that in such cases the magnetoresistnace can undergo sub-harmonic Aharanov- Bohm type oscillations and also, can result in negative magnetoresistance. Although their work was in the context of superconductor-to-insulator transition in granular films, the general outcomes of their calculations should hold, in general, if the assumptions of the model are satisfied in a system. In order to test this hypothesis here we report the results of temperature dependent magnetoresistance measurements on a superconducting NiBi3 nanowire fabricated by focused ion beam patterning from a granular NiBi3 films. The choice of Superconducting NiBi3 films was motivated by two factors. Firstly, our earlier work on this system has shown that NiBi3 films, prepared by co-evaporation of Ni and Bi metals, grow in a very granular form due to the large difference in the melting point of the two constituent metals. Secondly, co-evaporation of Ni and Bi leaves some Ni impurity in the system which can be varied, at least in a qualitative manner. Therefore, a granular superconductor with magnetic inter grain regions can be realized in this system, ideal for testing the model of Kivelson & Spivak. We find that low field magnetoresistance Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 3 of a 100 nm wide NiBi3 nanowire, with significant Ni impurity, exhibits MR oscillations and negative MR. A NiBi3 nanowire of same width, albeit with no Ni impurity, did not show any of these effects. Comparing with the earlier reports on MR of superconducting nanowires, we argue that our results closely follow the general predictions of Kivelson& Spivak model. 1. Results 1.1. NiBi3 films and fabrication of nanowires From our previous studies, we have found that the intermetallic superconductor NiBi3 with a Tc ∼4.2 K, forms naturally at the interface of Ni and Bi films by the process of reaction diffusion at room temperature. Due to the highly diffusive nature of this combination it is possible to grow thin films of NiBi3 by co-evaporation of Ni and Bi. In this process, however, some surplus Ni and Bi impurities are expected to remain in the film. In order to control the magnetic Ni impurities, in this work, we have co-evaporated Ni and Bi through a magnetized mesh placed between the substrates and the sources. Further details are provided as supplementary information. In Fig. 1 (a) we compare the surface microstructures of ∼100 nm thick NiBi3 films grown with and without a magnetic mesh, marked as ”low-Ni” and ”high-Ni” samples, respectively. Granular microstructure of the films is apparent in both the cases. X-ray diffraction measurements of these two films (Fig. 1 (d)) reveals that the the strongest Ni (111) peak is almost non-existent in the low Ni film, grown with a magnetized mesh over the substrate. Henceforth we will use the nomenclature of ”Low-Ni” and ”High-Ni” to distinguish the two samples. 100 nm wide and 20 μm long nanowires were fabricated in a single-step milling procedure using 30keV focused Gallium ion beam which defined the nanowire and the contact pads in the same process. A schematic of the milling process is shown in the Fig. 1 (b). A scanning electron micrograph of the high-Ni nanowire is shown in Fig. 1 (c). The high resolution transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of the high-Ni sample, performed in a Jeol 200 keV system, is shown in Fig. 1 (e). Several grains oriented in different directions have been identified and shown in the magnified view. HRTEM images at another spot is given as supplementary Fig S1. The overall internal microstructure appears to be a distribution of randomly oriented NiBi3 grains. Since the film has been prepared by co- evaporation the surplus Ni may be expected to be distributed uniformly throughout the material. With different amount of excess Nickel in the NiBi3 film the magnetic nature of the inter grain region can change considerably, affecting the Josephson coupling. 1.2. The resistive state of NiBi3 nanowires below the superconducting transition temperature In this section we compare the transport behavior of the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires below the superconducting transition temperature. Figure 2 (a) shows the Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 4 28 32 44 48 High Ni NiBi 3 NiBi 3 Bi(012) NiBi 3 NiBi 3 NiBi 3 NiBi 3 NiBi 3 Ni(111) Bi(202) Bi(-311) Low Ni Intensity(a.u.) 2q (deg) 300 nm Low Ni I + I - V + V - Ga + ion beam NiBi 3 - Ni Substrate (c) 20 mm (d) (e) 300 nm High Ni (a) (b) (a) Scanning electron micrograph of low-Ni and high-Ni films of NiBi3 showing similar granular texture. (b) Schematic illustration of focused Ga ion beam patterning of the nanowire and contact pads from the film. The milling width was ∼200 nm. (c) A scanning electron micrograph of the 20 μm long and 100 nm wide nanowire. (d) Comparison of X-ray diffraction patterns of the high-Ni and low-Ni sample. For the low-Ni sample, which was deposited through a magnetized mesh, the Ni(111) peak has disappeared. (e) A representative high resolution transmission electron micrograph of the NiBi3 film showing dispersion of randomly oriented grains. Some grains of different orientations have been marked in different colors. The magnified views of the fringe pattern for the numbered grains are also shown on 5 nm scale. superconducting transitions of the high-Ni sample in the film and nanowire forms. The resistances have been normalized at 5 K. The un-patterned film shows a sharp transition above 4.5 K, which is the best known transition temperature for NiBi3 single crystals. The nanowire prepared from the same film shows a broader transition, below the initial transition of the electrodes close to 4.5 K. At the lowest temperatures the resistance of the nanowire flattens at a finite value. The same comparison of normalized resistance is shown in Fig. 2 (b) for the low-Ni sample in thin film and nanowire form. In this case also the un-patterned film shows a sharp transition around 4.5 K, while the nanowire resistance flattens at a non-zero value. The fact that the transitions of both the NiBi3 films are sharp and same as single crystal Tc, implies that the surplus Ni in both cases are primarily in the inter-grain regions. Otherwise the Tc of the individual grains, and consequently of the NiBi3 films, would have been significantly suppressed by the pair breaking effects of the ferromagnetic Ni. Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 5 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.4 0.5 High Ni Low Ni J (mA/nm 2 ) T S /T C 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.5 0.6 High Ni QPS QPS + TPS R/R N T/T c T S 0.00 0.04 TPS R/R N (TPS) 2 3 4 5 0.0 0.5 1.0 R/R 5K Temperature (K) Film 100 nm wire Low Ni 2 3 4 5 0.0 0.5 1.0 R/R 5K Temperature (K) Film 100nm wire High Ni (a) (c) (b) (d) and nanowire for the high-Ni and low-Ni samples, respectively. The resistances have been normalized to the resistance at 5K in both cases. While the films reach the zero resistance state, the nanowire remain in a phase slip driven resistive state down to the lowest temperature, consistent with reports on other superconducting nanowire systems. (c) A representative fit of the low temperature resistance (upto 0.7Tc) of the high-Ni NiBi3 nanowire, measured with 40 μA current. The open symbols are the measured data and the solid line is the fit with the combined QPS and TPS models. The solid symbols plotted of the right hand axis and left hand axis are the TPS and QPS contributions to the fitting, respectively. The normalized temperature Ts corresponds to the point upto which the QPS response dominates. The values of Ts found from similar fittings of the low temperature resistances, measured at various currents, are plotted in the panel (d) for low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires. The solid line in panel (d) is only to guide the eye. In the high-Ni nanowire, QPS has a smaller temperature range of influence compared to the low-Ni nanowire. The resistive states of superconducting nanowires, below the transition temperature, have been a widely studied subject. The early pionieering work of Langer & Ambegaokar , McCumber & Halperin(LAMH theory) has established that thermal phase slip(TPS) events stabilize the resistive state in narrow superconductors near Tc. Although this random process is ubiquitous in all superconductors, the collective time averaged effect of these phase slip events become apparent in superconducting nanowires. It was later established that well below the transition temperature, quantum phase slips (QPS) can lead to a finite resistance in nanowire, typically below ∼0.7 Tc . The combined effect of both mechanisms of phase slips leads to a finite resistance well below the transition temperature which increases with increasing temperature. We have fitted Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 6 the low temperature resistances (upto 0.7 Tc) of the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires to a combination of thermal and quantum phase slip models. Fig. 2 (c) shows a representative fit of the low temperature resistance of high-Ni nanowire measured with 40 μA current. The details of the fitting process are provided in supplementary information. In Fig. 2 (c) the open circles are the experimental points, the solid line is the overall fit, and the solid symbols corresponds to the QPS and TPS components of the fit. It shows that the QPS model fits very well upto a certain normalized temperature, TS, above which the TPS component takes over. It has been shown earlier that the resistive state of the superconducting nanowires is current dependent. Therefore we have performed resistance measurements of both nanowires at different bias current densities upto 0.06 μA/nm2. Using the same fitting procedure we have estimated the temperature TS upto which the resistive state of the nanowires is QPS dominated. Fig 2 (d) shows the current dependence of Ts for the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires. In the high-Ni nanowire the QPS regime seems smaller, possibly due to the enhanced propensity of occurrence of thermal phase slip events in regions of partially suppressed order parameter around the Ni impurities. These measurements ensure that dissipation in the resistive state of these samples is due to phase slip processes. In addition, these measurements also clearly delineate QPS and TPS dominated temperature regions in these nanowires. 1.3. Magnetoresistance in the resistive state of NiBi3 nanowires In this section we discuss the low field magnetoresistance of the high-Ni and low-Ni samples as a function of temperature. Measurements were performed with a current of 70 μA within a field range of ∼ 2800 Oe between 1.8 K and 5 K. The present work is concerned with the resistive state of the nanowire, where the current density is important in the context of the phase slip. With increasing current density, more phase slip events occur and may drive the nanowire into a fully normal state. Therefore MR measurements at higher current densities were ruled out to avoid heating effects. Fig. 3 (a) shows the MR of the high-Ni and low-Ni nanowire at 5K, slightly above the transition temperature of the NiBi3. at this temperature both samples show extremely low MR (∼ 5×10−4 % at 2800 Oe ) and very similar field dependence. This implies that the Ni impurity concentration does not play a significant role in determining the normal state MR of the nanowires. Apart from a two orders of magnitude increase in the MR, compared to the normal state, two distinct differences are notable in the MR at 3.4 K (Fig 3 (b)). Firstly, the MR of the low-Ni nanowire is almost double of the MR of high-Ni nanowire, which again confirms that the magnetoresistance is not determined by the Ni impurities in NiBi3. Secondly, the high-Ni nanowire shows an oscillatory field dependence of MR, unlike the low-Ni nanowire which shows almost linear field dependence. At the lowest available temperature of 1.8 K, low field MR of both wires almost overlapped with each other (Fig 3 (c)). This shows that the field dependent orbital pair breaking effects are similar in both nanowires. We have plotted Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 7 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.00 0.07 MR (%) m 0 H (Tesla) Low Ni High Ni 1.8 K (c) -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.00 0.07 Low Ni High Ni MR (%) m 0 H (Tesla) (b) 3.4 K -0.2 0.0 0.2 MR (%) m 0 H(T) Low Ni High Ni 5 K (a) Panels (a), (b), and (c) show the comparison of magnetoresistance for low-Ni and high-Ni NiBi3 nanowires at 5K, 3.4 K and 1.8K, respectively. In the normal state of NiBi3 at 5 K, both nanowires have same value and form of MR. Both wires have the same MR at 1.8 K too. However, at 3.4 K the MR of the high-Ni sample shows oscillatory behavior unlike the low-Ni sample. Oscillations at several temperatures, after subtracting a smooth polynomial background, are shown in the supplementary Fig. S2. The 3D surface map and the corresponding contour maps for the MR measurements performed at various temperature are shown in the panels (d) and (e) for the low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires. The high-Ni sample shows a clear negative MR region, marked black in the color map in panel (e), unlike the smooth temperature dependence of MR for the low-Ni nanowire shown in panel (d). the MR data measured at several temperatures as a 3D surface maps in Fig. 3 (d) and (e), for low-Ni and high-Ni nanowires, respectively. The color scale represents the MR percentage in these figures. Corresponding 2D surface projections are also shown in these figures. From these figures it is apparent that while the low-Ni nanowire shows an almost monotonic temperature dependence of MR, the high-Ni sample response is distinctly non-monotonic. In addition to oscillatory field dependence of MR, in a certain temperature range, the high-Ni nanowire also shows negative MR, which corresponds to the black regions in the color map in Fig. 3 (e). 2. Discussion An early signature of negative MR (nMR) in superconducting Pb stripes has been attributed to non-equilibrium charge imbalance effect at normal superconductor interface. Typically, a diffuse normal-superconductor interface forms around phase slip centers where Andreev reflection process introduces charge imbalance over a length scale of λQ, inversely proportional to the normal state resistivity of the materials. It has Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 8 been shown that a small external magnetic field decreases λQ. Consequently, the resistance of the phase slip process decreases and an overall drop in the resistance of nanowires is possible as a function of magnetic field. More recent observations of large negative MR in NbN nanowires and a:InO nanowires have also been interpreted in the same manner. The explicit field dependence of the resistance of the phase slip center, however, does not account for a non-monotonic temperature dependence of this effect. Therefore, this mechanism can be ruled out in the context of our data. Another mechanism for nMR has been proposed by Rogachev et al., in Nb and MoGe nanowires. They have conjectured that stray magnetic moments -0.2 0.0 0.2 6.4 6.8 R(W) m 0 H(Tesla) 3.4K 30 mA 50 mA 70 mA 100 mA (a) (b) S F Y(x) x Y 0 0 p 0 (a) Current dependence of magnetoresistance for high-Ni nanowire measured at 3.4 K. MR oscillations do not seem to depend on the bias current, ruling out the possibility of flux pinning related MR oscillations, as discussed in the text. (b) The top inset shows the schematic variation of the amplitude of the superconducting order parameter inside a ferromagnetic layer near a superconductor. Another superconductor can couple to the first superconducting layer in zero or π mode depending on their range of separation. The bottom inset shows a schematic internal granular structure of the current carrying nanowire, with random ”zero” and ”π” coupled grains. The dashed line shows an example of a possible current loop formed by positive and negative supercurrents across gains. Flux quantization through such loops can lead to oscillatory MR in superconducting nanowires. may form on the nanowire, whose pair breaking effects are suppressed at higher fields causing a negative MR in the nanowires. In such cases, nMR effect must start from zero field itself. Although Rogachev et al. have not identified any particular magnetic impurities in their nanowires, the NiBi3 nanowires in the present case certainly has Ni impurities. We can, however, rule out this possibility because, (i) nMR in Fig 3 (e) does not start at zero field, and (ii) the negative MR effect appears only in a certain temperature range. Negative MR reported by Tian et al. in Zn nanowires was explained by Fu et al. as a dissipative boundary effect of the contact pads, where field induced suppression of superconductivity in the contact pads allowed dissipation of vortex-antivortex pairs from the nanowire and promoted nMR. Negative MR in suspended NbN nanowires have also been interpreted in the same way. This effect, however, shows a very sharp field dependence unlike the present case. Chen et al. Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 9 have speculated that reduced phase fluctuations due to field driven enhancement of the dissipative quasiparticle channel in nanowires may have been the origin of negative MR in their Zn nanowires. A monotonic temperature dependence of nMR is expected in such cases, unlike our data. Xiong et al. have reported monotonic temperature dependence of nMR in superconducting Pb nanowires very close to the transition regime. They have speculated that fluctuations in the sign and amplitude of superconducting order parameter may be the cause of this effect. In these experiments, however, there is no clear basis for the negative sign of the order parameter. In contrast, the magnetic inter grain regions in our NiBi3 nanowire is a clear precursor for realizing negative inter grain currents. The other important aspect of Fig. 3 (b) is the oscillations in the magnetoresistance for the high-Ni nanowire. Although faint, two symmatrical oscillations are identifiable after subtracting a smooth polynomial baseline(Supplementary Fig S2). Incoherent penetration of vortex bundles into the nanowires at various spots of suppressed edge barriers can cause MR oscillations via flux matching effects. In that scenario, the period of the oscillations should be a function of magnetic field, unlike our data (Fig. 3). A matching effects can also arise from commensurable pinning force density with the density of vortices, resulting in periodic MR. However, Gurevich et al. have shown that this effect is strongly current dependent. In Fig 4 (a) we show the MR of the high-Ni nanowire, measured at 3.4K at different currents. The period as well as the depth of the resistance minima remained almost unchanged with current. Therefore, matching effect is very unlikely in this case. Another class of interpretations for the oscillatory MR in nanowires is the flux quantization effects through some effective phase-coherent loop formed by the current distribution in the nanowire. MR oscillations in granular Sn nanowires, granular NbN nanowires, and suspended a:InO nanowires have been interpreted in this way. A similar effect may be the origin of MR oscillations in high-Ni NiBi3. The only unified model describing both nMR and oscillatory MR in a superconductor was proposed by Kivelson and Spivak. The authors have shown that large fluctuations in amplitude and sign of the order parameter in a superconducting systems can naturally lead to both these effects. Although fluctuations in the amplitude of the order parameter can be expected in granular SC, no clear scope for a fluctuation in the sign of the order parameter has been identified in the earlier reported nanowire systems. The NiBi3 nanowire system is unique in this respect as the magnetic inter-grain regions provide ample scope for both sign and magnitude fluctuations of order parameter. When two superconducting regions are separated by a ferromagnetic region, it is now well established that the coupling between the two superconductors can be either 0-type or π-type, depending on the actual spatial separation between the two, as shown in the first schematic in the Fig 4(b). In the case of the Nickel barrier (inter-grain region, in this case) it has been shown that a 0-coupling can change to π-type coupling and vise-versa, within a length scale of 3-4 nm. Therefore, in this case, it is reasonable to assume that the intergrain Josephson Josephson coupling driven magnetoresistance in superconducting NiBi3 nanowires 10 coupling can have a random distribution of 0-type and π-type couplings. A schematic random couplings between the superconducting grains in the nanowire shown in the Fig 4(b). The observation of MR oscillations is possible only when some effective flux quantization loops (supercurrent loops) form in the nanowire. Since the external current is biased to flow only in one direction, (as shown in the schematic in the Fig 4(b)), effective supercurrent loops are possible only when there are some π-coupled grains in the sample which carry a local negative critical current, opposite to the external bias current. The dotted line shown in the schematic in Fig 4(b) shows an example of Such a possible quantization loop. The oscillation periods would then be determined by the average loop size due to the distribution of inter grain separations. 3. Conclusions In summary, NiBi3 nanowire is the only system which allows fluctuations in both magnitude and sign of the order parameter, due to the natural granularity and magnetic inter grain regions, respectively. Magnetoresistance of a NiBi3 nanowire with high Ni impurity concentration was compared with the MR of a nanowire containing negligible amount of Ni impurity in their phase-slip driven resistive states, below the superconducting transitions. It was found that the resistance of the nanowire with high Ni impurity undergoes periodic oscillations as a function of magnetic field. In addition, a negative MR also evolves in certain temperature range. Both these effects were absent in the NiBi3 nanowore containing negligible Ni impurities. Observation of both effects (oscillatory MR and nMR) in a single system strongly supports the model of Kivelson & Spivak, which shows that both these effects are natural outcomes of fluctuations in amplitude and sign of the superconducting order parameter in a system. As superconducting nanowires are highly desirable as lossless interconnects for nanoscale quantum devices , study of macroscopic quantum phenomena in nanowire systems is important. In this respect, NiBi3 is an unique quantum system to study in more detail. Acknowledgements We acknowledge the funding from National Institute of Science Education and Research (NISER), HBNI, Department of atomic energy (DAE), India, through plan project ”RIN-4001”.