1 A hybrid optical-wireless network for decimetre-level terrestrial positioning Jeroen C. J. Koelemeij1, Han Dun2, Cherif E. V. Diouf2, Erik F. Dierikx3, Gerard J. M. Janssen2 & Christian C. J. M. Tiberius2, 1Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands. 3VSL, Delft, The Netherlands. e-mail: C.C.J.M.Tiberius@tudelft.nl Global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) are widely used for navigation and time distribution1,2,3, features indispensable for critical infrastructure such as mobile communication networks, as well as emerging technologies like automated driving and sustainable energy grids3,4. While GNSS can provide centimetre-level precision, GNSS receivers are prone to many-metre errors due to multipath propagation and obstructed view of the sky, which occur especially in urban areas where accurate positioning is needed most1,5,6. Moreover, the vulnerabilities of GNSS, combined with the lack of a back-up system, pose a severe risk to GNSS-dependent technologies7. Here, we demonstrate a terrestrial positioning system which is independent of GNSS and offers superior performance through a constellation of radio transmitters, connected and time-synchronised at the sub-nanosecond level through a fibre-optic Ethernet network8. Employing optical and wireless transmission schemes similar to those encountered in mobile communication networks, and exploiting spectrally efficient virtual wideband signals, the detrimental effects of multipath propagation are mitigated9, thus enabling robust decimetre-level positioning and sub- nanosecond timing in a multipath-prone outdoor environment. This work provides a glimpse of a future in which telecommunication networks provide not only connectivity, but 2 also GNSS-independent timing and positioning services with unprecedented accuracy and reliability. The limitations of GNSS in urban areas are difficult to overcome. The limited radio bandwidth (~20 MHz) of GNSS systems implies metre level positioning errors due to multipath propagation, i.e. signals reflected off buildings and objects that interfere with the direct line-of-sight (LoS) signal10, while an obstructed view of the sky will impair even advanced GNSS receivers aided by inertial navigation systems5,6. These restrictions not only limit navigation applications: GNSS receivers are also widely used as time references3, enabling synchronisation of local clocks to coordinated universal time (UTC) with residual time errors of several nanoseconds at best. However, emerging technologies, such as quantum communication, require sub-nanosecond time synchronisation of (quantum) network nodes11. Moreover, even if GNSS errors could be reduced by the required 1-2 orders of magnitude, yet another bottleneck exists in the form of the unencrypted and relatively weak GNSS radio signals, which may be jammed, spoofed, or even forged to convey false time and position information. Amidst mounting concerns about the vulnerability of GNSS-dependent systems to (un)intentional disruptions7, network operators3 and governments12,13,14 have begun looking into possible back-up systems for GNSS. Alternative timing and positioning Several systems have been developed to cope with the limitations of GNSS. These include low Earth orbit satellite constellations14,15 and local terrestrial positioning systems14 based on GNSS-inspired signal structures with augmentations [one example being the Locata system, which employs two code-division multiple access (CDMA) signals with a 10 MHz chip rate on two frequencies, 51 MHz apart, within the 2.4 GHz band16,17] for improved signal power, coverage, and resilience (if combined with GNSS). Other systems make use of two-way ranging to Wi-Fi access points for positioning at the metre level14, or involve local networks of ultra-wideband radio transceivers to 3 reduce positioning and timing errors due to multipath to the decimetre level18 and sub-nanosecond regime20, respectively. However, these systems rely on two-way communication or radio transmissions from the mobile transceiver to a sensor infrastructure. Users thus have to reveal their presence and position, which is less privacy-friendly than the use of downlink-only (silent) GNSS receivers. Downlink-only positioning methods, like GNSS, also scale more favourably than two-way methods, for which the network overhead increases with the number of users. While each of the abovementioned solutions overcomes some of the GNSS limitations – sometimes leading to spectacular improvements – they require their own application-specific infrastructure, which forms a major obstacle to large-scale deployment. Established wireless-network-based (and therefore scalable) positioning methods, on the other hand, are still outperformed by GNSS14,21. Here, we describe a terrestrial networked positioning system (TNPS) based on a hybrid optical- wireless telecommunication infrastructure, which provides positioning in urban environments with centimetre to decimetre level uncertainty as well as sub-nanosecond time synchronisation. The system operates independently of GNSS, and many of the risks associated with GNSS are eliminated by the use of a fibre-optic infrastructure in combination with a constellation of terrestrial transmitters that enable received signal power levels one million times higher than typically received GNSS-signal powers. The TNPS demonstrated here is depicted schematically in Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1. A TNPS testbed was erected at an urban outdoor test site, The Green Village (TGV), located at the campus of Delft University of Technology (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Fig. 2). Six radio transmitters (Tx-1 ... Tx-6), dispersed over an area of 660 m2, play the role of anchor stations similar to the satellites of a GNSS constellation. Like in GNSS, the key concept that underpins the TNPS is the accurate measurement (by a mobile receiver) of arrival times of the various radio signals transmitted by the constellation. Time-of-arrival measurements are converted to ranges, and subsequently used to locate the receiver relative to the constellation through multilateration. Such measurements necessitate tight synchronisation of the internal clocks of the transmitters: 4 with radio signals propagating at nearly the speed of light in a vacuum, c=299,792,458 m/s, a time error of 1 ns translates to a 3-dm range error. We achieve sub-nanosecond synchronisation of the transmitters by use of White Rabbit (WR), a timing protocol that is implemented in optical 1.25 Gb/s Ethernet (8-bit/10-bit encoding) equipment8. Thus, the internal clocks of all WR network nodes are synchronised to a common reference clock so that each node replicates the time and frequency of the reference clock. Such synchronisation is achieved irrespective of fibre-optic and electrical signal propagation delays, which are quasi-continuously estimated by the WR protocol from measured round-trip delays, and electronically compensated. As shown in Figs. 1b and 2a, each transmitter in the TNPS network receives timing signals [in the form of 10 MHz and 1 pulse- per-second (PPS) electrical signals] from its associated WR timing node (TN), so that joint radio transmissions can be timed with an uncertainty of about 0.2 ns (see Methods for details). The reference clock for the WR network of our testbed is located at the Dutch metrology institute, VSL, and is connected to the TNPS testbed through approximately 2.5 km of installed telecommunication optical fibre. At VSL, a WR device is configured as WR Grandmaster (GM), taking its reference time and frequency directly from the timescale UTC(VSL), the Dutch realisation of Coordinated Universal Time. Through the WR network, the clocks of all nodes of the TNPS network are phase-coherently linked to UTC(VSL) and traceable to the base unit of time in the International System of Units (SI), the second. Radio signal processing and positioning The TNPS transmitters and receiver (Rx) are based on programmable universal software radio peripherals (USRPs). Tx stations transmit bursts of modulated radio signals for positioning, navigation and timing (PNT) at a carrier frequency of 3.96 GHz and an effective radiofrequency (RF) bandwidth (BW) of 160 MHz (Methods). The large BW helps resolve LoS signals from signals that are reflected by the various nearby buildings and objects at the test site. The signal structure and relative timing of the transmissions by Tx-1 ... Tx-6 are depicted in Figs. 2a,b. PNT signals are 5 encoded using orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM); see Fig. 2b. To this end we divide the 160 MHz signal BW into M=16 subbands of 10 MHz, each containing N=64 subcarriers, thus creating a multiband-OFDM signal. Good positioning performance can also be achieved using sparse signal bands (in our case employing only 7 out of 16 subbands), provided that the bands at the bandwidth edges are included22. Such sparse bands resemble the non-contiguous bands or combinations of separated bands that are frequently encountered in mobile communication systems. The position of the receiver is found from the arrival times of the OFDM signals as follows. The first step consists in determining the delay, τ̂ri, between transmission by Tx-i and reception by the receiver (Methods). From τ̂ri the pseudo-range, ρri, is derived, which (at a given time t) can be expressed as i + cδr(t) + εri(t). (1) Tx-i and Rx (with xr(t) and xi the three-dimensional position vectors of the receiver and Tx-i, respectively), h denotes the common hardware delay of all Tx-Rx links (which arises because all transmitters are based on identical USRPs, antennas, and cables), and τ′h i are small residual Tx-i- specific hardware delays; both h and τ′h i were determined separately (Methods). Furthermore, r(t) represents the unknown time-dependent clock offset of the receiver, and εri(t) is a term that lumps together all errors due to multipath, unknown residual hardware delays, and timing jitter. From the received OFDM signals the receiver determines for each transmitter the delay τ̂ri and pseudo-range ρri, from which the receiver position xr(t) and clock offset r(t) are subsequently solved by maximum likelihood estimation22,23 (MLE) (Methods). In addition to the OFDM time-delay (TD) positioning described above, we performed positioning with enhanced precision based on carrier-phase (CP) measurements (Methods). 6 Positioning and timing performance To assess the TNPS performance in an urban environment, static and slow kinematic tests (with the receiver unit carried by either a trolley or a car) were conducted at TGV, and seven test runs were performed in total (see also Methods and Extended Data Fig. 3). An optical land-surveying ground- truth (GT) system was deployed which provides position reference measurements with an estimated root-mean-square error (RMSE) of about 2.5 cm (Methods). Figure 3a shows OFDM-TD and GT position solutions during one run where the receiver was moved on a trolley along a 30 m long trajectory. Figure 3b displays the position errors for this run (as well as their mean and standard deviation), indicating good agreement with the GT results, and an overall empirical RMSE of 10.2 cm in the east-west (EW) direction, and 7.4 cm in the north-south (NS) direction (Table 1). Results from full-band and sparse-band OFDM-TD measurements are compared with CP results in Fig. 3c. We find that sparse-band and full-band OFDM-TD positioning have similar decimetre-level performance, as expected from the similar values for the theoretical Cramér-Rao lower bound (CRLB) for both methods9,22. CP positioning, however, delivers centimetre-range positioning: using ambiguity-float and ambiguity-fixed solutions (Methods), we achieved RMSEs as low as 4-5 cm and 2-4 cm (EW-NS directions), respectively (Table 1). The spread in the record of position errors is partly due to jitter and wander in the transmission times of the PNT signals. We experimentally determined an upper limit of 0.2 ns for these timing variations, which consequently contribute at most 3-5 cm (EW-NS) to the RMSE. The empirical RMSE of the TD positions, however, is appreciably greater, which we attribute to multipath effects. Indications of multipath are also found in the measured pseudo-ranges; Fig. 4a displays residual range errors (defined as TD range minus GT range) for each Tx-i. Apparently, range errors of several decimetres for a single transmitter occur. However, owing to the spatial diversity and redundancy of the constellation of transmitters, the weight of such errors in the position solution is reduced so that an RMSE below 10 cm is achieved. 7 Multipath is therefore a limiting factor in our TNPS, albeit at a much lower level – decimetre instead of metre – than in GNSS positioning by virtue of the much wider BW employed. This is illustrated in Fig. 4b, where theoretical multipath error envelopes for TD-ranging using the Global Positioning System (GPS) (L5 signal, 20.46 MHz BW) and the TNPS are shown. The maximum multipath error visible in Fig. 4b is 4 m for GPS, compared to 0.5 m achieved through the TNPS using full-band (160 MHz BW) as well as sparse-band OFDM (the latter occupying only 70 MHz of BW). CP ranging can be even less sensitive to multipath, because the sum phasor of multipath components with a combined amplitude smaller than that of the LoS component will lead to a phase error of at most π/2, corresponding to a range error of less than 1.89 cm at 3.96 GHz. Apart from multipath, radio navigation systems suffer from scenarios where the direct LoS to the transmitter is blocked, but where non-LoS (NLoS) multipath signals are still detected by the receiver, thus leading to position errors. Various strategies to detect and mitigate NLoS propagation in (ultra)wideband systems exist24,25. A conservative measure against NLoS is to omit the pseudo- range of an impaired base station from the positioning algorithm. To illustrate the robustness of our TNPS to such NLoS-implied omission of one or two base stations, we have computed position solutions for one of the runs at TGV for various reduced constellation sizes; see Extended Data Fig. 4 and Extended Data Table 1. Owing to the redundancy of the constellation, decimetre-level positioning remains possible in most cases if one or two arbitrary base stations are removed. One exception is base station Tx-6, whose exclusion renders a large section of the test run outside the remaining constellation’s coverage area, where – due to a mechanism known as geometric dilution of precision – positioning errors of several decimetres to up to a few metres may readily occur. Errors of a few decimetres may also occur for situations in which three base stations – half of the constellation – are excluded. For CP positioning, at least five base stations are required22, so that only one base station may be lost from our constellation. Our experimental data show that CP 8 positioning with centimetre-range uncertainty remains possible also if one base station is removed (Extended Data Table 2). The TNPS also enables accurate wireless time distribution, because the Rx clock offset with respect to WR network time is determined with sub-nanosecond uncertainty (Table 1 and Methods). The uncertainty is limited by errors due to multipath, the limited precision with which hardware delays were determined, and small residual misalignments of the time bases of the Tx stations. In our TNPS, WR network time is traceable to UTC(VSL), and the traceability was independently verified using a portable atomic clock with a standard uncertainty of 50 ns, limited by the drift of the portable clock (Methods). However, WR supports significantly smaller time uncertainties. This is illustrated by the time stability (TDEV26) of the roundtrip comparison between WR-SL and UTC(VSL), which was typically below 10 ps for averaging times ranging from 2 minutes to up to 115 days (Fig. 4c). The TDEV shown in Fig. 4c corresponds to a modified Allan deviation (MDEV26) of about 110-18 after 107 s of integration (Extended Data Fig. 5). The roundtrip time offset was 6 ns, which we attribute to uncalibrated delay asymmetries in the WR hardware and chromatic dispersion of the optical fibre. Well-developed methods27,28,29 exist to calibrate such delay asymmetries, making it is possible to synchronise WR devices to within a fraction of a nanosecond even over distances in excess of 100 km30 ,32. Therefore, our TNPS might be used to broadcast national realisations of UTC over the air with sub-nanosecond uncertainty, an improvement over common GNSS time distribution techniques by two orders of magnitude33. Compatibility with existing networks The TNPS reported here represents a milestone towards robust, network-based decimetre-level positioning and wireless sub-nanosecond time distribution in urban environments, based on signals that are significantly more difficult to tamper with than GNSS radio signals (because the relatively high signal levels and anticipated density of base stations will limit jamming and in 9 particular spoofing attacks to a small geographic area). However, the potential of any PNT technology to serve as a GNSS backup or next-generation positioning system also depends on the effort needed for its deployment. We here point out several crucial features of our TNPS which enhance its compatibility with existing telecommunication networks, thus reducing the barrier to implementation. First, there is the high technological readiness level of WR: the WR protocol has been standardised34, WR equipment has been commercially available for over one decade and, owing to its relatively modest bitrate, WR can operate (without loss of performance) at wavelengths in the fibre-optic spectrum that experience relatively large attenuation. Such wavelengths are often available as they are less suitable for high-capacity data transmission systems. Employing wavelength division multiplexing (WDM), WR operating in such unused wavelength bands has already been successfully integrated into long-distance fibre-optic networks that simultaneously carry live high-capacity data traffic, showing no interaction between the WR signals and the other data traffic, and achieving sub-nanosecond timing performance30,31,32. Second, our TNPS system may be implemented in ways that circumvent the scarcity of radio bandwidth. Present terrestrial PNT systems primarily make use of unlicensed frequency bands (e.g. the Industrial, Scientific and Medical band at 2.4 GHz in which Wi-Fi operates), while some other systems operate in proprietary spectrum (such as the NextNav Metropolitian Beacon System, which operates in an 8-MHz band around 923.75 MHz14). The sparse-band radio system demonstrated here could be designed such that its spectral footprint matches the spectra licensed to mobile network operators. These consist typically of several bands of 5-15 MHz BW distributed over the frequency range 600-3500 MHz, so that a sparse ultra-wide virtual BW may be achieved22. In addition, the OFDM modulation format is similar to that used in 4G and 5G radio access networks as well as Wi-Fi networks, suggesting that the OFDM PNT signals may be transmitted by present-day mobile base stations (in line with current and evolving standards such as 3GPP 36.305 for 4G and 38.305 for 5G) and Wi-Fi access points (assuming these are synchronised using WR or similar 10 protocols through the optical network, or over the air through two-way OFDM signal exchange35 with nearby TNPS reference transmitters). In our prototype TNPS, at a PNT message rate of 1 kHz, up to 94% of the telecommunication capacity remains available; however, this figure may improve to well above 99% by straightforward modifications of the PNT signal structure (such as joint PNT transmissions employing CDMA instead of TDM, or a reduced PNT message rate), and without loss of positioning performance (Methods). With the continuing densification of cellular networks and wireless access points, the density of such integrated telecom/TNPS transmitters may ultimately become sufficient to achieve city-wide or even nation-wide coverage, with a high level of robustness against MP and NLoS signals.