Topological superconductivity in two-dimensional altermagnetic metals Di Zhu,1 Zheng-Yang Zhuang,1 Zhigang Wu,2, 3, 4, вҲ— and Zhongbo Yan1, вҖ  1Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Magnetoelectric Physics and Devices, School of Physics, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China 2Shenzhen Institute for Quantum Science and Engineering (SIQSE), Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, P. R. China. 3International Quantum Academy, Shenzhen 518048, China. 4Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Quantum Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology Shenzhen, 518055, China. (Dated: November 7, 2023) Bringing magnetic metals into superconducting states represents an important approach for realizing uncon- ventional superconductors and potentially even topological superconductors. Altermagnetism, classified as a third basic collinear magnetic phase, gives rise to intriguing momentum-dependent spin-splitting of the band structure, and results in an even number of spin-polarized Fermi surfaces due to the symmetry-enforced zero net magnetization. In this work, we investigate the effect of this new magnetic order on the superconductivity of a two-dimensional metal with d-wave altermagnetism and Rashba spin-orbital coupling. Specifically we consider an extended attractive Hubbard interaction, and determine the types of superconducting pairing that can occur in this system and ascertain whether they possess topological properties. Through self-consistent mean-field calculations, we find that the system in general favors a mixture of spin-singlet s-wave and spin-triplet p-wave pairings, and that the altermagnetism is beneficial to the latter. Using symmetry arguments supported by detailed calculations, we show that a number of topological superconductors, including both first-order and second-order ones, can emerge when the p-wave pairing dominates. In particular, we find that the second-order topological superconductor is enforced by a C4zT symmetry, which renders the spin polarization of Majorana corner modes into a unique entangled structure. Our study demonstrates that altermagnetic metals are fascinating platforms for the exploration of intrinsic unconventional superconductivity and topological superconductivity. I. INTRODUCTION Magnetism and superconductivity are two fundamental phenomena in nature, whose interplay in materials is one of the central topics in condensed matter physics1вҖ“12. Magnetism can influence superconductivity in many ways, and its effect on the pairing symmetry is of particular interest13,14. Gener- ally speaking, magnetism is detrimental to spin-singlet super- conductivity but is conducive to the emergence of unconven- tional superconductivity. Take ferromagnetism for example. Its adverse effect on spin-singlet pairings can be attributed to the breaking of time-reversal symmetry (TRS) which lifts the spin degeneracy of the electronic bands; this results in spin- split Fermi surfaces on which electrons can no longer find time-reversal partners to form spin-singlet Cooper pairs. For- tunately, a realistic system admits of many competing pair- ing channels15. While the spin-singlet pairing normally wins out in time-reversal invariant systems, its suppression by mag- netism means that other unconventional pairings could stand to benefit. Recently, it has been observed in a series of materials with compensated magnetization that a third basic collinear mag- netic order16вҖ“29, referred to as altermagnetism (AM)30вҖ“32, ex- ists beyond the conventional dichotomy between ferromag- netism and antiferromagnetism. The nomenclature is intended to convey the most important characteristic of this new mag- netic order: that the spin polarization alternates in both co- ordinate and momentum spaces. The effect of AM on the electronic band structure is rather different from those of the ferromagnetism or antiferromagnetism. Unlike usual an- tiferromagnetism due to symmetry reason19,20, AM results in momentum-dependent spin splitting to the band struc- ture, resembling a spin-orbital coupling effect but without spin-momentum locking32. Although these spin-split bands also lead to spin-polarized Fermi surfaces like in ferromag- netic metals, the Fermi surfaces are generally anisotropic as a result of the momentum-dependent spin polarization. In addition, the number of spin-polarized Fermi surfaces in AM metals is constrained to be even due to the symmetry- enforced zero net magnetization. Because of these unique properties, AM metals are emerging as another intriguing class of systems to study the interaction between magnetism and superconductivity33. Several novel phenomena, such as orientation-dependent Andreev reflection34,35, Josephson ef- fect36 and finite-momentum Cooper pairing37, have already been predicted in heterostructures composed of AM materi- als and superconductors. Notably, some parent compounds of high-temperature superconductors are revealed to be alter- magnets31,32, raising the prospect that the coexistence of AM and superconductivity may be observed in a single material. However, the study of AM in general is still at an early stage, and fundamental questions such as what types of supercon- ductivity may emerge in AM metals and whether they are topological remain to be answered. In this work, we address these questions in the context of two-dimensional (2D) metals with d-wave AM32 and Rashba spin-orbital coupling (RSOC). We incorporate the RSOC be- cause it arises naturally when the AM metal is grown on a substrate38. Focusing on representative short-range attractive interactions allowing for both s and p-wave pairing channels, we first determine the pairing phase diagram spanned by the RSOC strength and the relative s-to-p-wave pairing interac- tion strength. Our calculations show that the AM metal with arXiv:2305.10479v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 6 Nov 2023 2 RSOC favors a mixture of spin-singlet s-wave and spin-triplet p-wave pairings, in contrast to the case of pure s or p-wave pairings without RSOC; such mixed parity pairings are a re- sult of the simultaneous breaking of the TRS by AM and the inversion symmetry by RSOC. For finite RSOC, two mixed parity pairing phases are found, namely the s + helical p- wave phase and the s + chiral p-wave phase. Notably, the former can prevail over the latter for weak RSOC strengths even though the TRS is broken. We further investigate the topological properties of these pairings and identify a cru- cial set of symmetries that can be used to delineate various topological phases. Using symmetry arguments corroborated by detailed calculations, we show that the superconducting phase is topologically trivial when the s-wave pairing domi- nates, regardless of the nature of the p-wave component; on the other hand, a multitude of topologically non-trivial phases can be realized when the p-wave pairing dominates. Specif- ically, it realizes a chiral TSC39вҖ“43 characterized by an even Chern number for dominant chiral-p wave pairings, and a he- lical TSC or a second-order TSC for dominant helical-p wave pairings. In the latter scenario, the superconductor is a heli- cal TSC44вҖ“52 if, as in the case of no RSOC, a mirror symme- try or subsystem chiral symmetry exists to protect the helical Majorana modes; otherwise, it becomes a second-order TSC with Majorana corner modes53вҖ“74 when these symmetries are broken by finite RSOC. These results spotlight 2D supercon- ducting AM metals as a remarkable platform in which both 1D and 0D Majorana modes can be achieved. II. MODEL AND RESULTS A. 2D metals with d-wave AM and RSOC We consider a 2D metal with d-wave AM described by the Hamiltonian ЛҶH0 = пҝҪ kПғ hПғПғвҖІ(k)cвҖ  kПғckПғвҖІ. Expressed in terms of the Pauli matrices Пғx,y,z and the identity matrix Пғ0, hПғПғвҖІ(k) is given by (lattice constant is set to unity through- out)32 +2О»(sin kyПғx вҲ’ sin kxПғy), (1) where the tAM term and the О» term describe the exchange field associated with AM and the RSOC respectively. We note that the momentum dependence of the AM exchange field resem- bles that of the d-wave pairing in high-Tc superconductors75. The AM exchange field brings significant changes to the original band structure given by the first term of Eq. (1). First, it breaks the TRS T = вҲ’iПғyK (K is the complex conjugation operator) and gives rise to spin-split bands. Second, its d-wave nature breaks the 4-fold rotational symmetry C4z = ei ПҖ 4 Пғz and results in the deformation of the Fermi surfaces. Both features can be clearly seen in Figs. 1(a) and 1(b). Now, the additional RSOC also has important effects on the band structure. Be- cause it breaks both the inversion symmetry P = Пғ0 and the mirror symmetry Mz = iПғz of the AM metal, the remain- ing degeneracies along the |kx| = |ky| axes are removed (see (b) (d) (c) (a) (Color online) Band structures (left) and Fermi surfaces (right) of the AM metal with and without RSOC. (a)-(b), О» = 0; (c)-(d), О» = 0.2. The color of the Fermi surfaces indicates the mag- nitude of вҹЁПғzвҹ©, and the length and direction of the arrows indicate the magnitude and direction of the in-plane spin polarization. The spin textures clearly display the C4zT symmetry. Common parameters are t = 0.5, tAM = 0.1, and Ој = вҲ’1. Fig. 1(c)). Furthermore, it introduces spin-momentum locking on the spin-polarized Fermi surfaces, as shown in Fig.1(d). All these properties play a role in determining the pairing symmetry and topological properties of the superconducting phases. Another interesting fact about the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) is that it preserves the overall C4zT symmetry; this can be seen from the fact that all three terms in Eq. (1) respect this sym- metry. Two important properties of the AM metallic state im- mediately follow from this observation. First, the net magne- tization of the metallic state must be zero even though the two bands become spin-split. Second, such a state can be viewed as a critical metallic phase. To see this, we first note that the Kramers theorem dictates the existence of band degenera- cies at the two C4zT -invariant momenta, i.e., О“ = (0, 0) and M = (ПҖ, ПҖ), as shown in Fig.1(c). Thus, an arbitrarily small out-of-plane magnetic field, which breaks the C4zT symme- try, will open a gap at О“ and M and drive the system to be a Chern metal where the two bands will carry opposite Chern numbers C = Вұ176 (see Appendix A). In addition, a reversal of the magnetic fieldвҖҷs direction will reverse the Chern num- ber of the two bands. Such a critical behavior is a manifes- tation of the fact that the band structure of AM metals differs drastically from those of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic metals. B. Pairing phase diagram The pairing mechanism in a magnetic metal is known to be non-unique77, and the effects of magnetism on superconduc- tivity are also known to be diverse. Importantly, magnetism and superconductivity are not always exclusive. Indeed, the coexistence of magnetic and superconducting orders has been 3 observed in many materials, ranging from heavy-fermion sys- tems5вҖ“9 to oxide interfaces10вҖ“12. In this work, we do not ex- amine the microscopic origin of the pairing interaction and instead assume the following extended attractive Hubbard in- teraction ЛҶHint = вҲ’Vs пҝҪ i niвҶ‘niвҶ“ вҲ’ Vp пҝҪ вҹЁijвҹ©,Пғ niПғnjПғ, (2) where niПғ is the density operator for electrons of spin Пғ on site i, and Vs and Vp are respectively the strengths of the on- site and nearest-neighbor attraction. Equation (2) is a minimal form of interaction that is capable of describing the competi- tion between spin-singlet and spin triplet pairings. Following the standard BCS theory, we define the gap func- tion as ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) = вҲ’ 1 NL пҝҪ kвҖІ VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)вҹЁckвҖІПғcвҲ’kвҖІПғвҖІвҹ©, (3) where NL is the number of lattice sites and VПғПғвҖІ(q) = вҲ’(1вҲ’ОҙПғ,ПғвҖІ)VsвҲ’ОҙПғ,ПғвҖІ2Vp(cos qx+cos qy) is the interaction in Fourier space. The pair correlation can be calculated in terms of the Bogoliubov amplitudes as вҹЁckПғcвҲ’kПғвҖІвҹ© = uПғ,1(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,1(k) + uПғ,2(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,2(k). (4) These amplitudes are determined by the Bogoliubov-de Gennes (BdG) equation HBdG(k)ПҮk,l = Ek,lПҮk,l, where Ek,l with l = {1, 2} refer to the two positive eigenener- responding eigenstates, and HBdG(k) = пЈ® пЈҜпЈҜпЈ° ОҫkвҶ‘ Оӣ(k) ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) ОһвҶ‘вҶ“(k) ОӣвҲ—(k) ОҫkвҶ“ ОһвҶ“вҶ‘(k) ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ‘вҶ‘(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ“вҶ‘(k) вҲ’ОҫkвҶ‘ вҲ’ОӣвҲ—(вҲ’k) ОһвҲ— вҶ‘вҶ“(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ“вҶ“(k) вҲ’Оӣ(вҲ’k) вҲ’ОҫkвҶ“ пЈ№ пЈәпЈәпЈ» . (5) Here Оӣ(k) = 2О»(sin ky + i sin kx) and Оҫks = вҲ’2(t вҲ’ stAM) cos kx вҲ’ 2(t + stAM) cos ky вҲ’ Ој where s = 1 (вҲ’1) for spin up (down). To determine possible pairing channels, one may expand both VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) and ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) in terms of the so-called square lattice harmonics gО·(k) (see Appendix B), i.e., VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = пҝҪ О· ОіО· ПғПғвҖІgО·(k)gвҲ— О·(kвҖІ); (6) ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) = пҝҪ О· вҲҶО· ПғПғвҖІgО·(k), (7) where ОіО· ПғПғвҖІ is the strength of the pairing interaction in the О·-channel. For the attractive interaction given in Eq.(2), the only relevant channels are the s-wave one gs(k) = 1, and the p-wave ones gpВұ(k) = sin kx Вұ i sin ky. Pairing chan- nels with higher angular momentum, e.g., d-wave or f-wave pairing channel, are absent due to the Fermi statistics and the restricted range of the interaction considered. Substituting the for the О·-channel pairing amplitude вҲҶО· ПғПғвҖІ self-consistently. white solid line divides the pairing phase diagram into two regions, with one favoring the mixed s + helical p-wave pairing and the other favoring the mixed s + chiral p-wave pairing. The former preserves the C4zT symmetry, while the latter does not. Below the black dashed line, along which |вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“| = |вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ |, is a sizable region with dominant helical p-wave pairing. Here the parameters are t = 0.5, tAM = 0.1, Ој = вҲ’1 and Vp = 1.5. For finite RSOC, the gap equation admits only mixed par- ity solutions, of which two specific types are candidates of the ground state. They are (i) mixture of s-wave and chiral p- wave pairing for which ОһвҶ‘вҶ“(k) = вҲ’ОһвҶ“вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“gs(k), ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+(k) and ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) = вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+(k); and (ii) mixture of s-wave and helical p-wave pairing for which ОһвҶ‘вҶ“(k) = вҲ’ОһвҶ“вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“gs(k) and ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) = вҲ’ОһвҲ— вҶ“вҶ“(k) = вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+(k). We note that for the chiral p-wave pairing, an- other degenerate solution exists corresponding to ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’(k) and ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) = вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’(k). The fact that the so- lutions are exclusively mixed parity is a natural consequence of the lack of inversion symmetry in the system78. It is also consistent with our findings that only pure s or p-wave solu- tions are found when the inversion symmetry is restored by letting О» = 0. Both types of the pairing solutions are found in the same pa- rameter space and so we need to compare their corresponding condensation energies to determine the pairing ground state. The resulting pairing phase diagram takes the generic struc- ture shown in Fig.2. We see that the superconductor favors a mixed s+ chiral p-wave pairing for strong RSOC and a mixed s+ helical p-wave pairing for weak RSOC. In the former phase, the s-wave component is always dominant, whereas in the latter the p-wave component can dominate over the s- wave one for a significant range of Vs/Vp. The s-wave dom- inant and the p-wave dominant pairings indeed regress to the pure s-wave and the pure p-wave pairings respectively in the О» вҶ’ 0 limit. However, in the case of pure p-wave pairing, chiral and helical p-wave pairings are completely degenerate. The two phases in Fig. 2 are not only distinguished by the nature of the p-wave pairings but also by their different mag- netic properties. Since the pairing amplitudes among spin 4 up and spin down electrons are not equal for mixed chiral p- wave pairing, a finite net magnetization emerges in this phase. Thus, the fact that this phase is favored for strong RSOC is rather reminiscent of the charge-neutral atomic superfluid with SOC, where a strong SOC leads to chirality as well as finite magnetization79,80. Lastly, these two phases can also be differentiated by whether they preserves the C4zT symmetry. As we shall see immediately, this turns out to be very conse- quential for the topological properties of the superconducting phases. C. Diverse topological superconducting phases Based on the pairing phase diagram and the BdG Hamilto- nian (5), we investigate possible topological superconducting phases. We begin with the О» = 0 axis on the phase diagram, where only pure parity pairing occurs. Since the three possi- ble pairings can be classified by symmetry properties, the first thing to note is that if the superconducting state possesses the C4zT symmetry it will forbid the presence of chiral TSC even though the TRS has been broken by AM. This fact can be in- tuitively recognized since in such a scenario two edges related by C4z rotation will carry chiral Majorana modes with oppo- site chiralities due to the concomitant time-reversal operation, implying a zero net Chern number. This symmetry argument suggests that among the three possible pairings, only the chiral p-wave pairing, which breaks the C4zT symmetry of the nor- mal state, can lead to the realization of chiral TSCs. For a chi- ral p-wave superconductor, the Chern number C has a simple relation to the number of Fermi surfaces NFS enclosing one time-reversal invariant momentum, i.e., (вҲ’1)C = (вҲ’1)NFS81. Since the zero net magnetization of the normal state in the AM metal demands an even NFS, an even Chern number is thus enforced. For example, we find C = вҲ’2 for the Fermi surface configuration shown in Fig.1(b). We focus on the chiral p-wave pairing for the moment and move into regions of finite О» in the phase diagram, where the pairings are now mixed with an s-wave component. In this case, whether such a mixed-parity superconducting phase sup- ports a chiral TSC hinges on the relative weight between the two pairing components. When the s-wave component domi- nates, the superconducting phase is topologically trivial since it is adiabatically connected to the pure s-wave limit with C4zT symmetry as long as the bulk gap remains open. Sim- ilarly, when the chiral p-wave pairing dominates, the super- conducting phase is adiabatically connected to the pure chi- ral p-wave limit and retains the topological properties of that limit. A calculation of the energy spectrum of a cylindrical sample shows the existence of two chiral Majorana modes on an open edge, also confirming the realization of a chiral TSC with C = вҲ’2 when the chiral p-wave pairing dominates, as shown in Fig.3(a). Due to the even C constraint, this mixed chiral p-wave phase must transition directly to a trivial phase with C = 0 when the s-wave component gradually increases. Now let us turn to the helical p-wave pairing. In the О» = 0 limit, we find that the superconductor with pure helical p-wave pairing supports helical Majorana modes protected by mir- (a) (b) (d) (c) The blue and red solid lines refer to chiral Majorana modes on two opposite edges. (b) A helical TSC with a pair of helical Majorana modes. The blue and red solid lines are doubly degenerate. (c)-(d) A second-order TSC with gapped edge spectra and four Majorana corner modes. The four red dots in the inset of (d) refers to four Majorana zero modes, with their probability density profiles concen- trating around the four corners. Common parameters are t = 0.5, tAM = 0.1, and Ој = вҲ’1. The rest of parameters are as follows. (a) О» = 0.2, вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0.05, and вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ = вҲҶp+ p-wave pairing amplitude; (b) О» = 0, вҲҶsвҶ“вҶ“ = 0.25 for the chiral вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0; (c)-(d) О» = 0.2, вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0.05. In (b)-(d), the helical p-wave pairing amplitude is cho- sen to be вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ = 0.25. ror symmetry Mz52,82,83 or subsystem chiral symmetries84,85. An example is provided in Fig.3(b), where we show that the resulting superconductor carries a pair of helical Majo- rana modes on the boundary for a Fermi surface configura- tion shown in Fig.1(b). When the RSOC becomes finite, gap- less Majorana modes are always absent, regardless of which component of the mixed s+helical p-wave pairing dominates, as exemplified in Fig.3(c). Despite being trivial in first-order topology, the superconductor is in fact a second-order TSC when the helical p-wave pairing dominates. Indeed, consid- ering a square sample with open boundary conditions in both x and y directions, we find the hallmark of a second-order TSC, the existence of Majorana corner modes53вҖ“59, as shown in Fig.3(d). The arising of a second-order TSC in the region with dom- inant helical p-wave pairing can also be understood via adia- batic and symmetry arguments. As mentioned above the he- lical Majorana modes in the О» = 0 limit are protected by the mirror symmetry Mz or subsystem chiral symmetries (see Appendix C). However, all these symmetry protections are re- moved once О» becomes finite, giving rise to a Dirac mass on the boundary to gap out the helical Majorana modes. On the other hand, the C4zT symmetry is retained in this mixed parity superconductor, which forces the Dirac masses on two nearby C4z-related edges to be opposite, and hence leads to the emer- gence of Majorana corner modes according to the Jackiw- Rebbi theory86; this is very reminiscent of the scenario for the C4zT symmetry-enforced second-order topological insulator in 3D87. A rather unique property of this symmetry-enforced 5 second-order TSC is that the spin polarization of the four Ma- jorana corner modes are entangled. That is, owing to the con- straint from the C4zT symmetry, their out-of-plane spin polar- izations will form a quadrupole structure88, and the in-plane spin polarization will form a four-hour-clock-like structure. In experiments, such entangled structures of spin polarization can be detected by spin-polarized scanning tunneling micro- scopes as a defining signature of this second-order TSC89вҖ“91. III. DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS We have investigated the basic question of what kind of superconductivity and TSCs may emerge in 2D AM metals. A set of important symmetries relevant to the 2D AM metal with RSOC are unveiled, which place various constraints on the band structure, spin textures, and the pairing types for the realization of TSCs. Guided by the symmetry analysis, we have shown that the AM metal favors mixed parity pair- ings, and a multitude of TSCs, including both first-order and second-order TSCs, can emerge when the spin-triplet p-wave pairings dominate. We have also shown that the spin polar- izations of Majorana corner modes on a square lattice take intriguing structures as the second-order TSC is enforced by the C4zT symmetry. All these findings prove that AM metals have unique band structures and can give birth to unconven- tional pairings and TSCs with fascinating properties. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS D. Z., Z.-Y. Z, and Z. Y. are supported by the Na- tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12174455) and the Natural Science Foundation of Guang- dong Province (Grant No. Z. W. is supported by National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2022YFA1404103), NSFC (Grant No. 11974161) and Shenzhen Science and Technology Program (Grant Appendix A: Chern metals driven by an out-of-plane magnetic field By applying an out-of-plane magnetic field and only taking into account the resulting Zeeman-splitting effect, the Hamil- tonian becomes +2О»(sin kyПғx вҲ’ sin kxПғy) + BzПғz, (A1) where the last term, BzПғz, denotes the Zeeman field. It is readily checked that the Zeeman field preserves the C4z rotational symmetry but breaks the time-reversal symmetry, thereby breaking the combined C4zT symmetry. As a result, a nonzero Chern number becomes allowed. For the two-band Hamiltonian, the Berry curvature can be simply determined by the following formula76 2d3(k) (A2) where Вұ refer to the upper and lower band respectively, d(k) = (2О» sin ky, вҲ’2О» sin kx, Bz +2tAM(cos kx вҲ’cos ky)), and d(k) = |d(k)|. A straightforward calculation gives О©Вұ(k) = Вұ2О»2[Bz cos kx cos ky вҲ’ 2tAM(cos kx вҲ’ cos ky)] d3(k) . (A3) In the limit of Bz = 0, the Berry curvature has the property О©Вұ(kx, ky) = вҲ’О©Вұ(ky, вҲ’kx), also implying that the Chern number, which is the integral of the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone, identically vanishes. For a finite Bz, a calcu- lation of the Chern number yields CВұ = 1 2ПҖ пҝҪ BZ О©Вұ(k)d2k = Вұ пҝҪ sgn(BztAM), 0 < |Bz| < 4|tAM|, 0, |Bz| > 4|tAM|. (A4) This result shows that an arbitrarily small out-of-plane mag- netic field will open a gap to the spectrum, and renders a nonzero Chern number to the bands. In addition, it is easy to see from Eq.(A4) that a reversal of the magnetic fieldвҖҷs di- rection will reverse the Chern number of the two bands, in- dicating that the Hamiltonian (1) describes a critical metallic phase. Appendix B: The determination of pairing phase diagram In this part, we provide more details on the determination of the pairing phase diagram. We consider density-density inter- actions between electrons and assume the existence of discrete translational symmetry. Accordingly, the interaction takes the generic form ЛҶHint = 1 2 пҝҪ ijПғПғвҖІ VПғПғвҖІ(Ri вҲ’ Rj)niПғnjПғвҖІ = 1 2NL пҝҪ qПғПғвҖІ VПғПғвҖІ(q)nqПғnвҲ’qПғвҖІ, (B1) where Ri is the lattice site, NL is the total number of sites, nqПғ = пҝҪ i niПғeвҲ’iqВ·Ri = пҝҪ k cвҖ  kПғckвҲ’qПғ, (B2) and VПғПғвҖІ(q) = пҝҪ j VПғПғвҖІ(Ri вҲ’ Rj)eвҲ’iqВ·(RiвҲ’Rj) = VПғПғвҖІ(вҲ’q). (B3) 6 For the last equation, we have used the property VПғПғвҖІ(Ri вҲ’ Rj) = VПғПғвҖІ(Rj вҲ’ Ri). Following the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) theory, the pairing interaction is simplified as ЛҶHint вүҲ 1 2 пҝҪ kПғПғвҖІ ОһПғПғвҖІ(k)cвҖ  kПғcвҖ  вҲ’kПғвҖІ + h.c., (B4) where the gap function is defined as ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) = вҲ’ 1 NL пҝҪ kвҖІ VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)вҹЁckвҖІПғcвҲ’kвҖІПғвҖІвҹ©. (B5) Fermi statistics and the fact that VПғПғвҖІ(q) = VПғвҖІПғ(вҲ’q) lead to the following property of the gap function, ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) = вҲ’ОһПғвҖІПғ(вҲ’k). (B6) To determine possible pairing channels, one may expand VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) in terms of the so-called square lattice harmon- ics gО·(k) VПғПғвҖІ(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = пҝҪ О· ОіО· ПғПғвҖІgО·(k)gвҲ— О·(kвҖІ), (B7) where ОіО· ПғПғвҖІ is the strength of the pairing interaction in the О·-channel. Examples of the harmonics include the s-wave gs(k) = 1, the extended s-wave ges(k) = cos kx + cos ky, the p-waves gpВұ(k) = sin kx Вұ i sin ky and the d-wave gd(k) = cos kx вҲ’ cos ky. The gap function can similarly be written as ОһПғПғвҖІ(k) = пҝҪ О· вҲҶО· ПғПғвҖІgО·(k). (B8) Substituting Eq. (B8) into Eq. (B5), we obtain the amplitudes of each pairing channel as вҲҶО· ПғПғвҖІ = вҲ’ 1 NL пҝҪ kвҖІ ОіО· ПғПғвҖІgвҲ— О·(kвҖІ)вҹЁckвҖІПғcвҲ’kвҖІПғвҖІвҹ©. (B9) Introducing the Nambu basis ОЁk = (ckвҶ‘, ckвҶ“, cвҖ  вҲ’kвҶ‘, cвҖ  вҲ’kвҶ“)T , the BCS Hamiltonian can be written as ЛҶH вҲ’ Ој ЛҶN = 1 2 пҝҪ k ОЁвҖ  kHBdG(k)ОЁk, (B10) with HBdG(k) = пЈ® пЈҜпЈҜпЈ° ОҫkвҶ‘ Оӣ(k) ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) ОһвҶ‘вҶ“(k) ОӣвҲ—(k) ОҫkвҶ“ ОһвҶ“вҶ‘(k) ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ‘вҶ‘(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ“вҶ‘(k) вҲ’ОҫkвҶ‘ вҲ’ОӣвҲ—(вҲ’k) ОһвҲ— вҶ‘вҶ“(k) ОһвҲ— вҶ“вҶ“(k) вҲ’Оӣ(вҲ’k) вҲ’ОҫkвҶ“ пЈ№ пЈәпЈәпЈ» , (B11) where ОҫkвҶ‘ = вҲ’2(t вҲ’ tAM) cos kx вҲ’ 2(t + tAM) cos ky вҲ’ Ој, ОҫkвҶ“ = вҲ’2(t + tAM) cos kx вҲ’ 2(t вҲ’ tAM) cos ky вҲ’ Ој, Оӣ(k) = 2О»(sin ky + i sin kx). (B12) The above Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by the following Bogoliubov transformation ckПғ = uПғ,1(k)bk,1 + vвҲ— Пғ,1(вҲ’k)bвҖ  вҲ’k,1 +uПғ,2(k)bk,2 + vвҲ— Пғ,2(вҲ’k)bвҖ  вҲ’k,2, (B13) where uПғ,l, vПғ,l with l = {1, 2} are the Bogoliubov ampli- tudes and bk,l refer to the two quasiparticle operators. The Bo- goliubov amplitudes are obtained from the eigenvalue equa- tion HBdG(k)ПҮk,l = Ek,lПҮk,l, (B14) where Ek,l refer to the two positive eigenenergies, and ПҮk,l вүЎ sponding eigenstates. Using Eq. (B13), the gap equation (B9) can be written as вҲҶО· ПғПғвҖІ = вҲ’ 1 NL пҝҪ k ОіО· ПғПғвҖІgвҲ— О·(k) Г— пҝҪ uПғ,1(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,1(k) + uПғ,2(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,2(k) пҝҪ .(B15) Once the gap functions are obtained, the free energy of the superconductor at zero temperature can be calculated as FS = вҲ’1 2 пҝҪ k [Ek,+ + Ek,вҲ’ вҲ’ ОҫkвҶ‘ вҲ’ ОҫkвҶ“] + 1 2 пҝҪ ПғПғвҖІk ОһвҲ— ПғПғвҖІ(k) Г— пҝҪ uПғ,1(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,1(k) + uПғ,2(k)vвҲ— ПғвҖІ,2(k) пҝҪ . (B16) The condensation energy is ОҙE = FS вҲ’ FN, (B17) where FN is the free energy of the normal state FN = пҝҪ k,Оұ=Вұ (ОөОұ(k) вҲ’ Ој)Оё(Ој вҲ’ ОөОұ(k)). (B18) where the energy spectra ОөВұ(k) = вҲ’2t(cos kx + cos ky) Вұ 2 пҝҪ (tAM(cos kx вҲ’ cos ky))2 + О»2(sin2 kx + sin2 ky). Now we turn to our specific short-range interaction (an ex- tended attractive Hubbard interaction) ЛҶHint = вҲ’Vs пҝҪ i niвҶ‘niвҶ“ вҲ’ Vp пҝҪ вҹЁijвҹ©,Пғ niПғnjПғ (B19) for which VПғПғвҖІ(q) = пҝҪ вҲ’Vs, Пғ Мё= ПғвҖІ, вҲ’2Vp (cos qx + cos qy) , Пғ = ПғвҖІ. (B20) In terms of gО·(k), one finds 7 pairing amplitudes. Right: the condensation energy. VвҶ‘вҶ“(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = VвҶ“вҶ‘(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = вҲ’Vsgs(k)gвҲ— s(kвҖІ), VвҶ‘вҶ‘(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = VвҶ“вҶ“(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) = вҲ’Vp пҝҪ ges(k)gвҲ— es(kвҖІ) + gd(k)gвҲ— d(kвҖІ) + gp+(k)gвҲ— p+(kвҖІ) + gpвҲ’(k)gвҲ— pвҲ’(kвҖІ) пҝҪ . (B21) It is worth mentioning that, in the above decomposition, VвҶ‘вҶ‘ and VвҶ“вҶ“ not only contain p-wave harmonic components, but also contain extended s-wave and d-wave harmonic compo- nents. However, because this attractive interaction occurs be- tween electrons with the same spin, it can not result in ex- tended s-wave pairing or d-wave pairing due to the Fermi statistics. As extended s-wave and d-wave pairings are spin singlet, their formation requires an attractive interaction be- tween two electrons possessing opposite spins and located at two nearest-neighbor sites, i.e., вҲ’Vsd пҝҪ вҹЁijвҹ© niвҶ‘njвҶ“. To have pairings with even higher angular momentum, such as an f-wave spin-triplet pairing, one needs to further consider longer-range attractive interactions, such as the next-nearest- neighbor attractive interaction. In this work, to have a neat understanding of the pairing phase diagram and the poten- tial topological superconducting phases, we will focus on the simple interaction given in Eq.(B19). Accordingly, only on- site s-wave pairing and p-wave pairing will show up. Despite focusing on this simple interaction, we would like to empha- size that it is sufficient to capture all key physics, including the competition of even-parity and odd-parity pairings in an inversion-asymmetric system, and all possible topological su- perconducting phases at a qualitative level. In the following, we explain how we determine the superconducting ground state and the pairing phase diagram. As a result of the pairing interaction and the symmetry property of the gap function in Eq. (B6), we have ОһвҶ‘вҶ“(k) = вҲ’ОһвҶ“вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“, ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) = вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+(k) + вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’(k), ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) = вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+(k) + вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’(k). (B22) The general forms of ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k) and ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k) do not necessarily preserve the lattice symmetry. The two types of solutions that do are: (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+(k), вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+(k)) or (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k), ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k)) = (вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’(k), вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’(k)); and (ii) helical p-wave with (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k), ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k)) = (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+(k), вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’(k)) or (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘(k), ОһвҶ“вҶ“(k)) = (вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’(k), вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+(k)). It is noteworthy that for the chiral p-wave pairing, the two situations, (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+, вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+) and (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’, вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’), lead to the same con- densation energy and similar topological property for the superconducting phase (only the sign of the Chern number will be different since the pairings for the two cases carry opposite angular momentum). For this reason we only discuss the case of (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+, вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+). For the helical p-wave pairing, similarly, the two situations, (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+, вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’) and (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gpвҲ’, вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ gp+), lead to the same condensation energy and similar topological property for the superconducting phase, so we also only need to fo- cus on one of the cases. Below, we focus on the case (ОһвҶ‘вҶ‘, ОһвҶ“вҶ“) = (вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ gp+, вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ gpвҲ’). When both chiral p-wave pairing and helical p-wave pairing are solutions in the same parameter region, we need to compare their corresponding condensation energies in order to determine the ground state. When the Rashba spin-orbit coupling is absent, we find that the pairing has definitive parity, i.e., either even-parity or odd- parity. Whether the ground state favors the even-parity spin- singlet s-wave pairing or the odd-parity spin-triplet p-wave pairing naturally depends on the relative strength of Vs and Vp. It turns out that helical p-wave and chiral p-wave pairings 8 pairing amplitudes. Right: the condensation energy. solutions (only positive differences are shown). Right: the difference of condensation energies for the s+ chiral p-wave and the s+ helical p-wave solutions (only positive differences are shown). are degenerate in ground-state energy in the limit О» = 0. If both tAM and the spin-orbit coupling constant О» are finite, we find that the general solution is a coexistence of s-wave and p-wave pairings (either chiral or helical); in other words pure s-wave or pure p-wave pairings are absent when the Rashba spin-orbit coupling enters. In Fig. 4 (left) and (right) we show respectively the pairing amplitudes and the condensation en- ergy for the solution of mixed s+ chiral p-wave pairing. We note that the two p-wave pairing amplitudes, вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ and вҲҶp+ вҶ“вҶ“ , are the same in magnitude when the spin-orbit coupling О» is absent but they begin to gradually deviate as О» increases. In Fig. 5 (left) and (right) we show respectively the pairing am- plitudes and the condensation energy for the solution of mixed s+ helical p-wave pairing. In contrast to the chiral solutions, the two p-wave pairing amplitudes, вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ and вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ , are always the same so that the net angular momentum of this supercon- ducting state is zero. The phase diagram in the main text is obtained by first com- paring the condensation energies of the s+ chiral p-wave and the s+ helical p-wave pairing solutions. Shown in Fig. 6 (left) is ОҙEchiral вҲ’ ОҙEhelical in the region where it is positive, namely in the region where the s+ helical p-wave pairing is the ground state. This region can be further divided into one where the p-wave pairing is dominant and one where s-wave pairing is dominant, by a direct comparison of the pairing am- plitudes. Shown in Fig. 6 (right) is |вҲҶp вҶ‘вҶ‘|вҲ’|вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“| in the region where it is positive. The phase diagram is then straightfor- wardly determined from the two plots in Fig. 6. 9 Appendix C: Topological properties of the superconducting phase with mixed s + helical p-wave pairing When the pairing is a mixture of s-wave pairing and helical p-wave pairing, the BdG Hamiltonian is given by HBdG(k) = [вҲ’2t(cos kx + cos ky) вҲ’ Ој]П„zПғ0 +2tAM(cos kx вҲ’ cos ky)П„zПғz +2О»(sin kyП„0Пғx вҲ’ sin kxП„zПғy) +2вҲҶp(sin kxП„xПғz вҲ’ sin kyП„yПғ0) +вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“П„yПғy, (C1) where вҲҶp+ вҶ‘вҶ‘ = вҲ’вҲҶpвҲ’ вҶ“вҶ“ = вҲҶp is set for notational simplicity. In this section, we give a detailed discussion about the sym- metry protection of the topological superconducting phase in the О» = 0 limit. When О» = 0, our numerical calculations in fact show that the pairing has fixed parity for the investigated parameter region. Here for a generic discussion of the sym- metry protection of the band topology we ignore this parity constraint and still assume that the s-wave and helical p-wave pairings can coexist even in the О» = 0 limit. We first consider the вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0 limit. For this case, the BdG Hamiltonian (C1) reduces to Hp(k) = [вҲ’2t(cos kx + cos ky) вҲ’ Ој]П„zПғ0 +2tAM(cos kx вҲ’ cos ky)П„zПғz +2вҲҶp(sin kxП„xПғz вҲ’ sin kyП„yПғ0). (C2) This reduced Hamiltonian has mirror symmetry Mz, i.e., MzHp(k)MвҲ’1 z = Hp(k) with Mz = iП„0Пғz. According to the two possible eigenvalues of Mz, i.e., Вұi, the Hamilto- nian can be decomposed as Hp(k) = Hi(k)вҠ•HвҲ’i(k), where HВұi(k) = dВұi(k) В· П„ with di(k) = (2вҲҶp sin kx, вҲ’2вҲҶp sin ky, ОҫkвҶ‘), dвҲ’i(k) = (2вҲҶp sin kx, вҲ’2вҲҶp sin ky, ОҫkвҶ“). (C3) Each sector is a chiral p-wave superconductor and is accord- ingly characterized by a Chern number. The Chern numbers characterizing the two mirror-graded Hamiltonians are simply given by76 CВұi = вҲ’ 1 4ПҖ пҝҪ BZ dВұi В· [вҲӮkxdВұi Г— вҲӮkydВұi] d3 Вұi d2k, (C4) where dВұi = |dВұi| denotes the norm of the dВұi vector. With- out loss of generality, we take t > tAM > 0. Then a straight- forward calculation yields Ci = вҲ’CвҲ’i = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі 0, Ој > 4t, 1, 4tAM < Ој < 4t, 0, вҲ’4tAM < Ој < 4tAM, вҲ’1, вҲ’4t < Ој < вҲ’4tAM, 0, Ој < вҲ’4t. (C5) The result suggests that the total Chern number, which is given by the sum of the two mirror-graded Chern numbers, is always zero. We have previously explained that this is a natural result due to the constraint from the C4zT symmetry. Although the total Chern number is zero, the mirror Chern number, which is defined as CM = (Ci вҲ’ CвҲ’i)/282, has an absolute value of 1 when 4tAM < |Ој| < 4t. When |CM| = 1, the super- conducting phase is a topological mirror superconductor with a pair of helical Majorana modes on the open edges83. When вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ is nonzero, the Hamiltonian becomes Hsp(k) = [вҲ’2t(cos kx + cos ky) вҲ’ Ој]П„zПғ0 +2tAM(cos kx вҲ’ cos ky)П„zПғz +2вҲҶp(sin kxП„xПғz вҲ’ sin kyП„yПғ0) +вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“П„yПғy. (C6) Since the s-wave pairing term anticommutes with the mirror symmetry operator, i.e., {вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“П„yПғy, iП„0Пғz} = 0, the mirror symmetry is broken. Without the protection of mirror sym- metry, the helical Majorana edge modes are expected to be gapped due to potential hybridization. However, we find that the helical Majorana edge modes remain robust, suggesting that there exists some additional symmetry protection. This can be seen as follows. From the view point of dimensional reduction, we may view the momentum for the direction with periodic boundary conditions as a tuning parameter. Then the spectrum crossing of the helical Majorana edge modes suggests that the one-dimensional Hamiltonian is a topolog- ical superconductor with two Majorana zero modes at each boundary. To be more specific, let us take kx as a tuning parameter. We can then view the two-dimensional Hamil- tonian as a one-dimensional parameter-dependent Hamilto- nian Hkx(ky). Now only the argument ky in the bracket has the meaning as a momentum. For this parameter-dependent Hamiltonian Hkx(ky), one finds that the Hamiltonian has an emergent chiral symmetry at kx = 0 and kx = ПҖ, i.e., {C, Hkx(ky)} = 0. The explicit form of the chiral symme- try operator is C = П„xПғ0. The existence of chiral symmetry suggests that a winding number can be assigned to character- ize the band topology of H0(ky) and HПҖ(ky)84. To determine the winding number, the first step is to rewrite the Hamiltonian by changing the original basis to a new one in which the chi- ral symmetry operator takes a diagonal form, i.e., МғC = П„zПғ0. Apparently, this can be realized by a unitary operation of the form U = eiПҖП„yПғ0/4, i.e., UCU вҲ’1 = МғC. In the new basis, the form of the Hamiltonian becomes off-diagonal. Let us take H0(ky) as a specific example. It is straightforward to find UH0(ky)U вҲ’1 = пҝҪ 0 Q0(ky) QвҖ  0(ky) 0 пҝҪ , (C7) where Q0(ky) is a two-by-two matrix of the form Q0(ky) = пҝҪ qвҲ’(ky) вҲ’вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ пҝҪ , (C8) 2iвҲҶp sin ky. The winding number is given by84 W0 = i 2ПҖ пҝҪ ПҖ вҲ’ПҖ Tr[QвҲ’1 0 (ky)вҲӮkyQ0(ky)]dky. (C9) 10 The winding number W0 also does not change its value as long as the energy gap of H0(ky) remains open. Again let us first focus on the limiting case of вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0, for which Q0(ky) is diagonal, i.e., Q0(ky) = пҝҪ qвҲ’(ky) 0 0 пҝҪ . (C10) Accordingly, it is easy to find that W0 = W (вҲ’) 0 0 , (C11) where W (Вұ) 0 = i 2ПҖ пҝҪ ПҖ вҲ’ПҖ [qвҲ’1 Вұ (ky)вҲӮkyqВұ(ky)]dky. (C12) A straightforward calculation yields W (вҲ’) 0 = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі 0, Ој > 4tAM, вҲ’1, вҲ’4t < Ој < 4tAM, 0, Ој < вҲ’4t, (C13) and 0 = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі 0, Ој > вҲ’4tAM, вҲ’1, вҲ’4t < Ој < вҲ’4tAM, 0, Ој < вҲ’4t. (C14) Similar analysis shows that for HПҖ(ky) with вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0, W (вҲ’) ПҖ = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі 0, Ој > 4t, вҲ’1, вҲ’4tAM < Ој < 4t, 0, Ој < вҲ’4tAM, (C15) and ПҖ = пЈұ пЈІ пЈі 0, Ој > 4t, вҲ’1, 4tAM < Ој < 4t, 0, Ој < 4tAM. (C16) Based on the above analysis, we reach the following result, (W0, WПҖ) = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі (0, 0), Ој > 4t, (0, вҲ’2), 4tAM < Ој < 4t, (вҲ’1, вҲ’1), вҲ’4tAM < Ој < 4tAM, (вҲ’2, 0), вҲ’4t < Ој < вҲ’4tAM, (0, 0), Ој < вҲ’4t. (C17) Comparing with the mirror Chern number, we see that CM = 1 and CM = вҲ’1 correspond to (W0, WПҖ) = (вҲ’2, 0) and (0, вҲ’2), respectively. Obviously, the value вҲ’2 of the wind- ing number also guarantees the robustness of the spectrum- crossing feature of the helical Majorana modes. Interest- ingly, using the winding number, we find that the supercon- ducting phase is also topologically nontrivial in the region вҲ’4tAM < Ој < 4tAM even though the mirror Chern number is zero. In this region, the two winding numbers W0 and WПҖ both take value 1. It means that if the translational symmetry is preserved in the x direction, on each y-normal edge there (a) E kx/ПҖ 1 0 -1-1 0 1 (b) E kx/ПҖ 1 0 -1-1 0 1 О» = 0.2, Ој = вҲ’0.0 and вҲҶp = 0.25. (a) вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0.0, (b) вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0.2. The red and blue solid lines refer to mid-gap states on opposite edges. The edge-state energy spectra tangentially touch with the bulk energy spectra when вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = 0, and become floating bands when вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ becomes nonzero. are two branches of chiral Majorana modes with opposite chi- ralities, with one branch traversing the gap at kx = 0, and the other traversing the gap at kx = ПҖ, as shown in Fig.7. This superconducting phase can be categorized as a weak topologi- cal superconducting phase as it is protected by topological in- variants defined in noncontractible subspaces of the Brillouin zone. In this case whether the Majorana modes comes about relies on the orientation of the edges. When вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ becomes finite, the winding numbers retain their values as long as the energy gap remains open along those high symmetry lines. For the superconducting phase with W0 = вҲ’2 or WПҖ = вҲ’2, the robustness of the winding num- ber explains the robust spectrum-crossing feature of the heli- cal Majorana modes even when the mirror symmetry is broken by the mixture of s-wave and helical p-wave pairings. Due to the existence of C4zT symmetry, the physics is similar when the directions for the open boundary conditions and the peri- odic boundary conditions are reversed. Below we provide a discussion on the condition for the change of winding number when вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ is nonzero. With- out loss of generality, we focus on the Hamiltonian H0(ky) in Eq.(C7) for a detailed discussion. The energy spectra of H0(ky) can be analytically determined, which read E(ky) = Вұ пҝҪ h2 1 + h2 2 + h2 3 + h2 4 Вұ 2 пҝҪ h2 1h2 2 + h2 2h2 3 + h2 3h2 4, (C18) where h1 = 2t(1 + cos ky) + Ој, h2 = 2tAM(1 вҲ’ cos ky), h3 = вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“, and h4 = 2вҲҶp sin ky. The band gap becomes closed when the parameters fulfill either one of the following two conditions, (I) : h4 = 0, h2 = пҝҪ h2 1 + h2 3; (II) : h1 = 0, h3 = пҝҪ h2 2 + h2 4. (C19) For case (I), if вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ is nonzero, the band gap closes only at the time-reversal invariant momentum ky = ПҖ and only when 4tAM = пҝҪ (вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“)2 + Ој2. For case (II), the band gap closes at the momenta ky = Вұ пҝҪ ПҖ вҲ’ arccos пҝҪ2t + Ој 2t пҝҪпҝҪ (C20) 11 when вҲҶs вҶ‘вҶ“ = пҝҪ t2 AMОј2 t2 + (вҲҶp)2(Ој2 + 4tОј) t2 . (C21) According to the number of band-closing points, the winding number W0 will change by 1 for the case (I) and by 2 for the case (II). When О» Мё= 0, both the mirror symmetry Mz and chiral symmetries along the high symmetry lines are broken, and the helical Majorana modes become gapped. The gapped he- lical Majorana modes on the open edges can effectively be described by a low-energy massive Dirac Hamiltonian h(xb) = вҲ’ivвҲӮxbПҒz + m(xb)ПҒy, (C22) where v denotes the velocity of the Majorana modes, ПҒy,z are Pauli matrices acting on the Hilbert space spanned by the edge states, and xb denotes the coordinate along the edges57. Since the Hamiltonian does not have the C4z rotational symmetry or the time-reversal symmetry but has the C4zT symmetry, the Dirac mass m(xb) will take opposite signs on two nearby edges related by C4z rotation87. This leads to the formation of Dirac-mass domain walls at the corners of a square lattice whose geometry is C4z-rotationally invariant, and hence the appearance of Majorana corner modes86. вҲ— wuzg@sustech.edu.cn вҖ  yanzhb5@mail.sysu.edu.cn 1 D. J. Scalapino, E. Loh, and J. E. Hirsch, вҖңd-wave pairing near a spin-density-wave instability,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 34, 8190вҖ“8192 2 Y. Takahashi T. Moriya and K. Ueda, вҖңAntiferromagnetic Spin Fluctuations and Superconductivity in Two-Dimensional MetalsвҖ“ A Possible Model for High-Tc Oxides,вҖқ Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 59, 2905вҖ“2915 (1990). 3 P. Monthoux, A. V. Balatsky, and D. Pines, вҖңToward a theory of high-temperature superconductivity in the antiferromagneti- cally correlated cuprate oxides,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 67, 3448вҖ“3451 4 N. D. Mathur, F. M. Grosche, S. R. Julian, I. R. Walker, D. M. Freye, R. K. W. Haselwimmer, and G. G. Lonzarich, вҖңMagneti- cally mediated superconductivity in heavy fermion compounds,вҖқ Nature 394, 39вҖ“43 (1998). 5 S. S. Saxena, P. Agarwal, K. Ahilan, F. M. Grosche, R. K. W. Haselwimmer, M. J. Steiner, E. Pugh, I. R. Walker, S. R. Julian, P. Monthoux, G. G. Lonzarich, A. Huxley, I. Sheikin, D. Braith- waite, and J. Flouquet, вҖңSuperconductivity on the border of itinerant-electron ferromagnetism in UGe2,вҖқ Nature 406, 587вҖ“592 6 Dai Aoki, Andrew Huxley, Eric Ressouche, Daniel Braithwaite, Jacques Flouquet, Jean-Pascal Brison, Elsa Lhotel, and Carley Paulsen, вҖңCoexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetism in URhGe,вҖқ Nature 413, 613вҖ“616 (2001). 7 T. Mito, S. Kawasaki, Y. Kawasaki, G. q. Zheng, Y. Kitaoka, D. Aoki, Y . Haga, and Y. М„Onuki, вҖңCoexistence of Antiferro- magnetism and Superconductivity near the Quantum Criticality of the Heavy-Fermion Compound CeRhIn5,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 8 Teruhiko Akazawa, Hiroyuki Hidaka, Hisashi Kotegawa, Tat- suo C. Kobayashi, Tabito Fujiwara, Etsuji Yamamoto, Yoshinori Haga, Rikio Settai, and Yoshichika М„Onuki, вҖңPressure-induced Su- perconductivity in UIr,вҖқ Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 9 N. T. Huy, A. Gasparini, D. E. de Nijs, Y. Huang, J. C. P. Klaasse, T. Gortenmulder, A. de Visser, A. Hamann, T. G МҲorlach, and H. v. L МҲohneysen, вҖңSuperconductivity on the Border of Weak Itinerant Ferromagnetism in UCoGe,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 067006 (2007). 10 Lu Li, C. Richter, J. Mannhart, and R. C. Ashoori, вҖңCoexis- tence of magnetic order and two-dimensional superconductivity at LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interfaces,вҖқ Nature Physics 7, 762вҖ“766 (2011). 11 Julie A. Bert, Beena Kalisky, Christopher Bell, Minu Kim, Ya- suyuki Hikita, Harold Y. Hwang, and Kathryn A. Moler, вҖңDirect imaging of the coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconduc- tivity at LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface,вҖқ Nature Physics 7, 767вҖ“771 12 D. A. Dikin, M. Mehta, C. W. Bark, C. M. Folkman, C. B. Eom, and V. Chandrasekhar, вҖңCoexistence of Superconductivity and Ferromagnetism in Two Dimensions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 13 F. S. Bergeret, A. F. Volkov, and K. B. Efetov, вҖңOdd triplet superconductivity and related phenomena in superconductor- ferromagnet structures,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 1321вҖ“1373 (2005). 14 D. J. Scalapino, вҖңA common thread: The pairing interaction for unconventional superconductors,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1383вҖ“ 15 Manfred Sigrist and Kazuo Ueda, вҖңPhenomenological theory of unconventional superconductivity,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 63, 239вҖ“311 16 Libor ЛҮSmejkal, Rafael Gonz МҒalez-Hern МҒandez, T. Jungwirth, and J. Sinova, вҖңCrystal time-reversal symmetry breaking and spon- taneous Hall effect in collinear antiferromagnets,вҖқ Science Ad- vances 6, eaaz8809 (2020). 17 Satoru Hayami, Yuki Yanagi, and Hiroaki Kusunose, вҖңMomentum-dependent spin splitting by collinear antiferromag- netic ordering,вҖқ Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 88, 18 Satoru Hayami, Yuki Yanagi, and Hiroaki Kusunose, вҖңBottom- up design of spin-split and reshaped electronic band structures in antiferromagnets without spin-orbit coupling: Procedure on the basis of augmented multipoles,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 102, 144441 (2020). 19 Lin-Ding Yuan, Zhi Wang, Jun-Wei Luo, Emmanuel I. Rashba, and Alex Zunger, вҖңGiant momentum-dependent spin splitting in centrosymmetric low-Z antiferromagnets,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 102, 20 Lin-Ding Yuan, Zhi Wang, Jun-Wei Luo, and Alex Zunger, вҖңPrediction of low-Z collinear and noncollinear antiferromag- netic compounds having momentum-dependent spin splitting even without spin-orbit coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Mater. 5, 014409 21 Igor I. Mazin, Klaus Koepernik, Michelle D. Johannes, Rafael Gonz МҒalez-Hern МҒandez, and Libor ЛҮSmejkal, вҖңPrediction of uncon- ventional magnetism in doped FeSb2,вҖқ Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences 118, e2108924118 (2021). 22 Pengfei Liu, Jiayu Li, Jingzhi Han, Xiangang Wan, and Qihang Liu, вҖңSpin-group symmetry in magnetic materials with negligible spin-orbit coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 12, 021016 (2022). 12 23 Zexin Feng, Xiaorong Zhou, Libor ЛҮSmejkal, Lei Wu, Zengwei Zhu, Huixin Guo, Rafael Gonz МҒalez-Hern МҒandez, Xiaoning Wang, Han Yan, Peixin Qin, Xin Zhang, Haojiang Wu, Hongyu Chen, Ziang Meng, Li Liu, Zhengcai Xia, Jairo Sinova, Tom МҒaЛҮs Jung- wirth, and Zhiqi Liu, вҖңAn anomalous Hall effect in altermagnetic ruthenium dioxide,вҖқ Nature Electronics 5, 735вҖ“743 (2022). 24 R. D. Gonzalez Betancourt, J. Zub МҒaЛҮc, R. Gonzalez-Hernandez, K. Geishendorf, Z. ЛҮSob МҒaЛҮn, G. Springholz, K. Olejn МҒДұk, L. ЛҮSmejkal, J. Sinova, T. Jungwirth, S. T. B. Goennenwein, A. Thomas, H. Re- ichlov МҒa, J. ЛҮZelezn МҒy, and D. Kriegner, вҖңSpontaneous Anomalous Hall Effect Arising from an Unconventional Compensated Mag- netic Phase in a Semiconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 036702 25 I. I. Mazin, вҖңAltermagnetism in MnTe: Origin, predicted mani- festations, and routes to detwinning,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 107, L100418 26 Ilja Turek, вҖңAltermagnetism and magnetic groups with pseu- doscalar electron spin,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 106, 094432 (2022). 27 Yaqian Guo, Hui Liu, Oleg Janson, Ion Cosma Fulga, Jeroen van den Brink, and Jorge I. Facio, вҖңSpin-split collinear antiferromag- nets: A large-scale ab-initio study,вҖқ Materials Today Physics 32, 28 A. Hariki, T. Yamaguchi, D. Kriegner, K. W. Edmonds, P. Wadley, S. S. Dhesi, G. Springholz, L. ЛҮSmejkal, K. V МҒyborn МҒy, T. Jung- wirth, and J. KuneЛҮs, вҖңX-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism in Al- termagnetic Оұ-MnTe,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2305.03588 (2023), arXiv:2305.03588 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 29 Xiaodong Zhou, Wanxiang Feng, Run-Wu Zhang, Libor Sme- jkal, Jairo Sinova, Yuriy Mokrousov, and Yugui Yao, вҖңCrys- tal Thermal Transport in Altermagnetic RuO2,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2305.01410 (2023), arXiv:2305.01410 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci]. 30 Libor ЛҮSmejkal, Anna Birk Hellenes, Rafael Gonz МҒalez-Hern МҒandez, Jairo Sinova, and Tomas Jungwirth, вҖңGiant and Tunneling Magnetoresistance in Unconventional Collinear Antiferromagnets with Nonrelativistic Spin-Momentum Coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 12, 31 Libor ЛҮSmejkal, Jairo Sinova, and Tomas Jungwirth, вҖңBeyond Conventional Ferromagnetism and Antiferromagnetism: A Phase with Nonrelativistic Spin and Crystal Rotation Symmetry,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 12, 031042 (2022). 32 Libor ЛҮSmejkal, Jairo Sinova, and Tomas Jungwirth, вҖңEmerg- ing Research Landscape of Altermagnetism,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 12, 33 Igor I. Mazin, вҖңNotes on altermagnetism and superconductiv- ity,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2203.05000 (2022), arXiv:2203.05000 [cond-mat.supr-con]. 34 Chi Sun, Arne Brataas, and Jacob Linder, вҖңAndreev reflection in altermagnets,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 108, 054511 (2023). 35 MichaЕӮ Papaj, вҖңAndreev reflection at altermagnet/superconductor interface,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2305.03856 [cond-mat.supr-con]. 36 Jabir Ali Ouassou, Arne Brataas, and Jacob Linder, вҖңdc josephson effect in altermagnets,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 131, 076003 (2023). 37 Song-Bo Zhang, Lun-Hui Hu, and Titus Neupert, вҖңFinite- momentum Cooper pairing in proximitized altermagnets,вҖқ arXiv e-prints , arXiv:2302.13185 (2023), arXiv:2302.13185 [cond- mat.supr-con]. 38 Yua A Bychkov and МҒE I Rashba, вҖңProperties of a 2d electron gas with lifted spectral degeneracy,вҖқ JETP lett 39, 78 (1984). 39 N. Read and Dmitry Green, вҖңPaired states of fermions in two di- mensions with breaking of parity and time-reversal symmetries and the fractional quantum Hall effect,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 61, 10267вҖ“ 40 Masatoshi Sato, Yoshiro Takahashi, and Satoshi Fujimoto, вҖңNon- Abelian Topological Order in s-Wave Superfluids of Ultracold Fermionic Atoms,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 020401 (2009). 41 Xiao-Liang Qi, Taylor L. Hughes, and Shou-Cheng Zhang, вҖңChi- ral topological superconductor from the quantum Hall state,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 82, 184516 (2010). 42 Jay D. Sau, Roman M. Lutchyn, Sumanta Tewari, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңGeneric New Platform for Topological Quantum Computation Using Semiconductor Heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 43 Jason Alicea, вҖңMajorana fermions in a tunable semiconductor de- vice,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 81, 125318 (2010). 44 Xiao-Liang Qi, Taylor L. Hughes, S. Raghu, and Shou-Cheng Zhang, вҖңTime-Reversal-Invariant Topological Superconductors and Superfluids in Two and Three Dimensions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 Shusa Deng, Lorenza Viola, and Gerardo Ortiz, вҖңMajorana Modes in Time-Reversal Invariant s-Wave Topological Supercon- ductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 036803 (2012). 46 Sho Nakosai, Yukio Tanaka, and Naoto Nagaosa, вҖңTopological Superconductivity in Bilayer Rashba System,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 47 Fan Zhang, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, вҖңTime-Reversal-Invariant Topological Superconductivity and Majorana Kramers Pairs,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 056402 (2013). 48 Jing Wang, Yong Xu, and Shou-Cheng Zhang, вҖңTwo-dimensional time-reversal-invariant topological superconductivity in a doped quantum spin-Hall insulator,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 90, 054503 (2014). 49 Jonatan MelkГҰr Midtgaard, Zhigang Wu, and G. M. Bruun, вҖңTime-reversal-invariant topological superfluids in Bose-Fermi mixtures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. A 96, 033605 (2017). 50 Yingyi Huang and Ching-Kai Chiu, вҖңHelical majorana edge mode in a superconducting antiferromagnetic quantum spin hall insula- tor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 081412 (2018). 51 Rui-Xing Zhang and S. Das Sarma, вҖңIntrinsic time-reversal- invariant topological superconductivity in thin films of iron-based superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 137001 (2021). 52 Guan-Hao Feng, Hong-Hao Zhang, and Zhongbo Yan, вҖңTime- reversal invariant topological gapped phases in bilayer dirac ma- terials,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 106, 064509 (2022). 53 Josias Langbehn, Yang Peng, Luka Trifunovic, Felix von Op- pen, and Piet W. Brouwer, вҖңReflection-symmetric second-order topological insulators and superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 54 Max Geier, Luka Trifunovic, Max Hoskam, and Piet W. Brouwer, вҖңSecond-order topological insulators and superconductors with an order-two crystalline symmetry,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 97, 205135 (2018). 55 Eslam Khalaf, вҖңHigher-order topological insulators and super- conductors protected by inversion symmetry,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 97, 56 Xiaoyu Zhu, вҖңTunable Majorana corner states in a two- dimensional second-order topological superconductor induced by magnetic fields,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 97, 205134 (2018). 57 Zhongbo Yan, Fei Song, and Zhong Wang, вҖңMajorana Corner Modes in a High-Temperature Platform,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 58 Yuxuan Wang, Mao Lin, and Taylor L. Hughes, вҖңWeak-pairing higher order topological superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 59 Qiyue Wang, Cheng-Cheng Liu, Yuan-Ming Lu, and Fan Zhang, вҖңHigh-Temperature Majorana Corner States,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 60 Tao Liu, James Jun He, and Franco Nori, вҖңMajorana corner states in a two-dimensional magnetic topological insulator on a high- temperature superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 98, 245413 (2018). 13 61 Zhigang Wu, Zhongbo Yan, and Wen Huang, вҖңHigher-order topo- logical superconductivity: Possible realization in Fermi gases and Sr2RuO4,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 99, 020508 (2019). 62 Zhongbo Yan, вҖңHigher-Order Topological Odd-Parity Supercon- ductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 177001 (2019). 63 Yanick Volpez, Daniel Loss, and Jelena Klinovaja, вҖңSecond- Order Topological Superconductivity in ПҖ-Junction Rashba Lay- ers,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 126402 (2019). 64 Rui-Xing Zhang, William S. Cole, Xianxin Wu, and S. Das Sarma, вҖңHigher-Order Topology and Nodal Topologi- cal Superconductivity in Fe(Se,Te) Heterostructures,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 65 Xiao-Hong Pan, Kai-Jie Yang, Li Chen, Gang Xu, Chao-Xing Liu, and Xin Liu, вҖңLattice-Symmetry-Assisted Second-Order Topological Superconductors and Majorana Patterns,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 66 Xiaoyu Zhu, вҖңSecond-Order Topological Superconductors with Mixed Pairing,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 236401 (2019). 67 Yi-Ting Hsu, William S. Cole, Rui-Xing Zhang, and Jay D. Sau, вҖңInversion-Protected Higher-Order Topological Superconductiv- ity in Monolayer WTe2,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 097001 (2020). 68 Ya-Jie Wu, Junpeng Hou, Yun-Mei Li, Xi-Wang Luo, Xiaoyan Shi, and Chuanwei Zhang, вҖңIn-Plane Zeeman-Field-Induced Ma- jorana Corner and Hinge Modes in an s-Wave Superconductor Heterostructure,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 124, 227001 (2020). 69 Majid Kheirkhah, Zhongbo Yan, Yuki Nagai, and Frank Mar- siglio, вҖңFirst- and Second-Order Topological Superconductivity and Temperature-Driven Topological Phase Transitions in the Ex- tended Hubbard Model with Spin-Orbit Coupling,вҖқ Phys. Rev. 70 Xianxin Wu, Wladimir A. Benalcazar, Yinxiang Li, Ronny Thomale, Chao-Xing Liu, and Jiangping Hu, вҖңBoundary- Obstructed Topological High-Tc Superconductivity in Iron Pnic- tides,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 10, 041014 (2020). 71 Shengshan Qin, Chen Fang, Fu-Chun Zhang, and Jiangping Hu, вҖңTopological Superconductivity in an Extended s-Wave Super- conductor and Its Implication to Iron-Based Superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. X 12, 011030 (2022). 72 Di Zhu, Bo-Xuan Li, and Zhongbo Yan, вҖңSublattice-sensitive Majorana modes,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 106, 245418 (2022). 73 Tommy Li, Max Geier, Julian Ingham, and Harley D Scammell, вҖңHigher-order topological superconductivity from repulsive in- teractions in kagome and honeycomb systems,вҖқ 2D Materials 9, 74 Harley D. Scammell, Julian Ingham, Max Geier, and Tommy Li, вҖңIntrinsic first- and higher-order topological superconductivity in a doped topological insulator,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 105, 195149 (2022). 75 C. C. Tsuei and J. R. Kirtley, вҖңPairing symmetry in cuprate super- conductors,вҖқ Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 969вҖ“1016 (2000). 76 Xiao-Liang Qi, Yong-Shi Wu, and Shou-Cheng Zhang, вҖңTopolog- ical quantization of the spin Hall effect in two-dimensional para- magnetic semiconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 74, 085308 (2006). 77 P. Monthoux, D. Pines, and G. G. Lonzarich, вҖңSuperconductivity without phonons,вҖқ Nature 450, 1177вҖ“1183 (2007). 78 Lev P. GorвҖҷkov and Emmanuel I. Rashba, вҖңSuperconducting 2d system with lifted spin degeneracy: Mixed singlet-triplet state,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 037004 (2001). 79 Wei Sun, Bao-Zong Wang, Xiao-Tian Xu, Chang-Rui Yi, Long Zhang, Zhan Wu, Youjin Deng, Xiong-Jun Liu, Shuai Chen, and Jian-Wei Pan, вҖңHighly Controllable and Robust 2D Spin- Orbit Coupling for Quantum Gases,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 150401 80 Canhao Chen, Guan-Hua Huang, and Zhigang Wu, вҖңIntrinsic anomalous Hall effect across the magnetic phase transition of a spin-orbit-coupled Bose-Einstein condensate,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Res. 5, 81 Masatoshi Sato, вҖңTopological odd-parity superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 81, 220504 (2010). 82 Jeffrey C. Y. Teo, Liang Fu, and C. L. Kane, вҖңSurface states and topological invariants in three-dimensional topological insulators: Application to Bi1вҲ’xSbx,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 78, 045426 (2008). 83 Fan Zhang, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, вҖңTopological Mirror Su- perconductivity,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 056403 (2013). 84 Shinsei Ryu, Andreas P Schnyder, Akira Furusaki, and Andreas W W Ludwig, вҖңTopological insulators and superconductors: ten- fold way and dimensional hierarchy,вҖқ New Journal of Physics 12, 85 Di Zhu, Majid Kheirkhah, and Zhongbo Yan, вҖңSublattice- enriched tunability of bound states in second-order topological in- sulators and superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 107, 085407 (2023). 86 R. Jackiw and C. Rebbi, вҖңSolitons with fermion number 1/2,вҖқ Phys. Rev. D 13, 3398вҖ“3409 (1976). 87 Frank Schindler, Ashley M. Cook, Maia G. Vergniory, Zhijun Wang, Stuart S. P. Parkin, B. Andrei Bernevig, and Titus Neu- pert, вҖңHigher-order topological insulators,вҖқ Science Advances 4, eaat0346 (2018). 88 Kirill Plekhanov, Niclas M МҲuller, Yanick Volpez, Dante M. Kennes, Herbert Schoeller, Daniel Loss, and Jelena Klinovaja, вҖңQuadrupole spin polarization as signature of second-order topo- logical superconductors,вҖқ Phys. Rev. B 103, L041401 (2021). 89 James J. He, T. K. Ng, Patrick A. Lee, and K. T. Law, вҖңSelective equal-spin andreev reflections induced by majorana fermions,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 037001 (2014). 90 Hao-Hua Sun, Kai-Wen Zhang, Lun-Hui Hu, Chuang Li, Guan- Yong Wang, Hai-Yang Ma, Zhu-An Xu, Chun-Lei Gao, Dan-Dan Guan, Yao-Yi Li, Canhua Liu, Dong Qian, Yi Zhou, Liang Fu, Shao-Chun Li, Fu-Chun Zhang, and Jin-Feng Jia, вҖңMajorana Zero Mode Detected with Spin Selective Andreev Reflection in the Vortex of a Topological Superconductor,вҖқ Phys. Rev. Lett. 116, 91 Sangjun Jeon, Yonglong Xie, Jian Li, Zhijun Wang, B. Andrei Bernevig, and Ali Yazdani, вҖңDistinguishing a Majorana zero mode using spin-resolved measurements,вҖқ Science 358, 772вҖ“776