This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 1 Ultra-fast Graphene-Plasmonic Hybrid Metasurface Saturable Absorber with Low Saturation Fluence Md Zubair Ebne Rafique1,2, Ali Basiri1,2, Jing Bai1,2, Jiawei Zuo1,2, Yu Yao1,2* 1School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, 85281 2Centre for Photonic Innovation, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA, 85281 *Corresponding author: yuyao@asu.edu Abstract Exploring novel materials with enhanced optical nonlinearities at low power levels with ultrafast response and small footprints is of great interests for information processing, communication, sensing and quantum systems. Recent progress on nonlinear metamaterials and metasurfaces suggests promising solutions to overcome the limitations of nonlinear materials in nature. Here we present a design concept for highly enhanced saturable absorption effect based on subwavelength- thick (<1/5) hybrid graphene-plasmonic metasurface structures in infrared wavelengths. Our theoretical and experimental results demonstrated that, by exciting nonequilibrium carriers inside nanoscale hotspots, one could not only enhance the saturable absorption in graphene, but also reduce the saturation fluence by over 3 orders of magnitude (from ~ 1 mJ/cm2 to ~100 nJ/cm2). Our pump-probe measurement results suggested an ultrashort saturable absorption recovery time (<60 fs), which is ultimately determined by the relaxation dynamics of photoexcited carriers in graphene. We also observed pulse narrowing effects in our devices based on the autocorrelation measurement results. Such design concepts can be tailored via structure engineering to operate in broader wavelength ranges up to mid-and far- infrared spectral regions. These ultrafast low- saturation fluence saturable absorber designs can enable low-threshold, compact, self-starting mode-locked lasers, laser pulse shaping, and high-speed optical information processing. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 2 Introduction Saturable absorbers (SA) are nonlinear optical components with reduced absorption at high optical intensities. They are widely used for mode-locked lasers, Q-switching devices, pulse shaping, optical signal processing applications, etc. Low saturation fluence and ultrafast recovery time are highly desirable attributes of saturable absorbers as they enable access to the nonlinear behavior with lower power consumption and faster speed. Using SA with low saturation fluence and ultrafast recovery time, one can achieve low-threshold, compact, stable, self-starting high-power mode-locked lasers1, efficient laser pulse shaping for ultrashort pulses2,3, and high-speed optical signal processing4–6. Various saturable absorbers have been demonstrated in literature utilizing different materials and approaches, such as semiconductor saturable absorber mirror (SESAM)7–10 and quantum dot (QD) saturable absorbers11–13. Traditional SESAM and QD require complicated and costly fabrication techniques for precise bandgap engineering, and they have a narrow working wavelength. Carbon nanotube (CNT)14–17, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC)18–20, topological insulator (TI)21,22, perovskites23, black phosphorous24,25, etc. are also demonstrated as saturable absorbers. CNTs require chirality control for high yield, and other 2D materials such as TMDC and TI show saturation fluence in the range from ~3mJ/cm2 to ~7mJ/cm2 with a few hundred femtoseconds to picosecond recovery time. Reports on planar SA devices such as semiconductor metasurface6 and plasmonic metasurfaces26 require high saturation fluences (100 μJ/cm2 to 0.6 J/cm2) with picosecond response time. Graphene-based saturable absorbers27–35 have attracted much attention because of graphene’s broadband optical properties36,37, nonlinear absorption32,38, ultrafast recovery time39–41, and easy integration with various substrates as well as fiber facets27,29,31,32. Yet, due to the weak absorption of graphene (~2.3%), weak light-matter interaction with free space This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 3 light, and ultrashort carrier lifetime, most of the graphene-based saturable absorbers demonstrated so far have high saturation fluence on the order of ~1 mJ/cm2 27,29,33. One common method to reduce the saturation fluence is to incorporate a waveguide structure to increase the light-matter interaction with graphene4,5,42. Such a method can reduce the saturation fluence to a few mJ/cm2 to μJ/cm2 with a recovery time of 1 ps to 100 fs, yet it usually suffers from high insertion loss (~20 dB) and require large interaction lengths4,5,42. In this paper, we demonstrate an ultra-compact graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurface saturable absorber (GPMSA) experimentally with ultralow saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm2) and ultrafast recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelength. The subwavelength-thick GPMSA focuses light in the nanogaps between adjacent Au nanobars and significantly enhances the saturable absorption effects in graphene. More specifically, the highly enhanced field intensity in the nanoscale hot spots strongly boosts photon absorption in the graphene over the nanogap regions, resulting in a large photoexcited carrier population. The high density of photocarriers results in a significant change in graphene optical conductivity around the incident wavelengths. Meanwhile, the highly enhanced light-matter interaction43,44 in these hot spots magnifies the tuning effects of the GPMSA reflection spectra as a result of the change in graphene optical conductivity. Such two-folded enhancement effects finally result in the decrease of saturation fluence by over three orders of magnitude compared to that of free space coupled graphene SA reported in literature27,29,30 (~1 mJ/cm2). Furthermore, the proposed scheme does not slow down the ultrafast carrier dynamics in the graphene layer. The number of photoexcited carriers rapidly rises upon the arrival of short pulses and relaxes via intraband carrier-carrier and carrier-optical phonon scattering within a few tens of femtoseconds. To the best of our knowledge, the GPMSA devices presented here exhibit the shortest recovery time and lowest saturation fluence among all free space SAs reported in the This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 4 literature so far6,8,14–16,18–22,26,27,29,45 (supplementary section S16). The proposed GPMSA holds the promise to enable high-speed signal processing, pulse shaping, and compact high-power pulsed laser sources in infrared wavelengths. Results and Discussion Design Concept The proposed GPMSA device consists of a plasmonic metasurface, a dielectric spacer layer (Al2O3), a metallic back reflector (Aluminum), and a monolayer graphene over the plasmonic metasurface, as shown in Figure 1a. The plasmonic metasurface is composed of gold nanobars closely coupled with each other. At the resonance wavelength of the plasmonic metasurface, the incident light is mainly focused onto the nanogap regions between the adjacent nanobars and results in nanoscale hot spots. The highly enhanced electric field intensity in these hot spots results in strong interaction between the resonance mode of the plasmonic metasurface and the graphene layer on top. By adding a metallic back reflector and a dielectric spacer layer with a thickness of a few tens of nanometers (~20-30nm), we have achieved close to perfect absorption condition43 at the resonance wavelength. In this condition, no light is reflected, and all the incoming light is absorbed. This can be explained by the modified Fresnel’s equations considering multiple reflections of incident light between the top metasurface and the bottom reflector43,44,46. By engineering the metasurface design and spacer layer thickness, one can realize destructive interference between the first partially reflected wave and the following higher-order reflected partial waves at the metasurface to achieve close to 100% absorption in the metasurface cavity (see supplementary information S1). Such a metasurface absorber design configuration can further enhance the light graphene interaction and results in up to 3 orders of magnitude enhancement for This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 5 the near field intensity in the nanoscale hotspots, as shown in the inset of Figure 1a. Full-wave simulation results showed that the optical absorption in the graphene layer over the nanogap region (100 nm ×30 nm) at resonance wavelength (~1.035μm) is close to 40% of all the incident light inside the device unit cell (150 nm × 450 nm), as shown in Figure 1b (more simulation details are provided in supplementary information S6), in comparison with ~2.3% in a suspended monolayer graphene47. (a) A schematic of the GPMSA device (left), its cross-sectional view (top right), and the near field intensity enhancement near the nanogap between adjacent Au-nanobars at resonance wavelength This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 6 (1.035μm) of the GPMSA (bottom right). |E|2 is the electric field intensity induced between the adjacent nanobars, and E02 is the intensity of the incident electric field. GPMSA device parameters used in all simulations presented in this manuscript: Au nanobar length, L=120nm, width, W=100nm, gap, g=30nm, thickness, tAu=40nm, x-period, Px=150nm, y-period, Py=450nm and Al2O3 thickness, tAlO=40nm. (b) The simulated overall Absorption, A (%), of the incident laser light in graphene inside the nanogap region (100nm x 30nm) of GPMSA compared to that of a suspended graphene layer without the metasurface structure. Both simulations were performed over the same area as the unit cell of the plasmonic metasurface (Px=150 nm, Py=450 nm) (c) Carrier dynamics in graphene under ultrafast laser excitation with photon energy Eph= ħω. Photoexcited electrons and holes generated by the incident photons form a non-equilibrium (NE) carrier distribution centered at energy ħω/2 in the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). Within 10 – 100 fs, the non-equilibrium carriers relax to a hot fermi-Dirac distribution due to plot of the photoexcited non-equilibrium electron distribution, N(m-2), in the graphene over the GPMSA nanogaps at energies around 1 2ħω, i.e., from 0.585eV to 0.615eV above the conduction band edge (EC=0eV). The pump fluence is 112nJ/cm2. For this and the following simulations in the manuscript, we use the same laser parameters as our measurement setup: pulse width 110fs; repetition rate 100MHz; central wavelength 1.035μm, and spectral broadening ~17nm. The x-axis represents the time delay with respect to the peak of the incident light pulse. (e) The instantaneous change in the real part Re(σS) and (f) the imaginary part of graphene optical surface conductivity Im(σS) of the GPMSA device presented in Figure 1d, at the peak of the incident pulse (delay time=0 in Figure 1d), in comparison with that of a suspended graphene layer without metasurface structures. (g) Simulated reflection modulation ΔR (%) of the same device in Figure 1a at the peak This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 7 intensity of different incident pump fluences for GMPSA, the reference device, and suspended graphene. When an ultrashort laser pulse incident onto the GPMSA device, the plasmonic metasurface focuses most of the optical energy into the “hot spots” in the nanogaps. Close to 40% of the incident photons are absorbed in the graphene located at the hotspots (as shown in Figure 1b) and generate a large population of transient photoexcited non-equilibrium (NE) carriers within a few tens of femtoseconds. The process is illustrated in Figure 1c. The electrons in the valence band absorb the incident photons, get excited to the conduction band, and form a non-equilibrium carrier distribution around the energy band covered by the laser wavelength and its spectral bandwidth. These photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers relax into a hot fermi-Dirac distribution within 10 – 100 fs due to electron-electron (e-e) and electron-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering30,41. We adopted a model considering this non-equilibrium photocarrier accumulation upon laser excitation and their subsequent relaxation due to electron-electron and electron-optical phonon scattering30. The dynamic interplay between the occupation probability of electrons in the conduction band (fC (t, ω)) and the valence band (fV (t, ω)) upon laser excitation is explained by two semi-empirical coupled differential equations relating the density of states of graphene at the excitation photon energy (D(E)), incident light intensity (I (t, ω)) and the associated relaxation time, τ1, which are provided below30, ∂fV(t, ω) ∂t = − fV(t, ω) παf D(E) ћω I0exp(− t2 Δ2) + fC(t, ω) παf D(E) ћω I0exp(− t2 Δ2) + 1 − fV(t, ω) τ1 (1) ∂fC(t, ω) ∂t = fV(t, ω) παf D(E) ћω I0exp(− t2 Δ2) − fC(t, ω) παf D(E) ћω I0exp(− t2 Δ2) − fC(t, ω) τ1 (2) This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 8 Where, I(t) = I0exp(-2.76t2/Δ2) is the incident laser intensity, αf is the fine structure coefficient of incident photon energy, and Δ is the incident laser pulse width (Full Width Half Maxima-FWHM). These two coupled differential equations explain the absorption, stimulated emission, and the subsequent relaxation of the excited non-equilibrium carriers. For saturable absorption, we are primarily interested in the ultrafast accumulation of non-equilibrium photoexcited carriers from VB to CB and the subsequent relaxation of the carriers from the non-equilibrium states to the equilibrium Fermi-Dirac distribution near the Dirac point. The most contributing relaxation channels in this process are the carrier-carrier (e-e) and carrier-optical phonon (e-ph) scattering, which happens within 10-100 fs. The scattering contributions from other origins such as carrier- acoustic phonon and phonon-phonon scattering are not considered here as they have a picosecond or larger time constant40. So, the relaxation time, τ1, only consists of the excited carriers’ intraband electron-electron and electron-optical phonon scattering rates. The detailed simulation process of the model can be found in supplementary information S2. Based on this model, we performed time-dependent FDTD simulations of the GPMSA device, in a self-consistent way, upon ultrashort laser pulse excitation based on an iterative method, taking into account the dependence of optical absorption in the GPMSA device on the incident light intensity (supplementary information S3). For each incident pulse fluence, we obtain the time-dependent photocarrier distribution and graphene surface conductivity from the model and the corresponding reflection spectra of the GPMSA is obtained from FDTD simulations. Figure 1d shows the obtained time-dependent photoexcited electron populations, N(m-2), around half of incident photon energy (from 0.585eV to 0.615eV) above the conduction band edge (EC=0eV) in the graphene over the nanogap regions of the GPMSA device, in Figure 1b, for an incident laser pulse. The peak photocarrier populations This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 9 generated in the nanoscale hot spots are two orders of magnitude larger than that in the suspended graphene layer (Figure S11). As a result of the transient photocarriers, the optical surface conductivity of graphene is modulated with respect to time and wavelength. Figure 1e and 1f show that both the real part and imaginary parts of the optical surface conductivity for the graphene located in the nanoscale hotspots are strongly modulated (∆σS = -(42 - 57i) μS/m) at resonance wavelength compared to that of a suspended graphene layer under the same pulse fluence (∆σS  -(0.8 - 1i) μS/m). Besides the significantly increased modulation of graphene optical conductivity, the reflection of the GPMSA device is also highly sensitive to the change of graphene optical surface conductivity inside the nanoscale hotspots43. We performed full-wave simulations (in a self-consistent way) to evaluate its reflection modulation, ΔR, at different pump fluence. Note that the reflection modulation ΔR is defined as the difference between the maximum reflection upon pump fluence compared to a reference device composed of monolayer graphene on the same substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si) as the GPMSA device but without plasmonic metasurfaces and the suspended graphene layer. The reference device acts as a saturable mirror with a metallic back reflector, similar to the GPMSA devices, and thus is more appropriate for evaluating performance enhancement by the metasurface design than the suspended graphene layer. According to the simulation results in Figure 1g, the reflection of the GPMSA mirror is increased by ̴ 15% at the peak of the incident pulse (indicated by the dotted line) for the pump fluence of 112nJ/cm2 while the reflection spectra of a reference device remain unchanged for the same pump fluence since it is much lower than the saturation fluence of the reference device. By fitting the simulated reflection modulation with a two-level atom model48, the saturation fluence of the GPMSA mirror is found This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 10 to be ~120nJ/cm2 which is close to three orders of magnitude smaller than that of the reference device (~100μJ/cm2) and more than three orders of magnitude smaller than that of the suspended graphene layer (~1mJ/cm2), also shown in Figure 1g. Therefore, the GPMSA device acts as a saturable mirror at significantly reduced pumping fluence compared to the reference device. Furthermore, the maximum reflection modulation of the GPMSA mirror is ~30%, more than one order of magnitude higher than that of the reference device. conductivity, σS (μS/m), (a-real and b-imaginary part) of graphene inside the nanogap of GPMSA (structure parameters for this simulation and all simulations in the manuscript are the same as presented in Figure 1a) with respect to time and wavelength after pump excitation with fluence 112nJ/cm2. The laser parameters used in the simulations presented here are the same as in Figure This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 11 1d. (c) Simulated reflection spectra of GPMSA for different incident pump fluences (at the peak of the pulses) at laser wavelength 1.035μm compared to no pump condition. Note that the GPMSA device used in all the simulations of this manuscript has a resonant wavelength of 1.035μm. (d) Simulated reflection modulation, ΔR (%), of GPMSA with respect to wavelength and time at 566nJ/cm2 incident pump fluence. ΔR is ~25% at the laser pulse peak intensity around the laser center wavelength (1.035μm). (e) The simulated amplitude of the reflected pulse, IR (%), with respect to time for increasing incident pump fluences. (f) Simulated pulse width, Δ (fs), of the reflected pump pulses at the laser center wavelength for different incident pump fluence. (g) Simulated reflection modulation, ΔR (%), for different carrier relaxation times, τ1, in graphene. (h) Simulated saturation fluence, Fsat, and peak saturation intensity, Isat (MW/cm2), of GPMSA at different graphene carrier-relaxation times, τ1. (i) Saturation fluence of GPMSA device as a function of wavelength difference between the incident light and the device resonance, ∆λ. surface conductivity (σS), with respect to time and wavelength, inside the nanogaps of GPMSA (structure parameters are the same as in Figure 1a, resonant at 1.035μm wavelength) for laser excitation with pump fluence 112nJ/cm2 at 1.035μm laser wavelength. As a result of the changes in graphene’s optical surface conductivity, the reflection spectra of GPMSA change. Figure 2c shows the simulated reflection spectra of the device at the peak of the laser pulses (time = 0fs) for different incident pumping fluences. The reflection spectra change of GPMSA is also time- dependent as graphene’s optical surface conductivity changes with time. This is shown clearly in GPMSA at 566nJ/cm2 pumping fluence (a similar figure for the reference device showing <1% reflection modulation for even larger pump fluence around 5.66μJ/cm2 is shown in Figure S12). This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 12 From Figure 2c, we see that the reflection modulation is dependent on the incident pump fluence. So, to evaluate the device’s operation as a saturable absorber, the self-modulation of reflection, ΔR(%), at the center wavelength of the incident laser and at the peak of the pulse (time = 0fs) for different incident pump fluences are plotted in Figure 1g (blue curve), showing the saturation effect of the device. Theoretical analysis of the reflected pulse widths from the GPMSA devices suggested pulse narrowing effects. Figure 2e presents the simulated reflected pulse amplitudes at different incident pumping fluences. It is obtained considering the device’s self-modulation effect (Figure 2d), and a normalized Gaussian incident pulse, Iin = I0 exp(− t2 Δ2) with pulse width Δ =110fs and amplitude I0=1. The corresponding pulse widths, Δ(fs), of the reflected pulses at different pump fluence are shown in Figure 2f. The reflected pulse width decreases with increasing pump fluences. The significant decrease (10%) of reflected pulse width relies on two important features of the GPMSA, i.e., saturated absorption at high intensity and ultrafast recovery time (shorter than half of the pulse width ~55fs), because both are necessary to ensure the peak of the pulse with highest intensity experiences larger reflection than the rising and falling edges of the pulse. If the recovery time is longer than the pulse width, the absorption experienced by the falling edge of the pulse would be close to that at the peak intensity, thus, the pulse width narrowing effect will be much weaker. An essential factor for the GPMSA operation is the carrier relaxation time of graphene, i.e., τ1. This is defined as the time necessary for the photoexcited non-equilibrium carriers to relax from the excited states with the help of e-e and e-ph scattering events (other longer time scale relaxation channels are not considered here, as explained in the previous section and in supplementary information S2 and S3). Reflection modulation, saturation fluence, and recovery time of GPMSA This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 13 are dependent on τ1. Figure 2g shows that for the same incident pump fluence (56.6nJ/cm2), shorter or longer τ1 will result in small or large reflection modulation, respectively. This is understandable because, for slower τ1, the non-equilibrium carriers take longer to relax, i.e., they stay longer at the excited states, and it helps to build up the number of carriers in non-equilibrium states. As the non- equilibrium carrier concentration increases, graphene optical surface conductivity goes through larger changes, resulting in larger modulation of the device response. For faster τ1, carriers are relaxed from non-equilibrium states quickly and have less time to build up. So, the change in graphene optical surface conductivity and the consequent change in device reflection spectra is smaller for faster τ1 compared to slower τ1. As a result, for faster τ1, larger pump fluence is required to obtain similar modulation as the slower τ1. Consequently, obtaining large reflection modulation with an ultrafast device is very challenging. The saturation fluence, Fsat, of GPMSA also varies for different relaxation times, τ1, illustrated in τ1, the required pump fluence is smaller. This observation explains the fundamental reason behind the difficulties in reducing saturation fluence in graphene while maintaining ultrafast carrier relaxation time (Fsat vs. τ1 for reference device is shown in figure S13). Furthermore, we also studied the case for pump laser wavelengths different from the device’s resonance wavelength (1.035μm). The saturation fluence increases quickly as the incident pump laser wavelength shifts far away from the device resonance, as shown in Figure 2i. This is due to lower near-field enhancement inside the nanogaps of the Au nanobars for off-resonance pumping wavelengths (Figure S15a). This, in turn, leads to decreased photon absorption in graphene, and thus produces smaller modulation in its optical conductivity. Therefore, the saturation fluence of the device becomes higher (Figure 2i) and reflection modulation becomes lower (Figure S15b, c) as the This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 14 pumping wavelength is away from the resonance, resulting in a limited operation spectral range of the saturable absorber. We will continue exploring designs with a broader operation wavelength range. Fabrication and characterization of GPMSA devices and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the device after fabrication (before graphene transfer). The scale bar (500nm) is indicated with a solid brown line on the lower right corner. The inset shows a close-up view of two nanobar structures. Device Parameters are L=150nm, W=100nm, g=46nm, PY=470nm, tAu=40nm, and tAlO=20nm. Here, L is the length of the Au nano bar, W is the width of the nano bar, g is the gap between the coupled nano bars in the x-direction, This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 15 and Py is the period of the structure in the Y direction, tAu is Au nano bar thickness and tAlO is Al2O3 thickness. (b) Measured reflection spectra of the device (presented in Figure 3a) before and after graphene transfer. The resonance wavelength of the device is at 1.035μm. (c) Measured reflection modulation, ∆R (%) at 1.035μm, of the GPMSA device compared to the reference device at different pump fluences. Red dash lines are the fitted curves. We fabricated the device on a Si substrate. First, 150nm Aluminum was evaporated (using electron-beam evaporator) as the back reflector. Then 20nm Al2O3 dielectric spacer layer was deposited on top of Al using Atomic Layer Deposition (ALD). The Au plasmonic metasurface on the dielectric layer was fabricated using a double layer resist of poly (methyl methacrylate) (495K PMMA with 2% Anisole, 100nm) and methyl methacrylate (950K MMA with 2% Anisole, 70nm). Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) was used to pattern the double layer resist. After patterning the sample, cold development (40C temperature) in a solution with 1-part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone deposited using a thermal evaporator, and lift-off was done using hot acetone for 12 hours. PMMA/MMA bilayer resist was used to form the overhang resist structure after development and facilitate the lift-off of the plasmonic metasurface structure. The fabrication flow is shown in Monolayer graphene was transferred on the device using a wet transfer method (see the methods section). We performed Raman spectroscopy to quantify graphene layer and its quality. The measured spectra are shown in Figure S16. Raman spectra reveal that the 2D/G peak is larger than two, indicating monolayer graphene, and a very small D peak indicates good quality. We used a FTIR spectrometer coupled with a microscope, linear polarizer, and a liquid nitrogen-cooled Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT) detector (Figure S17a) to measure the reflection spectra of This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 16 the GPMSA devices. Figure 3b shows the reflection spectra before and after the graphene transfer for a GPMSA device (SEM image and device structure parameters are presented in Figure 3a). After graphene transfer, the resonance wavelength of the device was blue-shifted by ~76nm, the reflection dip is decreased by 11%, and the reflection at the working wavelength (~1.035μm) is changed by 20%. Furthermore, we can tailor the working wavelengths of the GPMSA design (Figure S17b) by changing the geometric of the devices, i.e., length, width, gap, and spacer layer thickness. The optical setup for the saturable absorption measurement (shown in Figure S18a) comprises a femtosecond laser (Menlo System GmbH) with 110fs pulse width and 100MHz repetition rate at center wavelength 1.035μm and spectral broadening of ~17nm. The laser’s output power can be changed from 0 to 1200mW (~65μJ/cm2) by varying pump diode currents. The diameter of the focus point on the sample was around 150μm (supplementary information S13). The fabricated GPMSA device area was 200μm x 200μm, so the laser beam was focused on the center of the device to capture most of the incoming light intensity. After the incident light was reflected off the sample, it was captured by a power meter. We recorded the reflected power values from GPMSA and from the aluminum reflector without the graphene-plasmonic metasurface. These two values were used to calculate the reflection of the samples (GPMSA and reference device) at 1.035μm. The measured reflection of GPMSA (same device as in Figure 3b) at 1.035μm increased for increasing pump fluence and reaches a saturation level after it goes beyond the saturation fluence of the device (Figure S18b). This behavior is a characteristic indicator of saturable absorption property. Net reflection modulation, ΔR (%), of this device is more than 5.5%, and the relative modulation depth (ΔR/R0) is around 20% at 5μJ/cm2 incident pump-fluence. Consequently, the This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 17 insertion loss of GPMSA is ~4.25dB. Compared to the state-of-the-art of graphene-based SA4, the insertion loss is four times smaller. fluence) for the GPMSA device (same as in Figure 3b) compared to the reference device. The GPMSA device exhibits much higher reflection modulation, >5.5%, compared to almost zero (i.e., unchanged) reflection modulation of the reference device. The measured reflection modulation profiles of similar GPMSA devices (resonance at 1.035μm) show quite consistent saturable absorption properties (Figure S19). Almost zero reflection modulation from the reference device indicates that there is no nonlinear absorption in the A2O3/Al/Si stack. Note that the femtosecond laser’s spectra blue-shift due to output power change (Supplementary section S17 and Figure S22) does not affect our measurement results as it introduces negligible reflection modulation (~0.1%) unrelated to saturable absorption compared to the large reflection modulation (~5.5%) obtained from the saturable absorption measurement of the device. To extract the device’s saturation fluence, we followed the two-level atom model48 and used the following equation to fit the reflection profile (vs. incident pump fluence) of GPMSA. R = 1 − (ANS + As 1 + F Fs ) (3) Here, ANS describes the non-saturable absorption, As is the saturable absorption. Fs is the saturation fluence within the single photon absorption limit. After fitting the measured data with equation (3), we obtained the saturation fluence (Fs) of the device. The fitted curve is shown in The saturation fluence is 2-3 orders of magnitude smaller than the graphene SA reported in literature27,29. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 18 Ultrafast saturable absorption in GPMSA devices comprising of femtosecond laser working ~1.035μm, beam splitter, optical delay line, focusing optics and photodetector. A chopper and lock-in amplifier are used to increase the measurement’s substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si), reference device, and three GPMSA devices (same devices as presented in signals at different pump fluences for GPMSA (Device 1). (d) Measured and simulated pump- probe signal peaks with respect to incident pump fluences (Device 1). (e) Full width half maximum (FWHM) of the simulated pump-probe signals (blue circles) at different carrier relaxation times τ1 and the measured pump-probe signal (red star) at 56.6nJ/cm2 pump fluence. To investigate the transient behavior and obtain the recovery time of GPMSA, we have performed degenerate pump-probe measurements at 1.035μm wavelength with the femtosecond laser (Menlo System GmbH) as mentioned previously. A schematic of the optical setup is shown in Figure 4a This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 19 (details can be found in the methods section). With the optical delay line (ODL), we varied the delay between the pump and probe pulses and recorded the change in the device reflection with the probe pulse as the device interacted with the pump pulse. Pump-probe measurements show that GPMSA devices provide enhanced absorption and large reflection modulation within femtosecond time scale compared to the substrate and reference device (Figure 4b). The maximum reflection modulation occurred around zero-time delay between the pump and probe pulses. It is noticeable that the rising part is longer than the decaying part of the pump-probe signal. We think it is likely due to the fact that on the rising edge, two competing processes are happening at the same time within the excitation energy band (i.e. around 1 2ħω  0.6eV) of graphene conduction band: absorption of photons (photocarrier generation) and e-e scattering of the excited photocarriers (photocarrier relaxation), while the falling edge is dominated mainly by the photocarrier relaxation. Because of these two competing processes on the rising edge, there is a slower increase of nonequilibrium carrier concentration and thus takes longer time to reach the maximum reflection modulation. This trend was also observed in the simulation presented in fluence, as shown in Figure 4c. The reflection modulation goes up as the pump fluence is increased. The maximum values of the measured pump-probe signal at different pump fluences, Figure 4d, reveal saturation of the signal at higher pump fluences. The measurement results showed reasonably good agreement with simulation results (Figure 4d) obtained based on the model presented in the previous section. To extract the recovery time of the device, we first fitted the decaying portion of the pump-probe signal with an exponential decay function to obtain the recovery time, but the exponential decay function does not fit well with the measured pump-probe signal. This happens because the recovery This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 20 time of the device is dominated by the ultrafast carrier relaxation (for the photoexcited non- equilibrium carriers) of graphene, which happens within 10-100fs (<100fs) due to e-e and e-ph scattering events, which is shorter than the pulse widths of the pump and probe lasers. Thus the pump-probe signal cannot provide the actual relaxation time of the GPMSA device and produce a non-exponential decay of the signal. For this reason, we performed time-dependent FDTD simulations of GPMSA, in a self-consistent way, utilizing the time-dependent optical surface conductivity of graphene for different carrier relaxation times, τ1, obtained from the model described in the previous section (Supplementary Information S3). Figure 4e shows the comparison between the FWHM of the measured pump-probe signal (~160fs at 56.6nJ/cm2 pump fluence) and that of the simulated pump-probe signal for different carrier relaxation times. The results suggest that the carrier relaxation time is less than 60fs. By comparing the simulation results with the measured pump-probe signal, we found that the time-dependent simulations with 50fs to 60fs recovery times show good agreement with the measured pump-probe signal (Figure S20). At such an ultrashort time scale, the relaxation time of excited non-equilibrium carriers in graphene dominates the recovery time of our device, so we can conclude that our device has a recovery time of less than <60fs. Our device shows a faster recovery time than most reported works, including all graphene-based saturable absorbers, in the literature (Figure S21). We attribute it to the ultrafast nonequilibrium carrier relaxation time in graphene. Moreover, it is likely that the plasmonic metasurface provides new relaxation channels around the highly enhanced near-field hot spots in the nanogaps between adjacent antennas, which helps the hot carrier population and optical phonon population in graphene to relax faster. Further investigations are necessary to gain better insights into near-filed assisted carrier relaxation processes. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 21 Autocorrelation: pulse-width measurement Pulse narrowing is one of the important functions of saturable absorbers49. According to the simulation results, we expect decreased pulse width as incident fluence increases (Figure 2f). In experiment, we performed ultrashort pulse autocorrelation measurements to investigate the pulse width narrowing effect of the GPMSA devices. The measurement setup is shown in Figure 5a. Fs- laser pulses were incident on the GPMSA device and the reflected light was coupled into a two- photon-based interferometric intensity autocorrelator for femtosecond lasers (FSAC) to measure the pulse width. A simple illustration of the pulse width narrowing concept is presented in Figure 5b, where we expect to see a narrowing effect of the reflected pulse width from the GPMSA device (incident pulse width, ∆in, and reflected pulse width, ∆Ref). Figure 5c shows the intensity correlation as a function of the time delay between the pulses from the delay arm and reference arm inside the autocorrelator, obtained for the reflected pulse by the GPMSA, the reference device as well as the substrate back reflector (without graphene) at the same pump fluence ~58μJ/cm2. The autocorrelation curve for the GPMSA device is narrower compared to those for the reference device and the substrate back reflector. This, together with experimental results in Figures 3 and 4, confirms the ultrafast nonlinear absorption and the resulted pulse narrowing of the GPMSA devices, which did not happen in either the reference device or the substrate back reflector. Figure 5d shows the measured reflected pulse widths from the GPMSA device and the incident pulse widths at different pump fluences. Note that the output pulse width from the fiber laser source decreases as the laser pulse energy increases. Nonetheless, at all incident fluence levels above the saturation fluence, the pulse width becomes narrower after reflection from the GPMSA than the input pulse width by about 10%, which agrees with the theoretical analysis presented in Figure 2f. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 22 The results again confirm that the GPMSA device has strong saturable absorption with an ultrafast recovery time. the femtosecond laser, focusing optics and autocorrelator. The intensity autocorrelator is used to measure the pulse width. (b) Schematic representation of the pulse narrowing effect after the laser pulse is reflected from the GPMSA device. (c) The pulse shapes, intensity autocorrelation, of the reflected laser light from GPMSA (Device 1 in Figure 4b) compared to the reference device and substrate at pump fluence ~58 μJ/cm2. (d) Comparison of the reflected laser pulse width, ∆Ref, from GPMSA (Device 1 in Figure 4b) and incident pulse width, ∆in, at different incident laser pulse fluence. For input pulse fluence smaller than 20 μJ/cm2, the autocorrelation measurement results could not provide sufficient signal-to-noise ratio for pulse width estimation. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 23 Conclusion In summary, we have demonstrated ultra-fast saturable absorption in subwavelength-thick (~200 nm, < /5) GPMSA devices based on graphene-plasmonic hybrid metasurfaces. Both theoretical and experimental results demonstrated that the GPMSA devices are featured with ultralow saturation fluence (~100 nJ/cm2) and ultrafast recovery time (<60fs) in the infrared wavelengths. The GPMSA devices focus light into the nanoscale hot spots inside the nanogap between adjacent Au nanoantenna and significantly increase light-matter interaction with graphene. Consequently, photon absorption in the graphene is significantly boosted over the nanogap regions and generates a large photoexcited carrier population. Furthermore, the strong light-graphene interaction in the hot spots of the GPMSA magnifies the tuning effects of the reflection spectra due to the ultrafast modulation of graphene optical conductivity. These enhanced effects finally result in the decrease of saturation fluence by over three orders of magnitude compared to free space coupled graphene SAs reported in the literature. Moreover, the proposed scheme does not slow down the ultrafast carrier dynamics in the graphene layer while the saturation fluence of the device is decreased. To the best of our knowledge, the GPMSA devices presented here exhibit the shortest recovery time and lowest saturation fluence among all free space SAs reported in the literature so far. The design concept can be readily applied to longer infrared wavelengths via structure engineering thanks to the broadband absorption of graphene and the design flexibility of plasmonic metasurfaces. The proposed planer hybrid metasurface-based GPMSA design holds the promise to enable high-speed signal processing, pulse shaping, and compact high-power pulsed laser sources in the infrared wavelengths with low power consumption. This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 24 Methods Numerical Simulation All numerical simulation is done using MATLAB® (MathWorks Inc.) with a phenomenological graphene carrier dynamics model30 upon laser excitation, considering the non-equilibrium carrier accumulation and subsequent relaxation of the non-equilibrium carriers. The detailed simulation process can be found in the supplementary information S2 and S3. FDTD Simulation All FDTD simulations are done using commercially available Lumerical Inc. FDTD software. The optical surface conductivity of non-pumped graphene is extracted from the numerical model included in the software, and the time-dependent optical surface conductivity of pumped graphene is calculated using the numerical model described above. All other material parameters (Gold, Aluminum, and Aluminum Oxide-Al2O3) are also obtained from the simulation software database. Time-dependent FDTD simulation process details can be found in the supplementary information. Plasmonic metasurface fabrication On a Silicon substrate, a 150nm Aluminum (Al) layer was deposited using electron beam evaporation (PVD 75, Kurt J. Lesker Company®). On top of the Aluminum layer, a 20nm Aluminum Oxide (Al2O3) layer is deposited using atomic layer deposition (Cambridge Savannah ALD) as a dielectric spacer layer. The dielectric layer was spin-coated with two layers of electron beam resists. One layer of poly (methyl methacrylate) (495K PMMA with 2% Anisole, ~100nm) and on top, another layer of methyl methacrylate (950K MMA with 2% Anisole, ~70nm). On top of the resists, a very thin layer (~5-10nm) of Chromium (Cr) was deposited as a charge dissipation layer. Electron Beam Lithography (EBL, JEOL JBX-6000FS) was used to pattern the double layer resist. After patterning, the sample was developed at a cold temperature (40C) in a solution with 1- This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 25 part Methyl Isobutyl Ketone (MIBK) and 3-part Isopropyl alcohol (IPA) to remove the exposed resists. Then a thin layer (~5nm) of Cr and 35nm thick Gold (Au) layer was deposited using thermal evaporation (Edwards Auto 306). The lift-off was done by soaking the sample in hot acetone for 12 hours, followed by an acetone and IPA rinse. Graphene Transfer We used a CVD graphene sample on a Cu foil (covered both sides). We cut a small piece, large enough to cover the whole area of the fabricated device and put it on a glass slide. We used one drop of water on the glass slide to hold the small piece in its place. Then we spin-coated 950K A4 PMMA layer (at 2500 RPM for 1 minute) on top of the graphene piece to protect the graphene layer on that side from the following processing steps. Then we flip the small piece and expose the bare graphene side of the Cu foil. We take another glass slide and use Kapton tape on all four sides of the piece to hold it on the glass slide. Then put it inside oxygen (O2) plasma etcher for 15 minutes to etch the graphene off that side of the Cu foil. After the process is done, we remove the graphene-covered Cu foil (on one side now) and cut off the four edges of the foil as they were protected by the Kapton tape during the plasma etching and still have graphene on both sides. Then we put the graphene-covered Cu foil (Copper, Cu, side down) in a copper etchant (a mixture of CuCl2 and HCl). After the etching is completed, we can see a translucent piece of graphene (covered with PMMA on top) floating on the etchant. We scooped the floating graphene piece from the etchant with a small piece of SiO2/Si wafer and put it inside a Deionized (DI) water bath. We provide three separate DI water baths (each for 5 minutes) to the graphene piece to remove all the Cu etchants. After the last bath, we move the graphene sample to another DI water bath. Then we take our device (where we want to transfer graphene) and scoop the graphene sample out of the DI water with it (transferring graphene on our device). Then we gently blow the sample with This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 26 an N2 gun (optional as it may tear graphene) to remove any water puddle underneath the graphene and then let it dry on its own for 24 hours. After that, we put the sample in an acetone bath for 5 minutes and then rinsed it with acetone and IPA to remove all the PMMA from the top. Then blow- dry with an N2 gun. Raman spectrum of the monolayer graphene is presented in Figure S16. Device reflection spectra measurement Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer connected to a Hyperion 2000 microscope is used to measure the reflection spectra of the fabricated devices. A linear polarizer was used on the optical light path to align the light polarization along the long axis of the nanobar. The reflected light from the sample was collected with a 15x objective (NA=0.4). A liquid Nitrogen cooled Mercury Cadmium Telluride (MCT) photodetector was used to detect the collected reflected light from the sample. A background spectrum of the sample substrate (Al2O3/Al/Si) is taken and subtracted from all the measurements to remove any effect of the substrate. Degenerate Pump-Probe Measurement The ultrafast self-modulation is demonstrated by a degenerate (same color) pump-probe measurement. The measurement setup is illustrated in Figure 4a. A femtosecond Ytterbium fiber laser (Menlo Systems GmbH) is used to generate the pump and probe pulses at 1.035μm with a 100MHz repetition rate and ~110fs pulse width. The pump beam is focused on the sample at a 45 ̊ angle with a parabolic mirror, and the probe beam is focused at a normal angle on the sample with a ZnSe objective lens (NA=0.13). The reflected probe pulse is shrunk and focused with two plano- convex lenses on a biased free-space InGaAs photodetector (DET08CL, 5GHz, Thorlabs Inc.) and displayed by a mixed domain oscilloscope (DSA-X 91604A, Agilent Technologies) with 16GHz bandwidth. As the bandwidth and the response time of the photodetector is not enough to resolve the changes in the reflection of the probe pulses, we used a chopper (chopping frequency ~1200Hz) This document is the unedited Author's version of a Submitted Work that was subsequently accepted for publication in ACS Nano, copyright © after peer review. To access the final edited and published work see https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.3c01122 27 on the pump path and used it as a reference (5f option selected in chopper controller) for a phase- sensitive lock-in-amplifier. The photodetector output is connected to the lock-in-amplifier, and the DC output of the lock-in-amplifier is connected with a source meter and ultimately, the source meter reading is stored automatically by a computer using the MATLAB instrument control toolbox. An optical delay line controls the probe pulse delay (ODL 220, Thorlabs Inc.) with respect to the pump pulse. The movement of the ODL and the data recording from the lock-in-amplifier is synchronized and automated with the computer so that first the ODL is moved to change the delay and then a data is recorded.