1 Quantum Interference by Vortex Supercurrents G. P. PAPARI 1,2,3*AND V. M. FOMIN 4,5 1 Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Napoli “Federico II,” via Cinthia, I-80126 Napoli, Italy 2 CNR-SPIN, UOS Napoli, via Cinthia, I-80126 Napoli, Italy 3 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN), Naples Unit, via Cinthia, I-80126 Napoli, Italy 4Institute for Emerging Electronic Technologies, Leibniz IFW Dresden, Helmholtzstraße 20, D-01069 Dresden, Germany 5 Laboratory of Physics and Engineering of Nanomaterials, Department of Theoretical Physics, Moldova State University, str. Alexei Mateevici 60, MD-2009, Chişinău, Republic of Moldova Abstract: We analyze the origin of the parabolic background of magnetoresistance oscillations measured in finite-width superconducting mesoscopic rings with input and output stubs and in patterned films. The transmission model explaining the sinusoidal oscillation of magnetoresistance is extended to address the parabolic background as a function of the magnetic field. Apart from the interference mechanism activated by the ring, pinned superconducting vortices as topological defects introduce a further interference-based distribution of supercurrents that affects, in turn, the voltmeter-sensed quasiparticles. The onset of vortices changes the topology of the superconducting state in a mesoscopic ring in a such a way that the full magnetoresistance dynamics can be interpreted owing to the interference of the constituents of the order parameter induced by both the ring with its doubly-connected topology and the vortex lattice in it. In a superconducting state, vortices may nucleate to compensate the onset of supercurrents stimulated by magnetic fields . Vortices are quantized excitations composed by supercurrents swirling around single flux lines piercing a “normal” region of the superconductor. These topological defects are stiff and extended in size and affect the path and the phase evolution of coherent Cooper pairs . Measurements of Magnetoresistance Oscillations (MROs) are references to investigate vortex dynamics and their influence on the transport. In these acquisitions, the oscillation of resistance R is usually discussed in terms of the relaxation of supercurrents induced by the onset of successive nucleation of vortices occurring at discrete values of the magnetic field. The growth of investigations on quantized excitations in superconducting mesoscopic systems is persistent , either in shape of simple rings or in combination with semiconducting nanostructures as building blocks for “robust” quantum bits . However, though MROs are recognized as quantum interference effects, the argument deserves further investigations, especially from the phenomenological point of view. In particular, the role of vortices as a source of a topological phase has not been directly connected with the change of measured differential voltage yet. Quantum interference in both normal and superconducting mesoscopic rings is inherently dependent on geometrical phases gained during the electron transport . The interference shows up through the sinusoidal oscillation of the resistance that −for superconducting samples− is usually superimposed on a parabolic background (PB) . The origin of the PB is attributed to the growth of supercurrents , but a dedicated discussion of the way vortex supercurrents affect the onset of the PB is still missing in literature. In this Letter, we address the latter issue by focusing on the origin of the PB of MROs measured in various types of rings and patterned films . Recently, aiming to derive a model of the MROs in both low and high critical temperature superconductors, we have proposed a reliable approach based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory connecting quantum 2 interference to the onset of the sinusoidal constituent in MROs. Despite previous considerations , the interference mechanism affects the dependence of the wave functions of the transmitted particles on spatial coordinates, rather than their density. Both the densities ns of Cooper pairs (CPs) and thermally activated quasiparticles (QPs), realize the mixture of transmitted particles and depend on T only, while the interference-induced sinusoidal voltage ΔVint(T, B) = R(T)ΔIqp(T, B) (see Supporting Information) relies on the variation of the sensed QP charge. Here, the measured zero-bias resistance at B = 0 is R(T). We will apply the same model to address the PB by the onset of vortices affecting the topology of the sample as further ring-like objects. A sketch of a typical mesoscopic ring is represented in Fig. 1, indicating the input and output stubs, through which the voltage across the ring is measured. A magnetoresistance (MR) is acquired in proximity of the critical temperature Tc, when the current−voltage characteristic (IV) displays a zero-bias resistance due to the thermal activation of phase slips (TAPS) (see Fig. 2(d) in ) . Usually, to acquire a MR, an AC probe current Ix is injected and a lock-in amplifier measures the voltage across the ring as a function of B. The sinusoidal oscillation in MR has been addressed in terms of the order parameter Ψ̃r of a finite-size ring defined by the inner/outer radius (ri/o). Ψ̃r depends on the density of the dia- and paramagnetic supercurrents, distribution of which over the ring’s surface oscillates to fulfill the fluxoid quantization (FQ) condition. areas near the voltage leads are the voltage sensitive areas. Once the order parameter of the ring is defined, we can evaluate the change in geometrical phase according to the transmission equation Ψ̃out,ring = T(Φr) Ψ̃in,ring, (1) where T(Φr) = (−1)n cos (π Φr Φ0), n is the winding number and Φr = Bπravg 2 with ravg the average radius of the ring. Information on the change of the transmitted supercurrent density is obtained using the equation Js = e ħ i m∗ {Ψ̃ ∗∇Ψ̃ − Ψ̃∇Ψ̃ ∗} − 2 e2|Ψ̃| 2 m∗ A, (2) where e is the electronic charge, m∗ is the effective mass of a single electron and A = ∇ × B is the vector potential of the magnetic field piercing the sample. Substitution of eq. (1) in eq. (2) yields Js,out = T2(Φr) Js,in. (3) 3 The change of the transmitted current density must comply with the conservation of the injected probe current Iin = Iout, so that eq. (3) refers to a change in the spatial density of CPs. Thermally activated QPs propagate through the domains of the sample where Js = 0 separating the regions of dia- and paramagnetic supercurrents. Thus, supercurrent dynamics also affect the QP spatial density that results in the component of current sensed by voltmeter revealing the interference mechanism. As previously discussed , B stimulates the onset of supercurrents increasing with ns till a certain critical value nc1 triggers the onset of vortices . Geometry, including the sizes, of the sample strongly affects the vortex supercurrents, especially because of the crowding effects stimulating vortices to nucleate from interconnections between stubs and each of the voltage leads as well as the ring. Yet, confinement and vortex stiffness determine a nonlocal dynamics because local distribution of vortices relies on their motion all over the mesoscopic sample. The onset of dia- and paramagnetic supercurrents along with antivortices make the vortex matter and, consequently, the read out of QP density in each voltage lead very complicated (Fig. 2(a)). We tackle this problem by defining an average order parameter of the sample realized through the factorization of the swirling supercurrents in the ring Ψ̃r and the vortex supercurrents Ψ̃V (Fig. 2(b)) as shown in the equation supercurrent pattern realized by sampling the real distribution by a series of swirling supercurrents at the nanoscale. (c) Reduction of the vortex lattice to a single vortex because of averaging of the vortex supercurrents. Dashed arrows sketch the paths of injected and vortex supercurrents involved in the interference mechanism. 4 Ψ̃sample = √nsΨ̃rΨ̃vΨ̃φ = √ns e i2π Φ0 ∮ γr ΛJsr⋅dl e i2π Φ0 ∑ ∮ ΛJsi⋅dli γi N i=1 e i2π Φ0(∮ γr A⋅dl + ∑ ∮ A⋅dli γi N i=1 ) (4) where the first factor is the phase contribution owing to the averaged dia- and paramagnetic supercurrents in the ring, the second factor refers to the phase contribution of the vortex supercurrents, whereas the third factor depends on the total flux Φ = ∮ A ⋅ dl γr + ∑ ∮ A ⋅ dli γi N i=1 = Φr + Φv. The average supercurrent of the ring Jsr is assumed to flow along the circle γr = 2πravg.with the average radius ravg. The same approach is applied to the vortex supercurrents swirling along the circular paths γi = 2πri; Λ = μ0λ2 where λ is the penetration depth and Φ0 is the flux quantum. Since the vortex nucleation in mesoscopic structures occurs through the onset of vortex rows , the term Ψ̃v = ∏ ψ̃i N i=1 = exp{i 2π Φ0 ∑ ∮ ΛJi ⋅ dli γi N i=1 } in eq. (4) accounts for the onset of the first vortex row event justifying the PB in MRs. Transport measurements sense the collective coherent dynamics of all vortex supercurrents as if they were generated by a single effective vortex (see Fig. 2(c)), so that Ψ̃v = exp{i 2π Φ0 ∮ ΛJv ⋅ dlv γv }, (5) where γv = 2πrv; if w denotes the sample width, then the condition 2rv < w must be fulfilled. The total phase of Ψ̃sample satisfies the FQ ∮ (ΛJsr + A) ⋅ dl γr + ∮ (ΛJv + A) ⋅ dlv γv = nΦ0, (6) where n is either zero or an integer. According to eqs. (4) and (5), the total transmission equation is Ψ̃out = Ψ̃out,rΨ̃out,v, (7) so that the total transmission function is T = cos {π Φr Φ0} cos {π Φv Φ0} (8) and Φv = Bπrv2. By substituting eq. (7) in eq. (2) and with the support of eq. (8), the modulation of transmitted supercurrent density is obtained in the form Js,out = Js,in (r) cos2 {π Φr Φ0} + Js,in (v) cos2 {π Φv Φ0}, (9) where, as shown in Fig. 2(c), Js,in (r) and Js,in (v) refer to the input supercurrent densities corresponding to the ring with its doubly-connected topology and the effective vortex, respectively. The aforementioned supercurrent densities differ by their spatial distributions as a consequence of the different spatial position of the ring and the effective vortex. In order to measure the voltage signal ΔVint related to the quantum interference, the current conservation as sensed by the ammeter (the corresponding quantities are labelled by the index A) can be set Iin (A) = Iout (A), (10) and it can be represented as follows Iin,qp (A) + Iin,s (A) = Iout,qp (A) + Iout,s (A) , (11) where the subscripts qp, s refer to the temperature-based partition (see Supporting Information in ) into QPs and CPs within the injected current. The growth of B induces vortex supercurrents to swirl either in the 5 input or in the output part of the sample. These contributions Iin/out,Sv (V) are not sensed by the ammeter, but can be accounted for within the voltage sensitive areas , where the total charge is conserved Iin,qp (V) + Iin,s (V) + Iin,sv (V) = Iout,qp (V) + Iout,s (V) + Iout,sv (V) . (12) Magnetic field breaks the symmetry: Iin,j (V) ≠ Iout,j (V) for j = qp, s, sv, and eq. (12) can be written accounting for all increments: Iout,qp (V) − Iin,qp (V) = Iin,s (V) − Iout,s (V) + Iin,sv (V) − Iout,sv (V) . (13) According to eqs. (29) and (30) of ref. , eq. (13) turns to ΔVint(B)+ΔV0(T) R(T) = Iin,s (V) sin2 π Φr Φ0 + Iin,sv (V) sin2 π Φv Φ0, (14) resistance at the temperature of the MR acquisition. Hence, the MR trend accounting for the PB is given by R(T, B) = R(T) (1 + Iin,s (V) Iin sin2 π Φr Φ0 + Iin,sv (V) Iin sin2 π Φv Φ0), (15) where R(T, B) = ΔVint/Iin. It is important, that Iin,sv refers to vortex supercurrents, which, according to the B-T phase diagram, are placed as a function of B, and hence of ns, higher than those related to the full supercurrent phase bounded by Bc1(T). Thus, the inequality Iin < Iin,v (V) is physically possible. The model is validated employing MROs acquired on the “wide” mesoscopic ring reported in . The sample is realized patterning a 30 nm-thickYBa2Cu3O7- (YBCO) film. The ring has the inner and outer radii ri ≅ 70 nm and ro ≅ 190 nm, respectively. In Fig. 3, black dots and red curves represent the experimental and theoretical data, correspondingly. For three temperatures of acquisition T = 84.25K, 84.50K, 84.75K related to the zero-bias resistances R(T) = 0.40Ω, 0.93Ω, 1.73Ω, the best matching parameters are Iin,s (V) Iin = 0.33, 0.15, 0.06 , Iin,sv (V) Iin = 2.37, 1.17, 0.43 with an uncertainty of about 5%. The average radii of the vortex and the ring are rv = 36 nm and ravg = 127 nm, respectively. [Ref. ]) and the theoretical behavior (red curves) provided by the present model according to eq. (15). The proposed model is further tested on MROs of superconducting rings with different sizes and nanopatterned films as well (see Supporting Information). The effectiveness of the presented model and its direct dependence on the geometry of multiply connected samples can provide a relevant contribution for 6 solving issues on asymmetric rings presenting oscillation of critical current depending on the direction of injected current . A consistent demonstration of the change in distribution of transmitted QPs must involve a measurement realized through Hall probes at the input and output stubs. Hints on the valuable use of the Hall probes are indirectly provided by the sign-reversal effect measured in planar films. In this regard, CPs, QPs and vortices are considered mutually connected by the interactions, which can provide an edge imbalance charge measurable through the Hall resistance. In conclusion, we have extended the transmission model developed for the sinusoidal constituent in MROs of superconducting rings to the onset of the PB. We have argued that the onset of vortices and related vortex supercurrents affects the topology of the current flow. Consequently, the full MR dynamics can be addressed through the interference of the constituents of the order parameter induced by both the ring with its doubly- connected topology and the vortex lattice. The PB is inherent to the development of vortex supercurrents, which affect the path of QPs, introducing a further voltage variation that follows a sinusoidal law similarly to the arguments presented for the supercurrents in a ring . Since the vortex size is much smaller than the ring’s size, typical narrow-range acquisitions prevent from observation of the background oscillation. Acknowledgements This work was supported by the European Cooperation in Science and Technology via COST Action CA21144 (SUPERQUMAP).