1 Operando Photonic Band Gap Probe of Battery Electrode Materials Alex Lonergan1, Umair Gulzar1, Yan Zhang1 and Colm O’Dwyer1,2,3,4* 1School of Chemistry, University College Cork, Cork, T12 YN60, Ireland 2Micro-Nano Systems Centre, Tyndall National Institute, Lee Maltings, Cork, T12 R5CP, Ireland 3AMBER@CRANN, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland 4Environmental Research Institute, University College Cork, Lee Road, Cork T23 XE10, Ireland Abstract Innovative new materials are consistently emerging as electrode candidates from lithium-ion battery research, promising high energy densities and high-rate capabilities. Understanding potential structural changes, morphology evolution, degradation mechanisms and side reactions during lithiation is important for designing, optimising and assessing aspiring electrode materials. In-situ and operando analysis techniques provide a means to investigate these material properties under realistic operating conditions. Here, we demonstrate an operando spectroscopic method using photonic crystal-structured electrodes that uses the optical transmission spectrum to monitor changes to the state of charge or discharge during lithiation and the change to electrode structure, in real-time. Photonic crystals possess a signature optical response, with a photonic bandgap (or stopband) presenting as a structural colour reflection from the material. We leverage the presence of this photonic stopband, alongside its intricate relationship to the electrode structure and material phase, to correlate electrode lithiation with changes to the optical spectrum during operation. In this work, we explore the optical and electrochemical behaviour of a TiO2 anode in a lithium-ion battery, structured as an inverse opal photonic crystal. In principle, the operando technique demonstrated here is versatile and applicable to a wide range of electrochemical electrode material candidates when structured with ordered porosity akin to a photonic crystal structure. 2 Introduction The growing popularity of smartphones, electric vehicles and wearable electronic devices, alongside their associated high energy demands, has driven the research for lithium-ion battery (LIB) materials towards achieving higher energy densities, higher cycling stability, longer lifespans, safer battery cells, lighter and more flexible designs1 2 3. Future energy storage devices require highly energy dense materials which can be manufactured into versatile designs to support emerging technological innovation4 5. Research attempts to facilitate these requirements commonly explore alternative electrode materials for both the anode6 7 and the cathode8 9. Another approach focuses on exploring novel geometries or material dimensions, with particular emphasis on nano-sized architectures, for the electrode materials10 11. Incorporating nano-sized features into the electrode design has reported advantages of shorter ion diffusion lengths with a larger surface area exposed, improved rate capability from the increased electrolyte/electrode interface and better accommodation of material volume changes due to inherent porosity or particle spacing12 13. Mainstream commercial uptake of these alternative electrode materials or designs requires detailed information on side reactions, degradation mechanisms, particle cracking, morphology evolution, material phase changes and state of charge heterogeneity in order to assess the health and long term stability of these potential electrodes in functioning cells14 15 16. In-situ and operando characterisation techniques offer pathways to assess the battery performance and electrode material evolution non-invasively, allowing for this information to be obtained under realistic operating conditions by maintaining the sealed battery environment during analysis17 18 19 This is contrary to ex-situ or post-mortem analytical techniques which deconstruct the battery cell for analysis, introducing the possibility of material contamination which may not provide an accurate description of performance20. Development and progress related to in-situ and operando techniques in the literature has taken many forms, cleverly utilising a variety of different analytical techniques to probe aspects of LIB behaviour. In-situ x-ray diffraction (XRD) has been used to track structural changes and reversibility in anatase TiO2 electrodes21 and assess the crystallinity and identify metastable phases in silicon nanowires22. In-situ and operando Raman spectroscopy can monitor the intensity and position of phonon modes which has been used to identify 3 structural phase transitions (or lack thereof) in TiO2 nanowire and nanoparticle electrodes23 or pinpoint the lithiation potential in doped silicon anodes using the transition from crystalline to amorphous silicon as an indicator24. Operando atomic force microscopy (AFM) has been used to study dendrite growth on lithium metal electrodes25 or assess the mechanical properties of silicon anodes during lithiation processes26. A myriad of other techniques used in the literature for in-situ and operando studies include nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)27, scanning electron microscopy (SEM)28, transmission electron microscopy (TEM)29, fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy30 and acoustic ultrasound transmission31, to name just a few. Critically, each of these techniques offers an insight into LIB operation which cannot be obtained through conventional ex-situ methods. Recently, operando and in-situ optical characterisation techniques have begun to emerge. Optical scattering intensity from electrode materials and particles has been used to track phase transitions and state of charge in specific materials32 33. Optical fibre Bragg grating sensors have been embedded in coin cells in efforts to provide non-invasive operando assessment of chemo-mechanical stress in electrode materials34. Cross-sectional optical microscopy images of lithium-ion full cells have been used to provide in-situ insights into lithiation-linked color changes and electrode thickness evolution35. In-situ UV- Vis spectroscopy has been shown to provide useful supplementary characterisation to electrochemical processes by determining charge storage mechanisms and tracking of changes in material oxidation states36. Adopting optical probes provide many opportunities to evaluate mechanical/volumetric changes, interfacial species changes, electrolyte composition and absorption characteristics related to electronic processes with materials, to name a few possibilities. While invasive probes prove useful to evaluation cell-level state of health in batteries, there are challenges in assessing how active material interconnection and changes can be tracked in real-time, a problem that lies between spectroscopic identification of surface species or changes and electrode-level response. Here, we take an approach to develop an operando electrode characterisation technique that exploits the unique characteristics of photonic crystals (PhCs), where the periodicity in material refractive index creates a pseudo photonic band gap, somewhat analogous to the electronic band gap in semiconducting materials, to disallow propagation of certain frequencies of light. More specifically, we leverage the presence of the photonic stopband in inverse opal (IO) structured TiO2 anodes to monitor the behaviour of the electrode non- 4 destructively during reversible lithitation-induced changes to the interconnected active material. Electrodes incorporating an IO PhC design have been explored to a large degree in the literature, and serve as model electrodes for investigating porosity and the influence of interconnection between active materials without binders or additives37 38 39. However, these IO PhCs are much more than just a simple structural template and are renowned for their ability to manipulate specific frequencies of light40 41; the periodic dielectric structure establishes a ‘structural colour’ reflection from the PhC surface42 43. The structural colour inherent to these materials is a key component to the unique potential of the technique proposed here. Electrodes which adopt a periodic PhC can exploit this observable structural colour to provide information on battery material behavior, non-destructively and without specialised equipment, provided the battery cell was constructed to facilitate observation of the electrode material. Recently, the shrinking and swelling of PhC hydrogels have used changes in structural colour to track water content present in solid-state electrolyte in zinc-air batteries44, demonstrating the capability of a PhC-based optical monitoring system. While ordered and interconnected porous materials such as inverse opals have show very good stable response in LIBs using a range of cathode and anode materials, there remain some opens questions on how such electrodes vary during cycling since it has been assumed that porosity (acknowledging the gravimetric and volumetric energy density penalty) is believe to facilitate the typical volumetric change, while the interconnected nature maintains electrical conductivity41. But deformation accommodation mechanically, must also occur if that is the case, or a change to periodicity must accompany large volume changes. Similar queries arise for random porous materials and the nature of material packing, ionic and electronic conductivity and the benefits of non-tortuous porosity. The marriage of photonic crystal and electrochemical and physical processes is examined here as a operando tracking probe to determine how they behave during cycling. The idea for this concept has been proposed for some time45, though there has yet to be a practical implementation for the technique. In this work, we showcase a new operando characterisation technique for LIBs which directly exploits this phenomenon. Our results suggest that for TiO2 IO electrodes, the wavelength position and transmission intensity of the photonic stopband is intimately linked to the degree of lithiation of the electrode. The degree of light transmission intensity, as evidenced by operando spectra, is found track with the operating voltage for both charge and discharge processes; a cyclical variation in the optical transmission 5 emerges during charging and discharging. Operando transmission spectra recorded during cyclic voltammetry and galvanostatic charge/discharge cycles of TiO2 IO electrodes exhibit consistent red-shifting of the photonic stopband energy during cycling. We discuss the significance of these results, correlating the shifts in the photonic stopband to the physical properties of the IO electrode. Most notably, the operando technique explored here is not restricted to just TiO2 IO electrodes; the method is versatile and applicable to a wide range of electrochemically active electrode materials that can be structured to feature a photonic stopband. Defining the conditions for operando analysis of TiO2 IO anodes The optical probe is based on an angle-resolved transmission measurement arrangement (Figure 1(a)) where the TiO2 IO electrode is measured while charging and discharging in a three-electrode cell (Figure 1(b)). Here, we analyse TiO2 IO anodes coated with a thin layer of Ni metal to provide electrical conductivity of a current collector while maintaining optical transparency. More detailed information on the choice of materials and electrode design can be found in the Methods section. When dealing with the optical response of PhCs, an important consideration for the location of the photonic stopband is the periodicity of the structure. For IOs, the centre-to-centre pore distance is often used as an indicator of structural periodicity. For our TiO2 IOs, we measured centre-to-centre pore distances (Figure 1(c)) and they vary in the range 320 – 330 nm. These TiO2 IOs were prepared via sol-gel infiltration of PS spheres (see Methods section for further details) with initial diameters in the range 370 – 380 nm, exhibiting a well-documented uniform shrinkage upon inversion to the IO42 43 46. A typical SEM image of a TiO2 IO following the deposition of a 20 nm Ni metal layer can be seen in Figure 1 (e); the deposition of the metal layer through magnetron sputter coating has the effect of thickening the top surface of the IO walls. Additional SEM images for the TiO2 IO post-cycling can be found in the Supplementary Materials Fig. S2. These TiO2 electrodes are materials we have investigated for many years and in binder-free and conductive-additive free formulations, they provide very stable multi-thousand cycle life response in standard carbonate electrolytes and offer a reliable and well characterised LIB anode system to carefully extract a correlation between spectroscopic and electrochemical response. There are some open questions such as how anatase TiO2 responds to lithiation during a cycle and over long cycling lifetimes, how interconnected porous materials generally behave during initial and longer term cycling in terms of material 6 expansion and the supposed intrinsic benefits of porosity and what changes occur in materials that are relatively stable of long cycle durations. photonic crystal LIB electrodes obtains simultaneous optical spectra and electrochemical charge-discharge data from the ordered macroporous TiO2 inverse opal electrode. (b) The battery cell uses a three-electrode configuration to allow light transmission through the electrode. Lithium metal is used as the counter electrode and reference electrode, with sputtered Ni forming the current collector to an underlying glass substrate to the working electrode. (c) Scanning electron microscopy of a typical TiO2 IO used as an electrode prior to any modifications shows the highly ordered interconnected nature of the material. (d) The optical transmission spectrum of a typical unmodified TiO2 IO prepared using 350 nm polystyrene opal spheres as a sacrificial template, showing a photonic stopband centred at approximately 573 nm. (e) SEM image of a typical TiO2 IO following magnetron sputter deposition of 20 nm of Ni metal onto the surface to form the current collector. (f) A TiO2 IO following deposition of 20 nm of Ni metal and immersion of the IO into ethylene carbonate:dimethyl carbonate:LiPF6 battery electrolyte, showing a red-shifted photonic stopband centred at ~766 nm. Optical transmission spectra for typical TiO2 IOs used in this study are shown in Figs. 1 (d) and (f) for a pristine TiO2 IO in air and a Ni-coated TiO2 IO in LiPF6 electrolyte, respectively. The photonic stopband for the IO in air at 572 nm red-shifts to 766 nm upon infiltration with electrolyte. This effect is expected due to the increase in the effective refractive index of the IO when the electrolyte replaces the air in the porous structure42 46. The Bragg-Snell model is commonly used to estimate and predict the central position of photonic 200 nm 200 nm Pristine TiO2 IO Ni-coated TiO2 IO Ni-coated TiO2 IO - Electrolyte Photonic Stopband Pristine TiO2 IO - Air Photonic Stopband b a c d e f Counter/ Reference Working Electrode Li Metal Ni Mesh EC/DMC/LiPF6 Electrolyte TiO2 IO Glass Substrate (Ni coated) 7 bandgaps and stopbands. At 0° incidence, the minimum transmission wavelength λ111 for light reflected from the primary (111) plane is found from the Bragg-Snell relation using the effective refractive index neff and the interplanar spacing d111 as: λmin = 2 d111 neff (1) A common method, of which there are a few, used to calculate the neff is based on a volume averaging of the IO refractive index nIO, with volume fraction φIO (typically, φIO = 0.26) , and the background filling material refractive index nbg, with volume fraction φbg (typically, φbg = 0.74), as: neff = nIO φIO + nbg φbg (2) Our previous work43 46 47 with anatase TiO2 IOs found a good agreement between effective refractive index estimates using eqn. (2) and experimentally measured optical transmission spectra for nIO = 2.488, yielding an estimate for the effective refractive index of neff = 1.387. For the primary (111) reflection plane, d111 can be calculated for ideal and isotropic PhCs using the centre-to-centre pore distance D via the relation: d111 = √ 2 3 D (3) Measurements with TiO2 IOs show that a reduced interplanar spacing is present in TiO2 IOs prepared this way43 46, possibly attributed to anisotropic shrinking of the space between layers compared to the pore sizes on the horizontal plane. Importantly for this work, any changes to the optical spectra from changes to material dielectric constant, electrolyte or thickness/periodicity are comparative to an initial state or position, allowing for stopband shifts to be simply related to changes in neff or d111, as in eqn. (1). Reversible lithiation that causes cyclic fluctuations in optical transmission Since the approach is sensitive to changes in both material refractive index and periodicity or dimension, the fundamental electrochemical response was defined at the outset. Figures 2 (a) and (b) show the voltammetric response observed on a typical cyclic voltammogam (CV) for a TiO2 IO electrode for the first and second cycle, respectively. The current peaks at ~ 1.63 V in the cathodic sweep and ~ 2.20 V in the anodic sweep are typical of reversible lithiation reactions with anatase phase TiO248, peaks present just below ~ 1.3 V in the 8 cathodic sweep may suggest the presence of a bronze phase TiO2(B), potentially indicating a mixture of both phases49. However, there is a large peak at ~ 2.20 V in the cathodic sweep of the first CV cycle which is not present in the second cycle, or any subsequent cycles for that matter. The peak voltage for this reaction coincides with the reported reaction potential for the conversion of Ni metal to NiO50; the reverse reaction (NiO conversion to Ni metal) is not present in this potential window (1.0 – 3.0 V) as this reaction is reported to happen below 1.0 V50 and so the modification of the Ni current collecting deposit remains unique to the very first cycle. The operando monitoring of the TiO2 IO electrode immediately revealed some significant effects on the appearance of the transmission spectra, compared to the initial spectra prior to cycling. One such effect is visible in Figures 2 (c) and (d), which shows several transmission spectra, recorded at 3.0 V, for two different TiO2 IO electrodes undergoing cyclic voltammetry (Figure 2 (c)) and galvanostatic charge/discharge (Figure 2 (e)). For every electrode we cycled, and every electrochemical process we tested, we find a significant irreversible drop in transmission intensity through the electrode, which occurs after the first cycle and, critically, remains essentially unchanged for all subsequent cycles. The oxidation of the Ni metal current collector layer to NiO is most likely the underlying cause for the significant reduction in transmission intensity unique to the first cycle; the conversion process ceases after the first cycle, with no substantial drops in transmission intensity observed after this point. The photonic stopband also undergoes a considerable red- shift (~16 nm) in the first cycle between 3.0 V and 2.0 V, likely linked to the conversion of Ni to NiO and subsequent increase in effective refractive index of the PhC47, see Supplementary Materials Fig. S3 for more details. Intercalation-mode Li-ion battery material involve reversible lithium insertion and removal during each cycle. This often results in volumetric swelling, sometimes causing cracking in cyclic swelling/contraction cycles, among other effects. Determining the relative contributions of composition (thus refractive index) changes and physical (dimension) changes is difficult and they are often measured separately. Our approach couples both parameters and we find that real-time monitoring of these processes exhibits cyclic behaviour coincident with the charging and discharging cycles. Figures 2 (e) and (f) show a series of operando 9 transmission spectra recorded at 0.1 V intervals for a typical cathodic sweep (discharge, 3.0 V – 1.0 V) and the corresponding anodic sweep (charge, 1.0 V – 3.0 V), respectively. Most notably, we see a cyclic fluctuation in the optical transmission intensity that is closely linked to the operating voltage. Lithium insertion into the electrode during the discharge acts to decrease the overall transmission intensity. The transmission intensity is then recovered to the initial intensity, at the cycle’s beginning, when lithium is removed during the charge process. and (b) 2nd cycles of a typical TiO2 IO anode, cycled at 0.2 mV/s, showing the disappearance of a prominent peak centred at 2.20 V after the first discharge with a suggested link to an irreversible conversion of Ni to NiO in the 3 – 1 V voltage window. Operando optical spectra recorded for TiO2 IO anodes at 3.0 V for electrodes undergoing (d) cyclic voltammetry and (e) galvanostatic charge/discharge processes, highlighting an initial significant irreversible drop in transmission intensity occurring in the early stages of battery life. Reversible and cyclic transmission intensity fluctuations shown via operando optical spectra recorded at 0.1 V intervals in a typical (c) discharge (cathodic sweep) and (d) charge (anodic sweep) for a TiO2 IO anode. Certain spectra are accentuated in colour to highlight specific voltage intervals with the largest fluctuations in transmission intensity. Nickel Oxide Layer Irreversible Conversion @2.20 V Lithium Removal: Transmission Recovery Lithium Insertion: Transmission Drop Cyclic Change to Opacity After 1 Cycle 3.0 V 3.0 V 1.0 V 1.0 V 2.20 V 2.20 V 2.20 V 1.63 V 1.24 V 1.64 V 1.27 V Cyclic Voltammetry @ 3.0 V Galvanostatic Charge/Discharge @ 3.0 V a b c d d e Nickel Metal Layer 10 Here, this effect is shown for a typical CV cycle (0.2 mV/s) but we observe this cyclic process in every cycle during voltammetric measurements and also during galvanostatic charge-discharge cycles. The transmission intensity constantly, and reversibly, responds to the operating voltage and thus, the level of lithiation of the electrode i.e. the mole fraction of Li in LiχTiO2. This identifies an effective refractive index change and not a change to the dimensions of the TiO2 electrode during lithium uptake or removal. Several of the operando spectra in Figures 2 (e) and (f) are displayed in colour to draw attention to certain spectra at specific voltages, namely, the spectra which coincide with the largest suppression or recovery in transmission intensity. In the discharge in Figure 2 (e), the largest drop in transmission intensity is found between 1.7 – 1.5 V. Likewise, during charging the most pronounced recovery in the transmission intensity is found in the operando spectra recorded between 2.1 – 2.3 V. Considering that for TiO2, the lithium insertion reaction in the discharge occurs at ~ 1.63 V and the lithium removal reaction occurs at ~ 2.20 V, as per the CV data, there appears to be a strong correlation between the expected mole fraction of lithium content in the electrode and the transmission intensity. Greater lithium mole fractions in the electrode clearly cause a suppression of total optical transmission. The drops in transmission intensity are consistent across multiple cycles. Cyclic opacity in the electrode is thus linked to the state of charge or depth of discharge. For example, during the lithiation of the electrode in the discharge process, voltages between 1.7 – 1.5 V are the onset of more optically opaque electrodes and this voltage window in a typical galvanostatic discharge process coincides with an increase in the lithium mole fraction in LiχTiO2 from χ ~0.1 to χ ~0.25. The photonic band-gap and changes to material dimensions in operando Beyond the overall optical transmission intensity changes during cycling, which track the reversible lithiated state of the electrode, spectral features near the photonic band-gap of the ordered macroporous electrode can reveal much finer changes in the optical profile and so the dimensions and changes to the TiO2 IO. As per eqns. (1) – (3), the photonic stopband of PhC materials is inherently sensitive to the IO pore spacing and refractive indices of the materials comprising the porous structure. Figure 3 (a) shows the calculated specific capacity at cycle 7 and cycle 70 for a TiO2 IO undergoing repeated galvanostatic charge/discharge processes at a C-rate of 2C, showing a respectable performance with a discharge specific capacity of ~ 160 mA h g-1 at 11 that fast rate, which comparing favourably with other reports for TiO2 materials38 39 and our previous examination of these types of electrodes over 5000 cycles; the volumetric expansion is small in the first several hundred cycles. Calculated mole fractions of lithium incorporation into LiχTiO2 based on the theoretical specific capacity for TiO2, that is 168 mA h g-1 for Li0.5TiO2 or 335 mA h g-1 for Li1TiO223 39, indicate that ~0.5 moles (Li0.5TiO2) are incorporated at full discharge, a common occurrence with TiO2 electrodes. Figure 3 (b) shows the corresponding optical transmission spectra for cycle 7 and cycle 70, both recorded at 3.0 V. An enlarged view of the photonic stopband is shown in Figure 3 (c), showing the subtle changes in the stopband energies during cycling. Most importantly, the shift in the central wavelength position of the photonic stopband is emphasised with ~10 nm red-shift observed between cycle 7 and 70. Additional operando optical spectra for these measurements, showing the cyclic reversible transmission intensity, can be found in the Supplementary Materials Fig. S4. the number of completed full (charge an discharge) cycles. Interestingly, there appears to be a linear relationship between the stopband position and the number of completed cycles; the cycle life of the electrode is indicated by the red-shift in stopband position. Over extended (several hundred to several thousand) cycling periods, the structural walls of TiO2 IOs have been observed to thicken39 while retaining the periodicity and interconnected order. Quantifying this change in the IO structure as relating to an expansion of the interplanar spacing of the PhC or an increase in the effective refractive index of the composite material should allow for a correlation to be established between the observed structural colour of the material and the cycle number. Expansion occurs in all directions and the change to the stopband energy is linked to the (111) planes or the ordered crystal, i.e. its thickness. The electrochemical behaviour of the TiO2 IO is stable across a number of cycles, as seen in Figure 3 (e) with consistent specific capacity values (~ 150 – 160 mA h g-1). The Supplementary Material Fig. S5 provides more detail on the coulombic efficiency for this cell. The red-shift of the photonic stopband is a gradual and consistent process that occurs throughout the battery life, as illustrated in Figure 3 (f). Changes to the photonic stopband position are minor, often just a few nanometres of spectral shift, depending on the number of cycles completed. It is important to remember that the cyclic and reversible change in light transmission from reversible lithiation during each cycle in Figure 2 of course 12 happens here also, while the spectrum red-shifts over extended cycling, and the changes to the dimension of the TiO2 become apparent. for a typical TiO2 IO anode undergoing galvanostatic charge/discharge cycling at 2C, showing cycle 7 and cycle 70. (b) The corresponding operando optical transmission spectra, both recorded at 3.0 V. (c) The same optical spectra with a closer focus on the gradual red-shift in stopband position with increased battery cycling, in this case highlighting a 10 nm red-shift recorded between cycle 7 and cycle 70. (d) A plot showing the recorded stopband position at 3.0 V versus the number of completed cycles for a TiO2 IO anode at a charge/discharge rate of 2C. A linear fit is applied to the data, suggesting a predictable red-shift with increasing cycle number. (e) Recorded specific capacity values across a number of cycles in the galvanostatic charge/discharge process of a TiO2 IO anode. (f) Enlarged view of the photonic stopband of a TiO2 IO anode showing the gradual red-shift in the central stopband position at 3.0 V with higher cycle number. (g) A schematic diagram showing the proposed effect of battery cycling on the photonic stopband of IO structured electrodes, with a red-shift in the optical signature observed for increased cycling. This gradual red-shift in stopband position is not limited to galvanostatic charge/discharge processes; it can also be observed in the repeated voltammetric cycling. Optically, the operando transmission spectra, recorded at 3.0 V in each case, for a number of selected cycles are shown in Figures 4 (a) – (c) for scan rates of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 mV/s, respectively. For each scan rate, the spectra are compared at 3.0 V after a period of 4 full cycles has passed. Importantly, there is a gradual red-shift in the stopband position with cycle number, observed in each case. At 0.1 mV/s the stopband shifts ~11 nm from 781 nm to 792 nm between cycle 1 and Stopband Red-Shift Cycling Δλ ~ 10 nm a b c d e f g 13 cycle 5. A smaller stopband shift of ~9 nm from 781 nm to 790 nm between cycle 1 and cycle 5 is observed for the electrode cycled at 0.2 mV/s. Finally, the smallest stopband shift of ~8 nm from 778.5 nm to 786.5 nm is observed for the electrode cycled at 0.3 mV/s between cycle 2 and 6. Figures 4 (d) – (f) show the recorded CV curves for the 2nd cycle for the three different TiO2 IO electrodes at scan rates of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3 mV/s, respectively. In each case, the most prominent reaction peaks are located at ~ 1.6 V in the cathodic sweep and ~ 2.2 V in the anodic sweep, typical of TiO2 electrodes48 49. By examining the red-shifts, recorded after 4 completed cycles for each scan rate shown in Figures 4 (a) – (c), a trend in the optical data emerges. The largest red-shift of 11 nm is associated with the slowest scan speed (0.1 mV/s) and the smallest red-shift is linked to the quickest scan rate (0.3 mV/s). Extending this analysis to include the stopband red-shift data for additional CV cycles, shows the trend is maintained, as depicted in Figure 4 (g). The highest rate of change in the stopband position with cycle number is observed for the slowest scan speed (0.1 mV/s), featuring the steepest slope of 2.86 nm/cycle, with the converse statement being true for the slowest scan speed with a slope of just 1.60 nm/cycle. Since the potentiodynamic voltammetry does not force a constant reaction rate from a fixed current of a galvanostatic cycle, the fastest scan rate thus corresponds to the shortest lithiation duration. Additionally, the change in scan rate is just 0.1 mV/s, yet we observe a specific difference in response correlated to the degree of lithiation, showing how sensitive the measurement and lithiation processes are to voltage changes. The extended lithiation period of the overall cycle associated with slower scan speeds may contribute to this effect, with higher degrees of lithiation and repeated cycling causing further red-shifting of the stopband. By comparison to the galvanostatic data in Figure 2 (d), we note that the fixed current (reaction rate) under standard charge-discharge conditions results in a stopband shift of ~0.134 nm/cycle, slightly over an order of magnitude less that under voltammetric polarization in spite of a near identical effect of cyclic optical transmission variation during each cycle. Since our method is not susceptible to differences between the cumulative processes that contribute to the total integrated time in galvanostatic vs voltammetric cycling, the difference in stopband shift from changes to material dimension indicates that the galvanostatic data results in a lesser degree of lithiation-induced swelling per cycle than voltammetry under similar conditions. 14 optical spectra of TiO2 IOs occurring over the course of battery operation for cyclic voltammetry at rates of the shift in stopband position is shown with an accompanying plot where the shift in stopband position is highlighted. The corresponding cyclic voltammetry curves, with labelled reactions peaks, for the same TiO2 the photonic stopband positions, all recorded at 3.0 V, versus the number of completed CV cycles for TiO2 IO anodes at three different CV scan rates. The data for the relationship between stopband position and number of completed cycles for fixed scan rate follow a linear fit. An interesting feature of the plots in Figure 4 (g) is that there appears to be a strong linear correlation between the shift in stopband position and the number of cycles completed. This effect, for these electrodes with different CV scan speeds, is similar to the linear trend in stopband shift observed in galvanostatic charge/discharge, data displayed in Figure 3 (d). From the operando optical data, it would appear that every electrochemical test acts to alter the TiO2 IO electrode, in a steady and predictable manner, giving rise to the observed photonic stopband red-shift effect. Additional tests performed on TiO2 IOs prepared from larger polystyrene sphere templates also show the same optical effects; there is a red-shift in the photonic stopband (now centred at longer wavelengths from a larger initial pore size) with increased cycling. More details on the performance and behavior of the larger pore TiO2 IO electrodes can be found in the Supplementary Materials Figs. S6-S8. The fact that the stopband red-shifts, regardless of the initial central wavelength position, suggests Δλ ~ 9 nm Δλ ~ 8 nm 2.12 V 1.58 V 2.20 V 1.54 V 1.27 V 2.29 V 1.60 V Δλ ~ 11 nm a b c d e f g 15 that this red-shift is closely linked to the properties of the photonic stopband and of the reversibly lithiated electrode as a whole and, critically, not an isolated or abnormal change to the transmission/absorption properties of the material in a specific region of the spectrum. Referring back to eqn. (1), there are two possible explanations for the red-shift in the photonic stopband: an increase in d111 (the out-of-plane interplanar spacing of the photonic crystal) or an increase in neff (the effective refractive index). Considering the small magnitude of the red-shift to the photonic stopband, changes to either of these parameters would also be minor. In this study, some of the larger shifts in stopband position were on the scale of ~10 nm. In galvanostatic charge/discharge tests a 10 nm stopband red-shift was recorded after 70 cycles compared to just 7 cycles and in CV tests at 0.1 mV/s a stopband red-shift of 11 nm was recorded between cycle 1 and 5. The corresponding changes to the electrode parameters correspond ∆d111 = 3 nm or ∆neff = 0.025, assuming the optical shift can be attributed solely to each parameter and not some combination of both, overall constituting very small changes to the system properties. These miniscule modifications to the electrode system are difficult to detect accurately by experimental means, e.g. in situ or operando microscopy measurements require sensitivity to track the slight changes to d111 which are of the order of ~1% of the overall interplanar spacing of the macroporous electrode, and photoelectron or energy loss spectroscopy analysis of the surface/interface rely on specific cell designs to confidently probe the region of interest. Tomographic or CT-methods could visualise structural changes, but the sensitivity of the spectral shifts used in this work provide high fidelity tracking of very small, but systematic, changes to the overall electrode during each cycle, and over the full cycle life, both together. Consequently, for the TiO2 IO electrode system examined here, it is currently difficult to uncouple the minor shift in photonic stopband position and attribute its origin to either a change in d111 or neff, or, some combination of both parameters. The PhC electrodes examined in this work consisted of 8 – 10 layers of IO material (see Supplementary Materials Fig. S7, for example). Assuming a change in the structural periodicity of ∆d111 = 3 nm alone is responsible for the photonic stopband shift, this would translate to a maximum increase in the overall height of the electrode of approximately 24 – 30 nm. Some expansion of the electrode height would indicate a change to d111, otherwise a change to neff could be assumed. Overall, the observations show a very sensitive change 16 to optical transmission that is linked to the star of charge or depth of discharge (and lithium mole fraction) within each cycle. In addition, we can also track the small but systematic change to the periodicity and thickness of an electrode in real-time from the shift of photonic bandgap. Within each red-shifted cycle, the remarkably consistent reversible and cyclic change to transmission intensity during the cycle is always maintained and this is found under galvanostatic and voltammetric conditions. The operando optical effects observed here during reversible lithiation are fascinating and have the potential to offer an optical real-time readout of electrode state based on an observed structural colour. The method allow the reversibility to be tracked during each cycle and the state of the electrode over extended cycling non destructively, which may prove useful for material sensitive to swelling, changes in electronic conductivity or mechanical integrity with lithiation, or for assessing influence of SEI, CEI or other interfacial films or interphases. Conclusions Operando optical transmission spectra in conjunction with electrodes adopting an IO design have been shown to be capable of providing an optical assessment of the degree of lithiation and electrode cycling behaviour. Through close monitoring of the transmission spectra during operation, the operando optical spectra reveal an intricate relationship between the magnitude of the transmission intensity and the nominal lithium content in the electrode at various operating voltages. Drops in the overall transmission intensity correlate to higher uptake of lithium content in the electrode; a remarkable reversibility is seen in the inverse process as the intensity recovers at the onset of voltages corresponding to lithium extraction from the electrode. Cyclic variability in the optical transmission intensity is shown to relate directly to the state of charge of the electrode, linking the electrode optics to the electrochemical performance. Another optical effect which shows great promise is the structural colour inherent to the IO PhC, exhibiting a direct response to repeated cycling. A gradual red-shift of the photonic stopband is incurred over the course of multiple cycles, establishing a visual colour indicator of the electrode behaviour and history. From the data sets reported here, it would appear that this shift in stopband position is linear with cycle number and, more importantly, predictable. An observable structural colour for an electrode linked to the cycle number 17 has the potential to chronicle the electrochemical performance, provided the optical behaviour of the IO material is reasonably well-understood or characterised. Taking the broad applicability of this technique into consideration, with it being feasible for a wide range of electrode materials which can adopt an IO structure or be made to mimic one, the operando optical analysis explored here is versatile enough to inform on electrode phase and structural evolution while relating this information back to expected levels of lithiation during the cycle. This method shows great promise in assessing and diagnosing material performance, furthering our understanding of potential electrode candidates by closely monitoring their fundamental material properties alongside their electrochemical evolution. Acknowledgments We acknowledge support from the Irish Research Council Government of Ireland Postgraduate Scholarship under award no. GOIPG/2016/946. We also acknowledge funding from the Irish Research Council Advanced Laureate Award under grant no. IRCLA/2019/118. Materials & Correspondence Correspondence or request for materials should be address to Colm O’Dwyer, Email: c.odwyer@ucc.ie 18 Methods Preparation of Polystyrene Artificial Opal Templates Polystyrene spheres in an aqueous suspension were used to form the sacrificial artificial opal templates for the IO structure. Monodisperse sphere suspensions, with a concentration of 2.5 wt% polystyrene, were purchased from Polysciences Inc. and used, as received, for forming the opal templates via dip-coating. In this work, spheres were purchased with diameters in the ranges of approximately 370 – 380 nm and 490 – 500 nm, depending on the application. A sulfate ester used in the preparation process of the polystyrene spheres bestowed a slight negative charge to the spheres. Opal templates were prepared on glass substrates which had been pre-cut into 2 × 1 cm2 pieces. The glass substrates were first cleaned via successive ultrasonication (at a frequency of 40 kHz) in acetone (reagent grade 99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich), isopropyl alcohol (reagent grade 99.5%; Sigma-Aldrich) and deionised water, for 5 minutes each, in order to remove any dust or dirt particles by physical agitation. Following the cleaning process, a 1 × 1 cm2 surface on the glass substrate was exposed to UV-Ozone treatment using a Novascan PSD Pro Series cleaner for a period of 1 hour, in order to promote surface hydrophilicity, immediately prior to immersion in the aqueous sphere suspension. Treated substrates were dip-coated into pre-heated vials of sphere suspension at a rate of 1 mm min-1 which was maintained at a temperature of approximately 50 °C. An MTI PTL-MM01 dip-coater was used for all dip-coating processes. Glass substrates were immersed at a slight incline angle (~ 10 – 20°) to the vertical in order to improve the adhesion of the polystyrene spheres to the surface. Upon immersion into the suspension, the substrate was held still for 5 minutes to the allow the surface of the suspension to settle and allow a stable meniscus to form with the substrate. Finally, the substrate was withdrawn from the suspension at a rate of 1 mm min-1 with the polystyrene spheres arranging themselves into an ordered colloidal crystal template during extraction. Sol-Gel Infiltration and Preparation of TiO2 Inverse Opals TiO2 inverse opals were prepared using the sol-gel synthesis technique to infiltrate the voids in a prepared sacrificial opal template. In this technique, a liquid (sol) precursor is introduced into the air voids of an opal template. Ambient moisture or applied heat to the infiltrated template allows the sol to hydrolyse, condense or crosslink to form a solid material (gel) which resides in the interstitial voids of the opal template. Annealing 19 the samples at high temperatures is often performed to create crystalline materials. For the TiO2 IOs prepared in this work, a 0.1 M TiCl4 solution in isopropyl alcohol was utilised as the sol-gel precursor. A titanium (IV) chloride tetrahydrofuran complex (TiCl4·2THF 97%; Sigma-Aldrich) was used as the source of TiCl4; the precursor solution was magnetically stirred for 24 h before use, at which point the solution was clear in colour. For the sol-gel infiltration process, the TiCl4 solution was drop-cast using a syringe onto opal templates. One or two drops of the precursor was applied, just enough to adequately wet the entire surface of the photonic crystal. Special care was taken to not flood the sample with excess precursor, which can create solid layers of material which may sit atop any potential IO structure. The sacrificial opal template was subsequently removed via calcination in air at 450 °C for 1 hr with a heating ramping rate of 5 °C min-1. The high temperature allowed for both the removal of the opal template and for the crystallisation of the TiO2 material to anatase phase TiO2. Microscopy and Materials Characterisation Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a Zeiss Supra 40 high resolution SEM at typical accelerating voltages of 15–20 kV. The instrument was used to analyse the morphology of the opals and IO PhCs, and the metal film morphology or thickness. Dimensional analysis for feature size distributions from SEM images were measured using IMAGEJ software. Microscopy analysis was performed on selected samples before and after electrochemical cycling. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis was also performed on the same SEM instrument using an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. EDX line scan measurements were obtained in several directions across the surface. EDX analysis was particularly useful for detecting the presence of residual electrolyte salt in post-cycling images, often presenting as enlarged IO walls. EDX analysis could screen for elements present in the electrolyte salt and ensure that post-cycling images were free from any salt contamination, please see Supplementary Materials Figs. S11 and S12 for further details. Raman Scattering Spectroscopy for Identifying Material Phase Raman scattering analysis was used to characterise the prepared TiO2 IO films. The analysis was useful for identifying the material phase of TiO2, with modes corresponding to anatase phase TiO2 detected here (see 20 Supplementary Materials Fig. S10 for more details). In this work, Raman scattering spectroscopy was carried out using a Renishaw InVia Raman Spectrometer with a 30 mW Ar+ laser with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm. The beam was focused using a 40x objective lens and collected using a RenCamCCD camera. Deposition of Conductive Metal Layers onto TiO2 Inverse Opals Nickel metal layers were deposited over the surface of TiO2 IOs, formed on glass substrates, in order to provide a conductive layer for the electrode. A thickness of 20 nm of Ni was used for the electrodes in this work, providing a good balance between the conductivity and the optical transmission of the electrode. The metal films were deposited via physical vapour deposition using a Quorum 150 T S magnetron sputtering system. The thickness of the film deposited could be measured using a built-in film thickness monitor. The Ni metal target was purchased from Ted Pella Inc. featuring a material purity of 99.99%. The magnetron sputtering system featured a shutter system which could be used to clean the surface of the Ni target prior to deposition, a necessary precaution in the case of Ni metal which is prone to oxidation. All films were sputtered under an inert atmosphere of high purity to prevent the any reaction between the metal particles and the gas atmosphere. In this case, argon gas (> 99.995%) was used as the inert gas for sputtering. The possibility of using transparent conductive oxides, such as fluorine-doped tin oxide, as substrates was explored and found to be incompatible with this measurement system due to alloying lithiation-induced opacity, see Supplementary Materials Fig. S1 for more details. Creating the Transparent Battery Cell for Recording Operando Spectra Conventional coin and pouch cells used in traditional and non-specialised lithium-ion battery research could not be used for analysis in this work as they do not possess the capability to record optical spectra, often been constructed and encapsulated in stainless steel. In order to record optical spectra consistently and to ensure compatibility with our optical system, a custom battery cell was designed to facilitate optical measurements. A cylindrical glass vial with a diameter of 2.5 cm and a height of 5 cm was used as the main body of the transparent cell, allowing for light to pass through and be collected by a spectrometer. A custom 3D printed cap was designed using AutoCAD to tightly to fit over the top of the system, while also gripping the electrode 21 and ensuring it remained upright during analysis. Two protruding holes from the top of the cap were used to allow for electrical wire connections to the electrodes. A stereolithography (SLA) vat polymerisation 3D printer was used for constructing 3D models. Here, a Formlabs Form 2 3D printer, featuring a 250 mW laser operating at 405 nm, was used. High temperature resistant resin from Formlabs was used, on merit of its strong structural composition and high deflection temperature >210C, in order to resist possible degradation from electrolyte vapour during operation. A hot glue gun and Kapton tape (Bemis Company, Incorporated) were used to seal openings in the cell and keep it hermetically sealed. All cells were assembled in an inert atmosphere, in this case inside a glovebox in an argon environment. Optical Transmission Measurements Optical transmission spectra were recorded using an Ocean Optics Inc. USB2000 + VIS-NIR-ES UV-visible spectrometer which features an operational wavelength range of 350 – 1000 nm. An unpolarised tungsten- halogen lamp with an operational wavelength range of 400 – 2200 nm purchased from Thorlabs Inc. was used as the broadband light source for recording spectra. For spectra recorded in air, 100% transmittance was normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass, allowing the spectra of TiO2 IOs on glass to be recorded relative to the spectrum of glass. Similarly, for the spectra recorded in 0.1 M LiPF6 electrolyte, 100% transmittance was normalised to the transmission spectrum of a clean blank piece of glass suspended upright in the electrolyte. For all spectra recorded in this work, the angle of incidence between the normal from the photonic crystal surface and the incident light was fixed at 0° incidence. For recording measurements over long periods of time (e.g. operando spectra recorded over many different electrochemical cycles), transparent battery cells were clamped in place to prevent any movement of the sample. This is an important consideration as there is some spectral variance experienced between different sample spots on the same IO electrode; clamping the cell in place ensured that the spectra were consistent and, importantly, recorded from the exact same sample spot. 22 Electrochemical Analysis Electrochemical testing was carried out using a Biologic VSP potentiostat/galvanostat instrument. TiO2 IO electrodes were tested in a half-cell arrangement, as the working electrode, with lithium metal acting as the counter and reference electrode. The mass loadings for the TiO2 IO electrodes were within the range 0.1 – 0.2 mg. Figure 1 (b) shows the typical half-cell configuration used in this work, with the half-cell setup tailored for optical transmission. A flooded-cell design, with an excess of electrolyte of approximately 5 – 6 mL, was used for all of the electrochemical tests in this work. The electrolyte was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich as a 1 M solution of LiPF6 salt dissolved in a 1:1 (v/v) mixture of ethylene carbonate and diethyl carbonate. For both galvanostatic and cyclic voltammetry tests, the voltage ranges were set to 1.0 – 3.0 V. CV scan rates were varied from 0.1 – 0.3 mV/s, depending on the application. For galvanostatic tests, C-rates were calculated based on a specific capacity of 168 mA h g-1 for TiO2, where 1 C corresponds to an applied specific current of 168 mA g-1. In this work, galvanostatic tests were either carried out at 1 or 2 C, explicitly stated in each case. 23