1 Evidence for Near Ambient Superconductivity in the Lu-N-H System Nilesh P. Salke1, Alexander C. Mark1, Muhtar Ahart1, Russell J. Hemley1, 2, 3 1Department of Physics, 2Department of Chemistry, 3Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607 USA The possibility of superconductivity at ambient pressure and temperature has been a long-standing dream in condensed matter science. The past few years have been witness to significant breakthroughs in this area with the discovery of novel hydrogen-rich materials exhibiting superconductivity in the vicinity of room temperature under pressure.1-6 In this effort, experiments performed by different groups and broad agreement of the reported very high critical temperatures (Tc) have been key to advancing the field. For example, the discovery of the superconducting superhydride LaH10 with its Tc of 260 K at megabar pressures by Somayazulu et al.1 was subsequently confirmed by Drozdov et al.2 Later, several groups reported Tc at comparable pressures in related Y-H superhydrides,3-5 and recent work has confirmed the discovery of superconductivity in the C-S-H system at similar temperatures but at lower, but still megabar, pressures.6 Recently, Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 reported room-temperature superconductivity of 294 K at a remarkably low pressure of 10 kbar in the Lu-N-H system. However, several groups have reported they are unable to reproduce these results and have asserted that there is no superconductivity in the Lu-N-H system.8-11 In addition, theoretical studies have not been able to explain these results (e.g., ). Measurements of zero electrical resistance and perfect diamagnetism are required to prove superconductivity in a material, and both independently confirmed by other groups. To this end, we have carried out a series of studies of phases in the Lu- N-H system at the conditions of the reported very high Tc superconductivity. As a first step in resolving this controversy, here we report electrical transport measurements on Lu-N-H that closely match both the previously reported Tc values near room temperature and the pressure dependence of the critical temperature.7 We obtained samples synthesized by the University of Rochester group and prepared for electrical resistance measurements in diamond anvil cells (DACs) as described by Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 We independently characterized the electrical transport and other properties of the samples in our laboratory at the University of Illinois Chicago and at facilities at Argonne National Laboratory. The four-probe electrical resistance measurements were carried out as a function of temperature at four different pressures from 8.5 kbar to 23 kbar (see Fig. 1). Because of the small size of the sample (and therefore the signal), the measurements were performed using phase-sensitive detection, i.e., with a lock-in amplifier to monitor the magnitude of the voltage across the sample. The signal was then converted to a resistance amplitude |R|, which is plotted in Fig. 1. In all runs, sharp drops of more than 5 orders of magnitude were observed at critical temperatures, with a maximum Tc of 276 K at 15 kbar. Technical details on the experimental setup and resistance calculations are provided in the Supplementary Information (SI). 2 drops in resistance at 8.5 kbar can be attributed to initial sample inhomogeneity that was reduced with subsequent thermal cycling (see SI). The inset shows an image of the sample in a DAC at 2 kbar. Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 There is good agreement between the two data sets, with small differences attributed pressure gradients that were directly measured from different ruby grains in the sample chamber. In situ confocal Raman measurements of the sample in the DAC are consistent with Compound A identified in as Fm-3m LuH3-xNy (see SI). In addition, these spatially resolved spectra collected after transport measurements at 23 kbar showed little variation across the sample, indicating a single dominant phase. In contrast to the above results, Ming et al.8 reported measurements on Lu-N-H samples they had synthesized and found no evidence of superconductivity over a temperature range of 10-350 K and pressures up to ~ 40 GPa. The synthesis method described in used NH4Cl and CaH2 with a 2:8 ratio as nitrogen and hydrogen sources to react with lutetium metal at 20 kbar and 573-623 K, whereas Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 described using a 1:99 nitrogen/hydrogen gas mixture to react with lutetium foil at 20 kbar and 338 K. On the other hand, Zhang et al.10 reported using the synthesis method described in , but also found no evidence for superconductivity. Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 reported that during the course of their study of the Lu-N-H system, the synthesis success rate for producing superconducting samples by the described method was 35%. Altogether, these results indicate successful synthesis of the superconducting material is strongly dependent on details of sample preparation, and that further study and optimization of these procedures are needed. 3 Additional transport measurements provide insight on this sample variability. R-T measurements on another sample obtained from the University of Rochester group are shown in Fig. 3. Similar to the results of Ming et al.8, no abrupt drop in |R| was observed above 80 K. This sample showed Tc of 240 K at 8 kbar and was synthesized in 2021 and had apparently degraded over a period of time. Interestingly, the non-superconducting samples measured in this work and reported by Ming et al.8 exhibit a resistance maximum as a function of temperature. In our sample, the maximum |R| is observed at 230 K, below which resistance gradually decreases. A similar trend is observed for all measurements in the curves in . This turnover suggests an intriguing interplay of insulator- metal transitions as a function of temperature in the Lu-N-H system reminiscent of those found in early studies of lanthanide hydrides at ambient pressure.13 Superconductivity in Lu-N-H could be sensitive to the concentration of nitrogen doping. For hydrides, nitrogen-doping has been shown to be a promising approach to enhance the superconducting properties. Evidence for variable Tc in LaH10 may be due to different degrees of nitrogen doping, which can enhance Tc to room temperature.1, 14 Our recent theoretical study indicates that the electronic properties expected to give rise to the high Tc superconductivity are strongly dependent on the structure, stoichiometry, and N-H-vacancy ordering of the material, i.e., in specific superlattices based on Fm-3m LuH3-xNy.15 This sensitivity of the electronic structure with respect to crystal structure and atomic ordering indicates that creating the superconductor may be strongly dependent on synthesis conditions, including annealing, consistent with the suggestions above. Additional routes for synthesis of this intriguing material are being explored along with additional characterization and tests of superconductivity. Dasenbrock-Gammon et al.7 4 to drop to zero. This work (black) 8 kbar data, Rmax of 414 mΩ at 240 K and Rmin of 373 mΩ at 159 K. The gap in the data is due to the presence of a large amount of environmental noise in the laboratory. Ming et al. (red) 11 kbar, Rmax of 86.9 mΩ at 306 K and Rmin of 78.3 mΩ at 28.0 K; Ming et al. (blue) 4 kbar data, Rmax of 237 mΩ at 274 K and Rmin of 185 mΩ at 24.8 K.8 Acknowledgements We are grateful to R. Dias for providing the Lu-N-H samples, Q. Li and H. Wen for sharing their data files, D. Kuntzelman and R. Sellers for help with the equipment, and Y. J. Ryu for help with the Raman measurements at GSECARS. This research was supported by the NSF (DMR-2104881) and DOE-NNSA through the Chicago/DOE Alliance Center (DE-NA0003975). Use of the GSECARS Raman Lab System was supported by the NSF (EAR-1531583). Data Availability Data supporting the findings of this study are available from the public link https://zenodo.org/record/8020419.