1 Hybrid Graphene-Plasmon Gratings Tianjing Guo1 and Christos Argyropoulos2,* 1Institute of Space Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China 2Department of Electrical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16803, USA *cfa5361@psu.edu Abstract: Graphene can support surface plasmons with higher confinement, lower propagation loss, and substantially more tunable response compared to usual metal-based plasmonic structures. Interestingly, plasmons in graphene can strongly couple with nanostructures and gratings placed in its vicinity to form new hybrid systems that can provide a platform to investigate more complicated plasmonic phenomena. In this Perspective, an analysis on the excitation of highly confined graphene plasmons and their strong coupling with metallic or dielectric gratings is performed. We emphasize the flexibility in the efficient control of light-matter interaction by these new hybrid systems, benefiting from the interplay between graphene plasmons and other external resonant modes. The hybrid graphene- plasmon grating systems offer unique tunable plasmonic resonances with enhanced field distributions. They exhibit a novel route to realize practical emerging applications, including nonreciprocal devices, plasmonic switches, perfect absorbers, nonlinear structures, photodetectors, and optical sensors. I. INTRODUCTION Graphene is the flagship two-dimensional (2D) material made of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal lattice. It has attracted a surge of research interest for its unique electrical, mechanical, optical, and thermal properties.1–4 It exhibits distinct advantages over metals leading to the realization of plasmonic effects at infrared (IR) and terahertz (THz) frequencies, where it can support surface plasmons (SPs) with high confinement and relatively low loss.5 Graphene plasmons (GPs) can become highly tunable by applying electrostatic gating voltage or chemical doping,6,7 89making graphene an important building block of envisioned reconfigurable devices. Another important advantage of GPs is their strong light confinement that becomes even stronger by further increasing the doping concentration in graphene.10,11 Moreover, GPs demonstrate much lower loss compared to noble metal plasmons mainly due to graphene’s higher carrier mobility, especially in the case of high doping.10,12 As a result, many theoretical and experimental studies have focused on demonstrating GPs due to their potential applications in various optoelectronic emerging technologies.13–17 Graphene monolayers can be tailored into various geometries, such as ribbons,18–20 disks,21,22 and crosses,23 with the goal to improve the GPs excitation. However, the process of 2 graphene patterning to various shapes is challenging to be experimentally implemented and can cause detrimental effects on graphene’s response. Another more practical approach to excite GPs is to integrate graphene monolayers with various already resonating structures, including plasmonic nanoantennas, gratings, and metamaterials, forming new hybrid plasmonic or dielectric systems. These hybrid graphene-based structures have the potential to rapidly increase the interaction strength between graphene and incident light radiation, leading to a variety of new IR and optical devices with exciting functionalities, such as tunable absorbers,24,25 efficient modulators,26,27 and photodetectors.28,29 As an example, optical gratings can provide strong localized electric fields and can be used to excite even more confined and enhanced GPs due to the formation of hybrid graphene-plasmon gratings (HGPGs).12,27,30–33 The hybrid designs consisting of gratings combined with graphene benefit from the merits of both systems. More specifically, the excited plasmons in graphene can strongly couple with the grating structure due to their proximity and coupling of their near- fields,34,35 usually causing enhanced resonant absorption that is a desirable outcome for most applications. In addition, metallic gratings used in such hybrid structures can work as gate electrodes to further tune the resonant frequency of the designed graphene-based device. The combination of graphene and metallic (plasmonic) nanostructures offers a unique way to enhance absorption at their resonance, where sharp peaks of reflectance or transmittance, combined with enhanced fields are present. This is the fundamental response behind the realization of a wide range of potential applications, including sensing, light modulation, and photodetection.36–41 In addition, these hybrid devices can have a tunable operation at mid-infrared (IR), far-IR, and THz frequencies just by using different grating periods. As a potentially useful application, HGPGs can be used to detect the presence of molecules or ions in a solution by measuring changes in the plasmonic properties of the total hybrid system.42,43 This approach can be used for the sensitive detection of DNA, proteins, and other biomolecules. Interestingly, graphene does not play the leading role in this type of sensing response. However, it provides the required tunability and biocompatibility, making it an ideal building block for new sensing and photodetecting devices. The superior reconfigurability guarantees that HGPGs can work as selective sensors for diverse applications, since their sensing frequency can be tuned in a wide range. HGPGs can also be used to create tunable optical filters and switches.44–46 The plasmonic properties of HGPG devices can be modulated by applying an external voltage, allowing for precise control over the transmission and reflection of light. Plasmonic absorption is also beneficial to graphene- based photodetectors that have been demonstrated to achieve ultrafast photodetection speeds combined with broadband operation.47–52 The photodetector responsivity is enhanced by utilizing HGPG designs simply because they capture light more efficiently.53,54 With the additional advent of various relevant nanofabrication techniques, HGPGs are expected to lead to new exciting applications emerging from these novel configurations. In this Perspective, we provide a detailed overview of the recent advances of various HGPGs structures and their potential applications. 3 II. STRONG COUPLING OF GRAPHENE-PLASMON GRATINGS The use of metallic subwavelength gratings is an appealing approach to boost the excitation efficiency of GPs along a continuous graphene monolayer. By placing graphene below a metallic aperture, a novel class of plasmon resonance was reported, where strong coupling occurs between the newly created hybrid plasmon mode and incident THz radiation.45 The hybrid graphene plasmonic structure is shown in Fig. 1(a). It is composed of a metallic grating patterned on top of a continuous graphene monolayer. Higher order modes present at longer frequencies are not considered and only the fundamental plasmon mode is investigated in this study. It is found that only when the metal contact is much wider than the grating channel w, a strong resonance can occur combined with high absorption with spectrum demonstrated in Fig. 1(c). Meanwhile, a maximum absorption value of 50% is reached, implying very high field confinement at this resonant plasmon frequency. On the contrary, Fig. 1(d) depicts a far lower absorption response for the complementary structure shown in Fig. 1(b), i.e., periodic graphene ribbons without metallic grating. To interpret the above absorption results, the charge density for the two cases is calculated at the resonant frequency and demonstrated by the three-dimensional (3D) distributions in Figs. 1(e) and 1(f), respectively. The former case exhibits a resonant circuit behavior that interacts strongly with the incident wave leading to high absorption, where the metal contacts act as capacitors and the graphene as inductors. While the latter work consists only of inductors (graphene) and exhibits much weaker resonant response. Hence, the incorporation of plasmonic gratings into graphene can substantially improve the THz absorption performance. An alternative relevant design was recently demonstrated, made of a continuous, large- area graphene sheet grown on silica substrate and coated with a square periodic array of metallic nanoparticles.55 Figure 1(g) presents this configuration, where the resulted diffractive coupling depends on the grating period  . Hence, the resonant frequency of the induced grating-coupled graphene plasmon can be tuned by the grating period  and graphene carrier density, as illustrated in Fig. 1(h). The resonant frequencies of graphene plasmons are tuned across the entire THz regime by using different micrometer-scale array periods  . The measured transmission spectra are demonstrated in Fig. 1(i), when the hybrid device has period  =1.5um , where a transmission dip is observed that becomes more pronounced for higher applied gate voltage (VGS) values. However, the resonant frequency is always constant and approximately equal to 7 THz. This work illustrated that the plasmonic transmission and absorption behavior is not consistent with the predicted theoretical analysis when large variations in carrier density N across the graphene sample are present.55 This useful result stressed the importance of uniform carrier distribution along graphene to realize strongly tunable plasmonic devices. The transformation of electromagnetic waves into propagating plasmons in graphene was also realized by the asymmetric dual-grating gate configuration operating in reflection mode depicted in Fig. 1(j).56 In this work, the wide-area graphene monolayer is separated from the dual-grating gate by a thin dielectric sheet. The interaction of the incident THz wave 4 with graphene is greatly enhanced by canceling the transmission and weakening the reflection due to the metallic substrate and Fabry-Perot resonances, respectively. This structure transforms normal incident THz waves into graphene propagating plasmons. The efficiency of the transformation is characterized by the so-called transformation coefficient, which can have negative or positive values when the graphene plasmon propagates in negative or positive directions, respectively. The absorbance A and transformation coefficient Tp are presented in Figs. 1(k) and 1(l), respectively, by optimizing the grating’s asymmetry and fixing the narrower gate width. When the relaxation time of graphene is  =1ps , the transformation coefficient can reach its maximum value of 51% at 4 THz. Moreover, the absorbance shown in Fig. 1(k) is very close to 100% at the maximum transformation coefficient point, mainly due to the excited Fabry-Perot resonances. This work demonstrates the possibility to realize efficient transformers of the incident THz waves into propagating plasmons along graphene. (a) Hybrid metal-graphene structure to achieve strong coupling between the plasmon mode and incident structures shown in (a) and (b), respectively.45 Reproduced with permission from Jadidi et al., Nano Lett. 15, 7099 (2015). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (g) Hybrid graphene structure with continuous large-area graphene sheet coated by a periodic array of gold nanoparticles. (h) First-order resonant frequency as a function of carrier density for different period values  . (i) Measured transmission spectra of the structure in (g) for different gate voltage values VGS. The inset is the minimum transmission frequency as a function of carrier density N.55 Reproduced with permission from Tantiwanichapan et al., ACS Photonics 4, 2011 (2017). Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (j) Dual-grating gated graphene configuration to excite propagating GPs. (k) Absorption as a function of frequency and width w1 of the wider gate finger. (l) Transformation coefficient as a function of frequency and width w1.56 Reproduced with permission from Fateev. et al., Phys. Rev. Appl. 11, 064002 (2019). Copyright 2019, American Physical Society. Hence, strong coupling phenomena provide a unique route to efficiently excite plasmonic resonances in graphene and graphene-based nanostructures that can be used in 5 various emerging applications. Phonons generated at various materials can also couple to graphene plasmons when strong coupling is achieved.57 Multiple plasmonic resonances were observed experimentally in graphene nanoribbons leading to four absorption peaks arising from the strong coupling of GPs and three surface optical phonon modes.58 Additionally, direct experimental evidence was provided that the coupling of a graphene/SiC support with gallium nanoparticles-localized surface plasmon resonances can be controlled over a broad frequency range, contributing to the enhancement of Raman modes.59 Plasmonic strong coupling effects were also investigated experimentally with graphene nanoribbon structures,60 enabling field-enhanced optical spectroscopy,61 biological sensing,62 and complete absorption.24,35 Interestingly, the efficient coupling of GPs to resonant modes excited by metamaterial structures was achieved with hybrid graphene-metamaterial systems.63 More specifically, complete modulation in the strength of the metamaterial electromagnetically induced transparency was realized because of the near-field coupling between monolayer graphene and THz resonant metamaterials.64 Furthermore, the incident photons were efficiently coupled to plasmons along the graphene layer by constructing a doubly resonant plasmonic configuration, leading to strong optical absorption with a large tuning range.65 Strong coupling effects were also reported between GPs and special evanescent wave modes induced by near-field perturbations between dielectric and metallic gratings.66 Moreover, tunable large THz modulation was demonstrated by coupling a gated continuous graphene layer to a non- resonant subwavelength scale meta-atom structure.67 Finally, effective directional couplers were designed by combining multilayer graphene-based cylindrical waveguides and metal- based waveguides.68 The excitation of magnetic polaritons in metal gratings with deep corrugations and their coupling with plasmons in graphene was accomplished based on the hybrid plasmonic system shown in Fig. 2(a).35 The strong coupling effect demonstrated in this work resulted in substantial enhancement to the system’s absorption by boosting the intrinsic plasmonic resonance of graphene. The absorption enhancement was utilized indirectly to determine the coupling effect strength in this work. The hybrid grating in Fig. 2(a) generates a highly localized magnetic field inside its trenches forming magnetic polaritons (MPs), also known in the literature as spoof plasmons.69,70 Figure 2(b) shows the absorptance spectrum for bare and graphene-covered grating structures. The obtained absorptance is only 0.35 for the bare grating at the MP resonance frequency of 1041 cm−1. However, the absorptance is substantially boosted to 0.94 after covering the grating with graphene, while its resonant frequency exhibits a blueshift. The absorptance enhancement and accompanied resonance shift clearly indicate the strong coupling effect between the metallic grating and graphene. This work also demonstrated the effect on the coupling strength when graphene is elevated above the grating surface. As expected, the coupling effect deteriorates when the graphene sheet detaches from the grating and its distance is increased. In addition, the coupling is modified by the geometrical parameters and graphene chemical potential values. Figure 2(c) depicts the absorptance spectra under different chemical potentials. The coupling strength is highest when  =0.3 eV and deteriorates when  slightly changes to 0.28 eV or 0.32 eV. 6 (a) Geometry of graphene ribbon-grating hybrid structure. (b) Absorption spectra of grating without graphene, hybrid graphene-grating structure, and bare graphene ribbon array. (c) Absorption spectra of the graphene ribbon-grating hybrid structure under different graphene Fermi levels.35 Reproduced with permission from Zhao et al., ACS Photonics 2, 1611 (2015). Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic of grating-assisted double-layer graphene hybrid system.71 Reproduced with permission from Zhao et al., Opt. Lett. 41, 5470 (2016). Copyright 2016, Optica. (e) Geometry of grating-assisted double layer graphene hybrid structure consisting of a silver grating placed between two graphene layers. (f) Absorption plots of the hybrid system as a function of frequency and graphene chemical potential EF. Here, the upper- and lower-layer graphene layers have the same chemical potential. (g) Absorption plots as a function of frequency and lower-layer graphene chemical potential EF2 when the upper-layer graphene chemical potential is fixed to EF1 = 0.4 eV. (h) Absorption plots as a function of frequency and upper-layer graphene chemical potential EF1 when the lower-layer graphene chemical potential is fixed to EF2 = 0.6 eV.72 Reproduced with permission from Qing et al., ACS Photonics 6, 2884 (2019). Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) Compound silver grating covered by a continuous graphene layer. (j) Interaction sketch among graphene plasmon and two different MP modes. (k) Geometry of the resulted hybrid system when three different MP modes are excited. (l) Simulated and theoretically calculated absorption spectra of the structure in (k) for the cases with and without graphene cover. (m) Dispersion relation of the resulted four hybrid modes.73 Reproduced with permission from Qing et al., Carbon N. Y. 145, 596 (2019). Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. The dielectric diffractive grating in Fig. 2(d) can also be used to efficiently couple the incident field and excite plasmonic resonances along a double graphene layer.71 Strong coupling is demonstrated by changing the graphene layer separation distance, substantially modifying the transparency window of the entire hybrid system. Similarly, an alternative hybrid system is demonstrated in Fig. 2(e) that consists of a metallic grating separating two 7 continuous graphene films.72 Three different modes are excited in this hybrid structure, i.e., the upper-layer graphene plasmon (UGP), lower-layer graphene plasmon (LGP), and MP. Classic coupled oscillator models are used to analyze the coupling behavior of these modes, which leads to two anti-crossing responses characterized by different Rabi splitting values and three new hybrid-polariton modes. The strong coupling between MP and the two graphene plasmon modes is explored by calculating the absorption contour plots of this hybrid system. Spectral splitting is observed in the absorption spectra due to the strong coupling between the MP and UGP modes. The obtained anti-crossing behavior occurs with a moderate splitting energy. The MP mode is coupled to the two graphene plasmon modes simultaneously leading to a strong interaction between UGP (or LGP) and MP modes that gives rise to hybrid dispersion bands. Figure 2(f) illustrates the absorption contour plot as a function of frequency and graphene chemical potential EF when upper- and lower-layer graphene have the same chemical potential (EF = EF1 = EF2). Strong coupling exists between the MP and UGP (or LGP) modes as EF increases, leading to the formation of three distinct hybrid dispersion bands. The spacer thickness also plays an important role on the coupling between the MP and UGP or LGP modes. More importantly, the coupling phenomena can be dynamically tuned by controlling the chemical potential of each graphene layer separately, as depicted in Figs. 2(g) and 2(h), where the doping is fixed to one graphene layer and vary in the other. This study presented an efficient platform to explore the coupling effect achieved by hybrid graphene-based systems. The aforementioned multimode coupling provides additional energy exchange channels and is expected to attract increased attention compared to the single coupling mode. Towards this end, the hybrid coupling among GP and MP modes was theoretically investigated by the multi-coupled hybrid system shown in Fig. 2(i), consisting of a thin dielectric spacer layer, asymmetric silver grating filled with dielectric, and a graphene monolayer placed on top.73 Based on the different trench depths of the compound grating, two distinct MP modes (MP1 and MP2) are excited by this composite configuration. In addition, the hybrid system is dynamically tuned by controlling the chemical potential of graphene. Graphene plasmon and MP modes are excited simultaneously along a practical design of this hybrid structure. The multimode interaction characteristics are depicted in Fig. 2(j). Rabi splitting occurs when the graphene plasmon is coupled to MP1/MP2 modes, generating two new hybrid plasmonic modes characterized by three dispersion bands. Moreover, an additional MP mode is introduced in the hybrid system by designing one periodic trench depth to be deeper compared to other trenches in the silver grating, as shown in Fig. 2(k). Based on the coupled oscillator model theoretical calculations and finite element method (FEM) simulations, the obtained absorption spectra are presented in Fig. 2(l) for the two cases with and without graphene monolayer. Three absorption peaks are observed when graphene is absent, corresponding to the MP1, MP2, and MP3 modes, respectively. When graphene is included in the system, the third absorption peak splits into two peaks because of the hybridization of the MP3 mode with the second order graphene plasmon mode. Figure 2(m) displays the dispersion relation of the resulted four hybrid modes. Interestingly, all four dispersion bands exhibit an anti-crossing strong coupling response. Hence, this type of complicated multimode 8 hybrid system coupled with graphene will further enhanced light-matter interaction. III. HYBRID GRAPHENE-PLASMON GRATINGS APPLICATIONS A. Absorption enhancement Graphene monolayers exhibit only 2.3% absorption in optical frequencies mainly due to their single-atom ultrathin thickness.6,26 Recently, researchers have made excellent progress to boost the light absorption in graphene.74 Towards this goal, microcavities were used to enhance absorption by making electromagnetic waves propagate through graphene multiple times.75 Alternatively, the overall optical path length was increased along graphene by draping it over optical waveguides leading to increased overall absorption.76 Moreover, perfect absorption was also obtained with hybrid graphene-metal systems when strong coupling and other interference effects exist between the THz graphene plasmons and metallic grating resonances.30 Consequently, coherent perfect absorption was reported by patterning graphene monolayers into periodic arrays of patch resonators placed on each side of an ultrathin dielectric substrate, i.e., constructing an asymmetric bifacial graphene metasurface.24 When patterned graphene13,21 was placed on a metallic or dielectric substrate, perfect graphene absorbers were realized by satisfying some specific constraints.21,36,77–79 Prominent absorption peaks were achieved by using gated graphene nanoribbons, benefiting from localized plasmon excitations excited along their surfaces.13 It was also reported that perfect THz absorption can be attained based on patterned graphene, however, with relatively low tunability.80 In addition, anisotropic graphene plasmonic structures were explored in the mid-IR range, where tunable spectral selectivity was accomplished with localized plasmonic resonances.81 Finally, tunable plasmon-induced absorption was realized based on graphene- assisted metal-dielectric gratings.82,83 As mentioned before, graphene monolayers can be coupled to various nanostructures to form new hybrid plasmonic systems. Strong enhancement of optical absorption was reported by a graphene-insulator-metal hybrid plasmonic device. This coupling was induced by the increased diffraction efficiency of the metallic (gold) grating combined with resonant coupling between plasmons generated along the grating and graphene hybrid system.65 Additionally, plasmonic gratings covered by graphene sheets were proposed to enhance absorption due to the strong localized electric field from the induced magnetic resonances at the grating.35,84 Alternatively, it was experimentally demonstrated that highly confined propagating surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) can be excited in monolayer graphene at IR frequencies by using a silicon diffractive grating combined with graphene.34 An example of a metal/dielectric/metal grating structure covered by graphene is demonstrated in Fig. 3(a).33 The system is modeled by full-wave simulations, as well as theoretical analysis based on the equivalent circuit model where the dielectric layer is treated as a capacitor while the metal and graphene are considered inductors. The near-IR absorption spectrum is calculated for three different systems: hybrid graphene-covered grating, grating without graphene, and bare graphene monolayer. The absorptivity of the hybrid graphene- 9 covered grating structure is depicted in Fig. 3(b) and can reach up to 0.9 values, much higher than the other two configurations. The physical mechanism behind these results is the strong coupling between MP modes excited at the metal/dielectric grating structure and graphene. The sharp Fano resonance achieved by these hybrid structures can have potential applications in improving near-IR light absorption.38 The hybrid structure shown in Fig. 3(c) is composed of a metal grating coupled to a graphene/waveguide system. This configuration operates at far-IR where a sharp asymmetric resonance line profile is achieved arising from the broad graphene plasmon resonance that interferes with the sharp planar waveguide resonance mode. The asymmetric profile of the resulted Fano resonance is tuned to symmetric by changing the mobility of graphene from 0.5 m2/Vs to 2 m2/Vs leading to tunable light absorption. Graphene absorption decreases with the increase in graphene’s mobility since lower graphene mobility always leads to higher material loss. The absorption efficiency can reach 0.76 when graphene mobility  = 0.5 m2/Vs is used, as demonstrated in Fig. 3(d). The almost linear relationship between the resonant wavelength and surrounding refractive index of this hybrid system is shown in Fig. 3(e) to demonstrate the structure’s sensitivity. The ‘‘right’’ resonance refers to longer wavelengths while the ‘‘left’’ refers to shorter ones. The sensitivity can reach 5.21 um/RIU for the ‘‘right’’ resonance, much higher than 0.242 um/RIU obtained from the ‘‘left’’ one. Hence, this hybrid structure can have potential applications as self-calibrated refractive index sensor. Composite metallic gratings covered by a graphene layer are demonstrated in Fig. 3(f) that can lead to wider absorption bandwidth and increased absorption efficiency.85 The composite system (bottom) is based on two regular gratings with optimal dimensions and small (top) or large (middle) periods. Not only exhibits high absorption but also achieves wide spectral bandwidth. Figure 3(g) displays the absorption spectra for transverse magnetic (TM) polarized waves under different scenarios. The absorption efficiency is enhanced in the case of compound grating covered by graphene compared to the scenario without graphene. Importantly, the compound grating can absorb 90% of incident light at the resonance wavelength of 1.67 um with a spectral bandwidth around 0.3 um. However, the absorption is increased to 98% after being covered by graphene at the same resonant frequency, while the spectral bandwidth is doubled to approximately 0.6 um.85 Furthermore, the absorption is computed as a function of operation wavelength and incident angles with results shown in Fig. 3(h) for the cases of compound grating with and without graphene. The computed absorption is found to be insensitive for a broad range of incident angles from 0° to 80°. It also exhibits wider bandwidth when graphene is used compared to the no graphene case. The electric field and Poynting vector distributions are plotted in Fig. 3(i) at off-resonance (top figure) and on- resonance (middle figure) to better understand the absorption physical mechanism. The electric fields are trapped among the two grating trenches at resonance, as shown in the middle caption in Fig. 3(i), leading to higher absorption. However, the electric fields are confined just in the middle trenches along their openings at off-resonance, as depicted in the top caption in Fig. 3(i). Hence, the absorption is much lower for the off-resonance case compared to on-resonance. In addition, the energy flow diagram demonstrated in the bottom caption in Fig. 3(i) also illustrates this effect, i.e., the incoming energy is concentrated on the 10 (a) Hybrid system with graphene covering a metal/dielectric/metal grating design. The effective circuit model is used to verify the simulation results. (b) Absorption for different systems including hybrid structure, grating, and bare graphene.33 Reproduced with permission from Pan et al., Opt. Express 25, 16400 (2017). Copyright 2017, Optica. (c) Hybrid structure composed of metal grating, monolayer graphene, and planar waveguide. (d) Simulated and theoretically calculated absorption of the designed hybrid structure when graphene mobility is fixed to 0.5 m2/Vs. (e) Relationship between the resonant operating wavelength and surrounding refractive index.38 Reproduced with permission from Ruan et al., J. Light. Technol. 39, 5657 (2021). Copyright 2021, IEEE Xplore. (f) Construction of compound grating by superimposing two short and long period grating designs. (g) Absorption spectra of short period, long period, and compound grating with and without graphene layer cover. (h) Absorption of compound gratings with (bottom) and without (top) graphene layer cover as a function of operation wavelength and incident angles. (i) Electric field and Poynting vector distributions in one period of the compound grating. Top and middle figures show the electric fields at off- and on-resonance wavelength, respectively. The bottom figures demonstrate the Poynting vector at resonant wavelength.85 Reproduced with permission from Nguyen-Huu et al., IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 27, 1 (2021). Copyright 2021, IEEE Xplore. interface between graphene and the top edges of the trench opening. This absorber design exhibits strong absorptance combined with wide spectral bandwidth and omnidirectional response. It can have applications in the design of new photodetector and energy harvesting systems. Besides numerical simulations of HGPGs, experimental realization of broadband THz absorbers based on graphene was recently reported,86 where an effective absorption 11 bandwidth of ≥90% ranging from 1.54 to 2.23 THz was achieved but with a relatively low electrical tunability. In another related work, the absorption was greatly boosted by placing a graphene monolayer into a Salisbury-screen-type absorber configuration.87,88 This type of structure can provide enhanced fields in the vicinity of the graphene layer. The hybrid graphene Salisbury screen composed of graphene plasmonic resonators placed a quarter wavelength away from the back reflector was reported to absorb almost 25% of incident light, more than 10 times larger than that of monolayer graphene in the same frequency range.89 Furthermore, electrically tunable perfect absorbers were reported experimentally by integrating metallic gratings into similar graphene Salisbury screens.32 The resulted hybrid structures were composed of a metal reflector, polyimide layer, periodic aluminum grating, and monolayer graphene covering the entire design, as depicted in Fig. 4(a). The graphene Fermi level (EF) was varied by tuning the externally applied gate voltage (Vg) in this configuration. The interaction between graphene and incident THz waves was further enhanced by a metallic grating embedded into the hybrid absorber design. Figure 4(b) illustrates the computed absorbance of two absorber designs with and without the grating. Both can achieve perfect absorption but the design without the metallic grating requires very high Fermi level values (EF = 1.05 eV), which is hard to experimentally realize. However, the absorber design with grating can achieve perfect absorption for low Fermi level values (EF = 0.3 eV) due to the improved enhancement in the interaction between graphene and incident electric field induced by the metallic grating. The measured reflection is presented in Fig. 4(c) under normal incidence for different gating voltage values and frequencies. The reflection can reach zero values around 0.72 THz, where perfect absorption is obtained, as presented by the green line in Fig. 4(d). The electrical modulation depth is also calculated at the resonance frequency and the maximum modulation depth approaches 29% that is shown by the blue line in Fig. 4(d). Hence, these results reveal potential applications of these hybrid absorber designs in THz modulators and switches. Furthermore, the experimental demonstration of peak absorption over 99% was reported for a hybrid structure composed of a monolayer graphene sandwiched between a 1D polymethy1-methacrylate (PMMA) grating and a silica layer,90 as shown in Fig. 4(e). The optical and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of the fabricated structure are presented in Figs. 4(f) and 4(g), respectively. It is found that we can distinguish samples with graphene from those without graphene by inspecting the obtained optical images. The fabricated structure is measured with confocal microscope setup, which is schematically illustrated in Fig. 4(h). The measured absorption spectra of the proposed absorber design with different grating periods for transverse electronic (TE) polarization are shown in Fig. 4(i), where peak absorption of 99.6%, 99.1% and 98.6% are achieved with grating period of 1230, 1254 and 1270 nm, respectively. Importantly, it is observed that the measured results are in excellent agreement with the simulation results, confirming complete optical absorption of graphene-based hybrid structures in the near-IR range. Note that the mid-IR spectral range is equally important because of many applications that include IR vibrational spectroscopy, sensing, and thermal radiation control. Electronically tunable perfect absorption is experimentally demonstrated with the HGPG shown in Fig. 4(j).91 In this type of structure, 12 (a) Graphene Salisbury screen hybrid metasurface design. The metallic grating between graphene and dielectric layer enhances the interaction between THz waves and graphene. (b) Absorption of the bare graphene and hybrid absorber system at their resonances. (c) Measured reflection as a function of external gate voltage and frequency with the period and width of the grating being 150 um and 70 um, respectively. (d) Absorbance and modulation depth measured at the resonant frequency.32 Reproduced with permission from Chen et al., Adv. Opt. Mater. 8, 1900660 (2020). Copyright 2020, Wiley online library. (e) Nearly perfect absorber design realized by coupling graphene with 1D PMMA grating. (f) Optical image of the fabricated structure. (g) SEM image of the same structure. (h) Schematic of the measurement setup. (i) The measured and simulated absorption spectra of the hybrid structure with different grating periods for TE polarization.90 Reproduced with permission from Guo et al., Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 1955 (2016). Copyright 2016, Wiley online library. (j) Schematic of a perfect absorption structure incorporating graphene ribbons and plasmonic metallic gratings. The graphene plasmonic ribbon is not located in the center of the metallic slit but slightly off the side. (k) SEM image of the structure in (j). (l) Gate voltage-dependent tunable absorption map of the proposed structure in (g).91 Reproduced with permission from Kim et al., Nano Lett. 18, 971 (2018). Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. the metallic slit is 100 nm wide while the 50 nm wide graphene ribbon is off to one side. The narrower slit in this configuration can more efficiently confine the incident radiation, leading to larger field enhancement and much higher light absorption compared to the configuration where the graphene ribbon is located in the center of the metallic slit. Figure 4(l) presents the tunable absorption map of the proposed HGPG design, as a function of frequency and graphene Fermi level. By performing experimental measurements, a peak absorption of 96.9 % is obtained in the hybrid structure at 1389 cm-1, revealing the potential of far-reaching applications in graphene-based active IR optical components. To assess the absorption level of HGPG designs, we compared the peak absorption and the operation range obtained with numerical simulations and experimental measurements, as seen in Table 1. It is observed that 13 nearly perfect absorption can be obtained by hybrid graphene-grating structures from IR to THz regime. However, most structure designs can achieve only narrowband response or single-frequency operation. Future efforts will be dedicated to obtaining broadband absorption performance. In addition, it is still challenging to shift the operation wavelength to near-IR or even visible frequency bands, mainly due to the fabrication difficulties in addition to graphene property limitations. Design Wavelength/ Frequency Absorption Bandwidth Method