Efficient Photonic Integration of Diamond Color Centers and Thin-Film Lithium Niobate DANIEL RIEDEL,1,2,† HOPE LEE,1,† JASON F. HERRMANN,1,† JAKOB GRZESIK,1,† VAHID ANSARI,1 JEAN-MICHEL BORIT,1 HUBERT S. STOKOWSKI,1, SHAHRIAR AGHAEIMEIBODI,1,3 HAIYU LU,1 PATRICK J. MCQUADE, 1 NICK A. MELOSH,1 ZHI-XUN SHEN,1 AMIR H. SAFAVI-NAEINI,1 JELENA VU ˇCKOVI ́C,1,* 1Edward L. Ginzton Lab, Stanford University, 348 Via Pueblo Mall, Stanford, CA, USA 94305 2 Present address: AWS Center for Quantum Networking, Boston, Massachusetts, USA 3 Present address: AWS Center for Quantum Computing, San Francisco, California, USA † These authors contributed equally to this work. * jela@stanford.edu Abstract: On-chip photonic quantum circuits with integrated quantum memories have the potential to radically progress hardware for quantum information processing. In particular, negatively charged group-IV color centers in diamond are promising candidates for quantum memories, as they combine long storage times with excellent optical emission properties and an optically-addressable spin state. However, as a material, diamond lacks many functionalities needed to realize scalable quantum systems. Thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN), in contrast, offers a number of useful photonic nonlinearities, including the electro-optic effect, piezoelectricity, and capabilities for periodically-poled quasi-phase matching. Here, we present highly efficient heterogeneous integration of diamond nanobeams containing negatively charged silicon-vacancy (SiV) centers with TFLN waveguides. We observe greater than 90% transmission efficiency between the diamond nanobeam and TFLN waveguide on average across multiple measurements. By comparing saturation signal levels between confocal and integrated collection, we determine a 10-fold increase in photon counts channeled into TFLN waveguides versus that into out-of-plane collection channels. Our results constitute a key step for creating scalable integrated quantum photonic circuits that leverage the advantages of both diamond and TFLN materials. 1. Introduction Optically addressable solid-state spin qubits are promising building blocks for scalable quantum networking applications . Among these, diamond color center defects are leading candidates for advancing quantum networks. Long-lived 13C nuclear spins in diamond can be harnessed as quantum memories , while nitrogen-vacancy centers have been used to demonstrate a multi-node quantum network and quantum teleportation between non-neighboring nodes . Further progress hinges on the efficient integration of color centers into photonic structures to enhance the spin-photon interface without introducing excessive noise [7–9]. Negatively charged group-IV color centers benefit from structural inversion-symmetry, which, to first-order, shields the local spin structure from nearby electric field noise introduced during nanofabrication . In addition, this family of color centers consistently exhibits high Debye-Waller factors, leading to strong emission into the zero phonon line (ZPL) . These features, in combination with the efficient coupling to nanophotonic cavities, have enabled the demonstration of memory-enhanced quantum communication and the generation of streams of indistinguishable photons , rendering SiV centers a prime candidate for quantum networking applications. However, scalable, monolithic fabrication of diamond photonic integrated circuits (PICs) remains challenging, and complex diamond PICs are precluded by the absence of second- arXiv:2306.15207v1 [physics.optics] 27 Jun 2023 5 um Diamond TFLN SiO2 LN Bulk a) b) c) |E|2 50 nm 100 nm 200 nm 350 nm Fig. 1. Structure for adiabatic transfer of light from diamond to thin-film lithium niobate (a) Reflectance image of the integrated device with a 408 nm laser scanning system. The green boxes indicate the TFLN grating couplers, and the blue box indicates the diamond nanobeam. (b) Schematics of the device: (top) side-profile, (bot) cross-section of the inverse taper region. A diamond nanobeam rests on thin-film lithium niobate on insulator, with a trench undercut. The insets show COMSOLTM simulations of the fundamental TE mode of the hybridized waveguide, demonstrating adiabatic mode transfer between the diamond and TFLN. The width of the diamond waveguide is given in each inset, with the TFLN waveguide top width fixed at 200 nm. Lighter color indicates greater intensity. (c) Lumerical FDTD simulations of transmitted power between the diamond and TFLN with swept taper lengths. The expected taper transmission efficiency for the 10 μm designed taper length is ∼ 98%. The inset shows the horizontal cross section of the simulated electric field, with the blue and green dashed lines acting as guides to the viewer of the approximate locations of the diamond and TFLN waveguides. Lighter color indicates greater field intensity. The horizontal scale bar indicates a 10 μm overlap in the tapers, while the vertical tick marks are spaced by 200 nm. order nonlinearities. To overcome these challenges, heterogeneous integration with mature nanophotonic material platforms is a promising approach [15–26]. Thin-film lithium niobate (TFLN) offers many advantages over alternative photonic materials via a large χ(2) nonlinearity. This enables many applications, including strong electro-optic modulation and frequency conversion [27–30], piezoelectric transduction , and periodic poling for quasi-phase matching and nonlinear frequency conversion . Here, we demonstrate efficient heterogeneous integration of a diamond nanobeam featuring incorporated SiV color centers with a TFLN platform using a mechanical pick-and-place approach [15,35–37]. By precisely placing double-tapered diamond nanobeams, we demonstrate the bridging of a gapped TFLN waveguide with a diamond-to-LN transmission efficiency of 92 ± 11% per facet at 737 nm, corresponding to the SiV ZPL wavelength, averaged across multiple measurements. We find a nearly 2.5-times improvement in ZPL photon extraction via integrated TFLN collection channels compared to out-of-plane collection from the same device. By taking into consideration grating coupler efficiencies, we can infer an approximately 10-fold improvement in photon channeling into the TFLN waveguide compared to confocal collection channels. Our results demonstrate a crucial step towards the incorporation of high-quality Transmission 99:1 5 K PD ... PC FC HWP ... 4f Fig. 2. Schematic of measurement setup for optical characterizations. “PC” (polarization controller), “PD” (photodiode), “99 : 1” (99%: 1% beamsplitter), “4f” (4-f imaging path, lengths not to scale), “HWP” (half-wave plate), “FC” (fiber-to-free space coupler), “5 K” (5 Kelvin). The dashed box indicates the removable dichroic beamsplitter and transmission path. We achieve spatial separation of the two transmission collection spots via a D-shaped mirror. diamond spin qubits into a scalable nonlinear photonics platform. 2. Results 2.1. Device Fabrication and Transfer Our device consists of a diamond double-tapered nanobeam with incorporated SiV centers bridging a gapped, undercut TFLN waveguide, imaged in Fig.1(a). The SiV color centers are generated during a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) overgrowth process on a electronic grade bulk single-crystalline diamond. We fabricate the diamond nanobeams using the well-established quasi-isotropic etching technique following the procedures outlined in [11, 35, 38–40] (see supplemental section S2). Our diamond devices consist of a 10 μm long rectangular nanobeam with 10 μm tapers at each end, for a total length of 30 μm. The nanobeam has a target thickness of ∼ 200 nm and its width is tapered from ∼ 350 nm to ∼ 50 nm at the taper end. The device is anchored to the bulk substrate via a thin tether, around which the nanobeam is widened slightly to reduce scattering effects of the tether on optical transmission. The TFLN waveguides are fabricated following the techniques demonstrated in . We first pattern a negative resist mask atop a lithium niobate-on-insulator (LNOI) substrate using electron beam lithography. We then employ Ar ion milling to etch the waveguides. A second photolithography mask and ion mill step is used for additional removal of the TFLN slab to expose the buried oxide layer of the LNOI. An additional acid cleaning procedure partially etches this oxide, thereby undercutting the waveguide sockets. The completed TFLN waveguides are approximately 190 nm thick atop an approximately 60 nm thick slab and ∼ 1 μm wide, which assists in the placement of the diamond nanobeam by allowing for a larger margin of alignment error (Fig.1(b)). The waveguides adiabatically taper down to ∼ 100 nm over a length of 5 μm. A 15 μm gap is left between the two waveguides to serve as a “socket” for a diamond nanobeam. Each waveguide ends in a grating optimized to couple 737 nm light to and from the device (see supplemental section S7). Following fabrication, the diamond nanobeam is transferred via pick-and-place to the TFLN socket. The mechanical transfer process is carried out using a home-built micro-manipulation setup equipped with confocal imaging capabilities and dual tungsten “cat-whisker” needles, each with a ∼ 70 nm tip radius. To assist with the mechanical break-off process, the holding tethers are partially cut via focused ion beam (FIB) etching. During transfer, precise orientation of the nanobeam can be controlled with the dual needles, while the LN chip is mounted on a combination of translation and rotation stages. After careful positioning, strong adhesion between the diamond nanobeam and the TFLN via Van der Waals forces allows us to remove the attached needle by pulling it down into the etched trench between the TFLN waveguides. Ultimately, the diamond nanobeam tapers are positioned inversely to the LN “socket” tapers, enabling high-efficiency adiabatic transfer of light between the TFLN waveguide and the diamond nanobeam, as shown in Fig.1(b). 2.2. Optical Characterization of Devices We characterize our device in a closed-cycle Montana cryostat at a temperature of ∼5 K utilizing a home-built confocal microscopy setup consisting of two distinct access arms. We refer to these collection arms as the confocal and transmission paths. The transmission path can be removed from the apparatus by withdrawing the dichroic just before the cryostat. The full measurement apparatus is schematically depicted in Fig.2. 2.2.1. Transmission As a first step, we measure transmission through our device, using the TFLN grating couplers to characterize the single-taper transmission efficiency between the diamond and LN. Using the transmission measurement path, we send a narrow-band laser source through one grating coupler and measure the output power through the other. The input laser power is calibrated via a fiber beamsplitter and photodiode at the input. The output transmitted light is coupled into a single mode fiber and routed to a second photodiode. We sweep the Ti:Sapphire laser excitation from 700 nm to 780 nm in intervals of 5 nm, with a separate measurement performed at 737 nm, specifically, as demonstrated in Fig.3(b). Direct transmission through the device at 737 nm is determined to be an uncorrected 2.8 ± 0.4% from single-mode fiber to single-mode fiber, averaged over four distinct measurements. We then shift the stage to a “control” device, consisting of a fully-connected (i.e., no taper or gap) TFLN waveguide with nominally identical grating couplers, while keeping the excitation and collection alignment fixed. Transmission through the control device (similarly averaged across four distinct measurements) is 3.3 ± 0.5%, implying a single-mode grating coupler efficiency of 17.3 ± 1.2%, in agreement with grating coupler simulations (see supplemental section S7). Attributing all additional losses in the device to the adiabatic taper facets, we conclude that each diamond-LN taper has a transmission efficiency of 92 ± 11% at 737 nm assuming equal taper and grating efficiencies (Fig.3(b) – see supplemental section S5 for additional details on the calibration procedure). This high efficiency is visualized by the lack of significant scattering at both taper contact points to the TFLN and along the diamond nanobeam in Fig.3(a). Importantly, grating couplers are very sensitive to the angle and focal plane of incident light. Therefore, crosstalk and hysteresis in our stage motion can introduce error into this efficiency calibration. However, additional repeated measurements across multiple thermal cycles yield similarly consistent values for taper efficiency. Furthermore, while this is the highest-efficiency device we measured, a second device exhibits an estimated single-taper transmission efficiency of greater than 80% (see supplemental section S5). 2.2.2. Optical Addressing of SiV We next perform photoluminescence (PL) measurements on SiV color centers embedded in the diamond waveguide. There are two measurement configurations: one with the excitation Control Integrated Integrated Control a) b) 5μm 5μm Fig. 3. Transmission characterization through the integrated device. (a) (top) White light image of efficient transmission of light through the integrated device, indicating high taper efficiency at the diamond/TFLN interface. Minimal scattering (indicated by arrows) at the contact points and along the device further demonstrates efficient abiabatic transfer of light. The diamond nanobeam and grating coupler locations are indicated by the blue and green dashed boxes, respectively. (bot) White light image for comparison of the fully-connected TFLN control device. Images taken at 20 ms camera exposure. (b) Average transmission through the integrated diamond-TFLN device (red) and a fully-connected TFLN “control” device (black). Error bars depict the standard deviation by averaging four measurements over two separate cooldowns of the devices. The dashed black and red lines indicate the transmission at 737 nm for the control and integrated devices respectively. and collection co-localized via the confocal path (C/C), and one with confocal excitation but collection through the grating couplers and transmission path (C/CP). Using a homebuilt confocal scanning microscope, we excite color centers off-resonantly at 710 nm and collect the ZPL emission at 737 nm. The resulting PL maps and spectra are presented in Fig.4(a). After locating isolated bright spots in PL, we sweep the optical excitation power and record the PL spectra, comparing the efficiency of SiV emission collected confocally to that collected through the integrated, nanobeam channel. We toggle between confocal and grating coupler collection paths by removing the transmission path dichroic and adjusting only the half-wave plate just before the cryostat. We are careful to make minimal extraneous optical adjustments in order to maintain the validity of any comparisons of the collected signal. From the PL spectra, we observe a small ensemble of emitters arising from the homogeneous Coupler 2 Coupler 1 Confocal a) b) c) Fig. 4. Color center PL characterizations. (a) PL scans, with confocal collection (top) and stationary coupler collection (bottom), reported in counts/sec. The coupler collection PL scan presented is obtained by counting photon arrivals from the couplers in parallel, with each avalanche photodiode collecting emission from one grating coupler. Over an integration period, these simultaneous counts are summed to yield the total photons collected from both grating couplers. Excitation for both were provided confocally, and scanning was performed utilizing a galvanometer mirror and 4f setup. The white circle in each scan indicates the location of confocal excitation for panels (b) and (c). Scale bars indicate 5μm. The colorbar is expressed in units of 1e6 counts per second (cps). (b) Normalized PL spectrum, overlaid with confocal and both coupler collected spectra. The grey region indicates the post-processed ’filtered’ wavelength range, determined by fitting the spectra to multiple Lorentzian peaks and identifying the FWHM of the selected emission peak for a single emitter. (c) Saturation curves for each collection configuration. CPS for each power and configuration was determined by integrating the number of counts collected in a spectra within the FWHM ranges identified by Lorentzian fit. PL spectra were each integrated for 2.5 s. The black trend lines represent a standard power saturation fit. Error bars for each data point was calculated using Poissonian photon statistics but are smaller than data markers. distribution of SiVs throughout the diamond nanobeam. Therefore, for our specific device, we are unable to isolate a single emitter through off-resonant confocal excitation. To quantify photon extraction efficiencies, we thus perform saturation measurements first with the C/CP configuration, then with the C/C configuration, and integrate within 6× the FWHM of identified Lorentzian peaks. As further post filtering, we selectively integrate and fit to the saturation model a representative transition for an SiV center, demarcated by gray in Fig.4(b). We note that we selected a transition which couples favorably to the diamond nanobeam. Errors for photon counts are given by assuming Poissonian photon statistics. We determine a 6.9 ± 0.2 mW (9.8 ± 0.7 mW, 9.3 ± 0.7 mW) saturation power and 116 ± 2 kcps (68 ± 2 kcps, 219 ± 8 kcps) saturation count rate for C/C configuration (C/CP1, C/CP2). We attribute the slight discrepancy between C/C and C/CP saturation powers to polarization adjustments made between the configurations in order to Fig. 5. Photon autocorrelation measurements A confocally collected (coupler collected) autocorrelation measurement with g2(0) = 0.629 ± 0.006 (g2(0) = 0.678 ± 0.004) on the left (right). The data was fit using a bunched g2(τ) function form, with counts far from the delay dip normalized to 1. The dashed line indicates the 0.5 threshold for single photon emitter characteristics. Error bars were calculated assuming Poissonian photon statistics. optimize power delivery to the color center with the removal of the second dichroic mirror . The difference in signal between the two CP configurations can be attributed to preferential emission of the SiV in one direction of the nanobeam due to either angular dipole orientation or positioning in the nanobeam (see supplemental section S6). Most notably, we observe a nearly 2.5-times increase in color center photon extraction through the diamond nanobeam and TFLN waveguide grating couplers compared to the confocal channel for collection through CP, indicating extremely high-efficiency diamond-TFLN coupling. Correcting for the grating coupler efficiency < 25%, we infer that channeling of SiV photons into the TFLN waveguide is improved by more than 10-fold when compared to out-of-plane confocal collection through a high-NA objective. As further evidence of emitter co-localization, we measure g(2) (τ) auto-correlation of its emission in the C/C configuration using a 50 : 50 fiber beamsplitter. We isolate a single emission line with a series of filters, and observe anti-bunching of g(2) (0) = 0.629 ± 0.006, indicating emission from an ensemble of emitters within our filtered wavelength region, as shown in Fig.5(a). We then repeat autocorrelation measurements in the C/CP configuration, utilizing our device as an integrated beamsplitter to correlate emission between the two grating couplers. We measure a similar g(2) (0) = 0.678 ± 0.004 with this approach, depicted in Fig.5(b). The power dependence of the auto-correlation is presented in supplemental section S8. Lastly, we consider the robustness of the integration to environmental factors. It should be noted that this particular device survived multiple partial and complete thermal cycles. Furthermore, during one such event, the nanobeam fully detached from the TFLN waveguide socket and the pick-and-place apparatus was used to re-position the nanobeam. In all cases, we observed similarly high transmission efficiency. Additional controlled thermal cycling and targeted testing will be necessary to formally characterize this robustness, but repeated transmission measurements suggest a lack of deterioration in device performance. 3. Discussion Overall, we have demonstrated the photonic integration of diamond color centers with thin-film lithium niobate. Our integration yields very high coupling efficiency of 91.9 ± 11% per-facet between the diamond and the TFLN. This translates into a nearly 2.5-times increase in off-chip photon collection through integrated channels, and a 10-fold enhancement in photon channeling into the LN waveguides versus out-of-plane. These metrics enable us to combine the promise of diamond spin qubits with the advantageous optical nonlinearities native to lithium niobate. Furthermore, the emission count rate is potentially limited by random placement and non-ideal angular orientation of the SiV inside the nanobeam. The homogeneous distribution of color centers within the nanobeam also complicates the probing of single emitter properties in our device. These challenges can be overcome by delta doping and targeted implantation techniques, such as masked or focused ion beam implantation [42–45]. Furthermore, photon extraction from the emitters into the TFLN waveguide can be enhanced by using resonant photonic structures . A major advantage of selective integration is the possibility for large-scale pre-characterization of diamond nanobeams and emitters, enabling a more deterministic device yield . The transfer process could potentially be fully automated using a combination of machine vision and in situ transmission measurements. Our device paves the way for high-efficiency emitter collection on TFLN, enabling single-photon experiments that leverage TFLN’s unique properties. We aim to utilize optical nonlinearities in LN for modulating color center emission, thereby demonstrate multi-emitter interference and multiplexing on chip . We further aspire to add additional on-chip capabilities, such as on-chip filters and detectors . On-chip photon routing would enable both the entanglement between several integrated quantum memories and coupling to the same external fiber channel. In combination with recently demonstrated high fiber packaging efficiencies , this would enable integrating a large number of quantum memories on the same chip. We also aim to leverage periodic poling in LN to achieve quantum frequency conversion of emitters to the infrared band for integration with the telecom band. These future directions would pave the way towards on-chip heterogeneous platforms linking the excellent optical and coherence properties of solid state spin qubits with the potential of a mature nonlinear photonics platform. Supplementary information Supplementary material provided. Acknowledgments This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science National Quantum Information Science Research Centers as part of the Q-NEXT center. H. Lee acknowledges support from the Stanford Graduate Fellowship. JFH acknowledges support from the NSF GRFP under grant no. DGE-1656518. JG acknowledges support from the Hertz Foundation Graduate Fellowship. SA and VA acknowledge support from the Bloch postdoctoral fellowship in quantum science and engineering from Stanford Quantum Fundamentals, Architecture and Machines initiative (Q-FARM). DR acknowledges support from the Swiss National Science Foundation (project no. P400P2_194424). DR and SA contributed to this work prior to joining AWS. HSS acknowledges support from the Urbanek Family Fellowship. H. Lu and ZXS were supported by the DOE Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Science and Engineering. The authors thank Patrick McQuade, and Alison Rugar for assistance with diamond sample growth. The authors thank Daniil Lukin, Samuel Gyger, Eric Irving Rosenthal, and Luke Qi for helpful discussions regarding sample measurements and data analysis. Work was performed in part in the nano@Stanford labs, which are supported by the National Science Foundation as part of the National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure under award ECCS-2026822. Part of this work was performed at the Stanford Nano Shared Facilities (SNSF), supported by the National Science Foundation under award Note. During the writing of this paper we learned of work using similar techniques to calibrate for the transmission efficiencies of adiabatic tapers in a different material platform . Declarations The authors declare no competing interests. Data Availability All data is available from the authors upon reasonable request. Authors’ Contributions H. Lee, JG, and DR contributed to the diamond nanobeam design and fabrication. H. Lu, PM, and ZXS, contributed to the diamond sample growth and material preparation. TFLN grating couplers were designed by JFH, and JFH and VA contributed to the TFLN chip fabrication. The adiabatic taper was initially designed and simulated by JMB, DR, and SA, with follow-up simulations conducted by JMB, DR, and JFH. The pick and place setup and transfer of the diamond nanobeam to TFLN was carried out by H. Lee, DR, and JG. Optical measurements of the integrated device were led by H. Lee and assisted by DR, JG, and JFH. The manuscript was prepared by H. Lee, JFH, JG, and DR. Additional support and assistance were contributed by HSS, ASN, and JV. ASN and JV oversaw the experiment and assisted in data interpretation and editing of the manuscript.