Systematic investigation of wear-induced cold welding in ultrahigh vacuum piezoelectric motors with non-metallic coatings Taemin Ahn,1 Sungmin Song,1 Ungdon Ham,2 and Tae-Hwan Kim1, a) 1)Department of Physics, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang 37673, South Korea 2)Center for Artificial Low Dimensional Electronic Systems, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), Pohang 37673, South Korea (Dated: 8 June 2023) Piezoelectric motors are widely used in various applications where both precision positioning and miniatur- ization are required. Inertial or quasi-static motors are commonly employed because of their high accuracy, which demands consistent sliding friction between moving sliders and their static counterparts for reliable operation. In general, slider wear is unavoidable after long-term use. This wear can often lead to more serious cold welding in vacuum, which is also referred to as friction welding induced by direct contact between similar metal surfaces. Non-metallic coatings can prevent such unwanted cold welding in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) applications. However, the practical reliability of available coatings under UHV conditions still remains to be elucidated. Here, we systematically investigate the practical reliability of commonly used UHV-compatible lubricant coatings for piezoelectric motors in vacuum. We demonstrate that polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) shows the most reliable long-term operation in vacuum, while other coatings eventually lead to wear-induced cold welding and motor failure. Our findings provide a simple and effective method to improve the long-term performance of UHV piezoelectric motors by coating the slider surface with PTFE. I. INTRODUCTION Piezoelectric motors, which have long travel ranges with high positioning accuracy, are widely used in various fields where nanopositioning with small physical dimen- sions is required.1 Inertial or quasi-static piezoelectric motors show reliable and accurate single-step motions.2 Such precise nanopositioning can only be achieved if the kinetic friction between moving sliders and their static counterparts is kept constant.3 In general, unwanted but unavoidable slider wear due to the friction becomes a major obstacle to the long-term operation of motors.1,4,5 Especially, in vacuum environ- ments, the lack of proper lubrication between the slid- ers and their static counterparts results in higher friction compared to ambient conditions. As a result, oxide lay- ers on the metal surfaces of moving parts can easily peel off, leading to wear-induced cold welding through the dif- fusion of metal atoms.6–10 It is particularly important to avoid cold welding in piezoelectric motors, which are widely used in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) scanning probe microscopes (SPMs). To prevent wear-driven cold welding in vacuum applications, non-metallic robust sliders11–16 or dry lubricants on slid- ers17 have been chosen. However, the possibility of the failure of the non-metallic sliders still exists after long- term operation in UHV due to changes in friction be- tween the slider and its static counterparts.16 To over- come this problem,15,16,18 the complicated in-situ fric- tion adjustment is inevitable. Such intricacy makes it a)Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: tae- hwan@postech.ac.kr very difficult to design ultra-compact piezoelectric mo- tors, which are ideal for low-temperature SPMs. On the other hand, metal sliders have often been used in simple and compact SPMs.19 In this case, the reliable motion of the sliders is even more critical after long-term opera- tion in vacuum, because it is almost impossible to adjust the friction without breaking vacuum due to their sim- ple structure. Therefore, it is necessary to find suitable coatings for metal sliders for their reliable long-term op- eration in vacuum. Here, we systematically investigate various UHV- compatible coatings on metal sliders for the practical long-term reliability of a piezoelectric motor under vac- uum. Long-term operation for each coating is performed automatically using a vision-based positioning method. Our results reveal that a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) coating exhibits the most consistent long-term operation in the UHV environment. In sharp contrast, other coat- ings become stuck after some operations in vacuum. This finding can be directly applied to other UHV piezoelec- tric motors without significant modification. II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP In this work, a homemade KoalaDrive-type quasi- static piezoelectric motor19–21 is used in a vacuum cham- ber [Fig. 1(a)]. The motor consists of a metal slider, three BeCu springs (TE Connectivity, part number: 5050865- 6), three ceramic disks, and two tube piezo elements (EBL Products, Inc.; part number: EBL #2; outer diam- eter: 3.2 mm; wall thickness: 0.25 mm; length: 6.3 mm). The metal slider is made of a stainless steel (SS) tube (Needle Store; part number: OD-10-032; outer diameter: 0.70 mm; wall thickness: 0.15 mm; length: 35 mm). To arXiv:2306.04401v1 [physics.app-ph] 7 Jun 2023 2 Spring (x3) Vacuum chamber Pump Start Stop cycling Set Zlow and Zhigh Move to Zlow Moving? Zlow< Z < Zhigh mod(Ndir, 2)? Keep moving up while counting Nup Keep moving down while counting Ndn Stop moving Ndir = Ndir + 1 Ncycle = ceiling(Ndir / 2) No 0 1 Yes Yes No Ndir= 0 Nup/dn= 0 CCD High voltage amplifier LabVIEW Python Window Ceramic disk (x3) (a) (c) (d) Piezo-1 Slider Piezo-2 Zhigh Slider Zlow Motor Slider (b) (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup used to test the KoalaDrive-type piezoelectric motor in vac- uum. (b) Photo of a homemade holder used to secure the piezoelectric motor in vacuum. (c) Snapshots capturing the motion of the slider in vacuum. (d) Flowchart of automated reliability tests performed on each coated slider. Here, Zlow and Zhigh represent the lowest and highest positions within each cycle. Nup/dn and Ncycle denote the cumulative number of up/down steps per cycle and the total number of cycles during the test, respectively. test long-term operation, we set a bipolar driving volt- age of ±100 V. This voltage is much higher than a typical threshold voltage (±40 V) below which the motor does not move with a pristine SS tube. We use a homemade holder [Fig. 1(b)] to mount the piezoelectric motor, which was attached to the vacuum chamber. The motion of the slider is monitored through a window by a CCD camera placed outside the vacuum chamber [Fig. 1(c)], and the position of the slider was Ncycle Nup (x103) Ndn (x103) Nup / Ndn (a) (b) (c) (a) Comparison chart showing the cumulative cy- cles of bare stainless steel (SS) tubes and a quartz tube, as well as coated SS tubes. SS tubes with a diameter of 0.70 mm are coated with four different coatings [thick oxide, Dicronite®, diamond-like carbon (DLC), and polytetrafluo- roethylene (PTFE)], while bare SS tubes with three different diameters of 0.64, 0.70, and 0.90 mm are tested. All tests were performed under vacuum until forced to stop, except for a PTFE coated SS tube (SS-PTFE*). For comparison, we have also included the test result of a bare SS tube in air (SS- Air*), which has similar characteristics to the PTFE coated tube. (b,c) Comparison plots of (b) cumulative steps per cy- cle during up (Nup) and down (Ndn) motions, and (c) the ratio of up to down steps (Nup/Ndn). identified by RGB color difference between the back- ground and the slider from the CCD image. To auto- mate the long-term operation of the piezoelectric mo- tor without human intervention, we have developed our own Python and LabVIEW programs. After each long- term operation test in vacuum, we ventilated the vacuum chamber before replacing the slider of the piezoelectric motor. After replacing another slider, we pumped down the chamber (P < 1 × 10−8 Torr) for the next long-term operation test with the replaced slider. mated reliability test. Before the first test run, we initial- ize the start position Zlow and end position Zhigh from the CCD images to ensure the same travel length (∼ 3 mm) during each test run. Once the slider is automatically po- sitioned at Zlow by the CCD camera, all variables used are set to zero. Then, the slider starts moving up (down) 3 when Ndir is even (odd). Nup/dn and Ncycle indicate the cumulative up/down steps per cycle and the total number of cycles during the test, respectively. When the slider reaches Zhigh, the controller automatically reverses the moving direction of the slider. Until stopped by increas- ing friction, a cycle of up and down motion will continue. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Subsequently, we investigate Ncycle for different types of coatings on the slider. A bare SS tube (diameter: 0.70 mm), which worked well in air, becomes stuck after only two cycles in vacuum [see SS-Air* and SS (0.70 mm) in Fig. 2(a)]. In contrast, the bare SS tube moves again without any treatment after air ventilation. We attribute the surprising recovery of motion to the regenerated ox- ide layer on the SS tube after exposure to air.7 During the vacuum test, the pristine oxide layer on the SS tube is broken by wear due to the friction between the BeCu springs and the SS tube. The damaged oxide layer is quickly restored in air, but gets worse with time in vac- uum, resulting in the inevitable cold welding.22 In addition, we reduce friction and wear in the SS- BeCu contacts by replacing them with a thinner SS tube (diameter: 0.64 mm) to see any improvement in vacuum. While the thinner SS tube slightly lowers the threshold voltage for motion in air, it also becomes stuck after sev- eral cycles in vacuum [see SS (0.64 mm) in Fig. 2(a)]. We experimentally confirm that our specific setup shows reliable motion in air with bare SS tubes for the diameter range of 0.64–0.90 mm. Beyond this diameter range, the motor did not work properly even in air. In this sense, we choose SS tubes with a diameter of 0.70 mm as a ref- erence to evaluate the relative efficiency of the coating materials in this work. To obtain thicker oxide layers against the wear in vac- uum, we further oxidize the SS tube by heating it to ≈ 500 K in air for 2 h.23,24 However, the oxidized SS tube is forced to stop after only 10 cycles [red bar in Fig. 2(a)]. Before the motor gets stuck, Nup/dn increases significantly with each cycle [red dots in Figs. 2(b)]. Fur- thermore, the ratio of Nup to Ndn (Nup/Ndn) also in- creases with each cycle [red dots in Fig. 2(c)]. We can conclude that the even thicker oxide layer is not enough to ensure reliable long-term operation in vacuum. To prevent cold welding due to direct contact between the SS tube and the BeCu springs, we can replace the SS tube with a non-metallic quartz tube of the same dimen- sions. We then examine the long-term reliability of the quartz tube in the same way as before. After about 50 cycles [black bar in Fig. 2(a)], the quartz tube gets stuck with the fluctuating Nup/Ndn [black dots in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)]. Although the quartz tube shows better per- formance compared to the bare or oxidized SS tube, the observation strongly suggests that the kinetic friction in- creases significantly with each cycle before being forced to stop. Furthermore, the quartz tube does not move even (a) (b) (c) Scan piezo 10 mm Piezo motor Tunneling current wire PTFE coated slider Tip Sample 5 Å (a) Schematic of a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) using a piezoelectric motor with a PTFE coated SS tube. The tunneling current wire is shielded by an electri- cally grounded SS tube. (b) Photo of a homemade STM. (c) Atom-resolved STM image of clean Cu(001) at 80 K. Imaging conditions: Vb = −3.0 mV, It = 134 nA. after air ventilation, in sharp contrast to the SS tube. Note that we repeat the same test with a new quartz tube in air, resulting in more or less the same Ncycle. We therefore exclude the quartz tube as a candidate for the reliable sliders in our piezoelectric motor. Alternatively, we try to coat UHV-compatible dry lu- bricants such as Dicronite®25 (coating thickness: ≤ 0.5 μm) and diamond-like carbon (DLC)26 (coating thickness: ∼1 μm) on the bare SS tube to reduce fric- tion between the SS tube and the BeCu springs. Both Dicronite® and DLC coatings show more reliable results than the others discussed above [cyan and blue dots, respectively, in Figs. 2(b) and 2(c)]. However, wear of the coatings is unavoidable. The Dicronite® and DLC coated SS tubes become stuck after about 80 and 130 cy- cles, respectively [cyan and blue bars in Fig. 2(a)]. Note that there is no inherent up-down asymmetry in the case of a bare SS tube in air [gray dots in Fig. 2(c)]. The ob- served up-down asymmetry in the Dicronite® and DLC coatings can be attributed to uneven wear caused by im- perfect alignment between the three sets of BeCu springs. PTFE coatings have also been widely used as UHV- compatible dry lubricants because of their low outgassing rate27 and low friction coefficient under vacuum.28 Un- likely other vacuum-compatible coatings, the PTFE29 coated SS tube (coating thickness: ∼10 μm) shows the best performance without seizing even after more than 1000 cycles [magenta bar in Fig. 2(a)]. Although the PTFE coating peels off during the test cycles, the peel- off debris from the PTFE coating acts as an additional lubricant.30 As a result, the Nup/dn of the PTFE coated SS tube decreases with each cycle and remains almost unchanged since Nup/dn ≈ 100. Furthermore, Nup/Ndn reaches ∼ 1 after 100 cycles [magenta dots in Figs. 2(b) 4 and 2(c)]. Since we used identical BeCu springs and SS tubes for all tests, increasing the coating thickness re- sulted in a corresponding increase in frictional load. In- terestingly, the thickest PTFE coating showed the best wear resistance despite the higher frictional load. This finding highlights the importance of the self-lubricating nature of PTFE for reliable operation in vacuum piezo- electric motors.30,31 Thus, we strongly suggest that the PTFE coated SS tube is the optimal slider for use in vacuum. Finally, we demonstrate the performance of our piezo- electric motor by conducting STM experiments. We built an STM combined with the piezoelectric motor using the PTFE coated slider. The schematic drawing and photo of our homemade STM head with the piezoelectric mo- tor are shown in Figs. 3(a) and 3(b), respectively. The piezoelectric motor is placed inside a scan piezo tube, which can be found elsewhere.19 The PTFE coated SS tube is also used as an electrical shield to minimize elec- trical noise in tunneling currents. Thanks to our reli- able piezoelectric motor, we successfully approach and obtain atom-resolved STM images of clean Cu(001) (pre- pared by several cycles of Ne+ sputtering and annealing at 820 K) under UHV (P < 1.0 × 10−10 Torr) at 80 K [Fig. 3(c)]. IV. CONCLUSION In this work, we explored the long-term reliability of the piezoelectric motor under vacuum with various UHV- compatible coatings on the slider. In particular, the PTFE coated slider shows the most reliable performance compared to the other dry lubricants tested, leading to the consistent motion with each cycle. In addition, our homemade STM head equipped with the PTFE coated slider demonstrates successful low-temperature operation under UHV without any noticeable wear-induced cold welding. We expect that the PTFE coating can be di- rectly applied to other piezoelectric motors in various vacuum SPMs to avoid wear and cold welding. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Min- istry of Science and ICT, South Korea (Grants No. 1C. Ru, X. Liu, and Y. Sun, Nanopositioning Technologies (Springer Cham, 2016). 2P. R. Ouyang, R. C. Tjiptoprodjo, W. J. Zhang, and G. S. Yang, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 38, 463 (2008). 3B. N. J. Persson, Sliding friction: physical principles and applications (Springer, 2011). 4J. Wallaschek, Smart Mater. Struct. 7, 369 (1998). 5J. C. Puoza and R. Sakthivelsamy, Tribol. Online 16, 286 (2021). 6J. T. Yates, Experimental Innovations in Surface Science (Springer International Publishing, 2015). 7A. Merstallinger, M. Sales, E. Semerad, and B. Dunn, ESA Sci. Tech. Memo. 279, 57 (2009). 8M. D. Pashley, J. B. Pethica, and D. Tabor, Wear 100, 7 (1984). 9Y. Lu, J. Y. Huang, C. Wang, S. Sun, and J. Lou, Nat. Nan- otechnol. 5, 218 (2010). 10R. Budakian and S. J. Putterman, Phys. Rev. B 65, 235429 11R. A. Wolkow, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 63, 4049 (1992). 12C. Wittneven, R. Dombrowski, S. H. Pan, and R. Wiesendanger, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68, 3806 (1997). 13Y. Guo, Y. Hou, and Q. Lu, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 056108 14S. H. Pan, E. W. Hudson, and J. C. Davis, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 15M. den Heijer, V. Fokkema, A. Saedi, P. Schakel, and M. J. Rost, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 85, 055007 (2014). 16Z.-B. Wu, Z.-Y. Gao, X.-Y. Chen, Y.-Q. Xing, H. Yang, G. Li, R. Ma, A. Wang, J. Yan, C. Shen, S. Du, Q. Huan, and H.-J. Gao, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 89, 113705 (2018). 17M. Fern ́andez-Lomana, B. Wu, F. Mart ́ın-Vega, R. S ́anchez- Barquilla, R. ́Alvarez Montoya, J. M. Castilla, J. Navarrete, J. R. Marijuan, E. Herrera, H. Suderow, and I. Guillam ́on, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 92, 093701 (2021). 18L. Liu, W. Ge, W. Meng, Y. Hou, J. Zhang, and Q. Lu, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 89, 033704 (2018). 19V. Cherepanov, P. Coenen, and B. Voigtl ̈ander, Rev. Sci. In- strum. 83, 023703 (2012). 20Q. Wang and Q. Lu, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 80, 085104 (2009). 21Q. Lu, Q. Wang, and Y. Hou, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83, 097101 22B. Podgornik, U. Borovˇsak, F. Meguˇsar, and K. Koˇsir, Surf. Coat. Technol. 206, 4651 (2012). 23A. Reghuraj and K. Saju, Mater. Today: Proc. 4, 9534 (2017). 24M. Ferreira, N. Hakiki, G. Goodlet, S. Faty, A. Simoes, and M. D. C. Belo, Electrochim. Acta 46, 3767 (2001). 25http://www.dicronite.com. 26A. Vanhulsel, F. Velasco, R. Jacobs, L. Eersels, D. Havermans, E. Roberts, I. Sherrington, M. Anderson, and L. Gaillard, Tribol. Int. 40, 1186 (2007). 27https://outgassing.nasa.gov. 28X.-D. Yuan and X.-J. Yang, Wear 269, 291 (2010). 29In our case, electrostatic spraying is employed for applying PTFE coating. Subsequently, the coated surface is cured by heating in order to bond the PTFE to the substrate. The PTFE coating on the surface of our stainless steel tubes was conducted by a Korean coating company (SUNG MIN TF Co., Ltd.). 30N. G. Demas and A. A. Polycarpou, Surf. Coat. Technol. 203, 31M. Rodiouchkina, J. Lind, L. Pelcastre, K. Berglund, ̊A. K. Rudolphi, and J. Hardell, Wear 484–485, 204027 (2021).