1 Superconductivity in In-doped AgPbBiTe3 compounds synthesized by high- pressure synthesis Takahiro Sawaharaa, Hiroto Arimaa, Takayoshi Katase b, Aichi Yamashita a, Ryuji Higashinakaa, Yoshikazu Mizuguchia* a Department of Physics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1, Minami–Osawa, Hachioji 192-0397, Japan. b Laboratory for Materials and Structures, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259 Nagatsuta, Midori, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan. (*Corresponding author: mizugu@tmu.ac.jp) Abstract NaCl-type metal tellurides (MTe) have been widely studied due to unique physical properties. We investigated the In-doping effects on structural and physical properties of Na-Cl type (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe and the superconducting properties of the In-doped samples. Polycrystalline samples with x = 0–0.5 were synthesized by utilizing high- pressure synthesis. For x = 0.2–0.5, superconductivity was observed in magnetization measurements, where the highest transition temperature (Tc) was 2.8 K for x = 0.4. We measured specific heat for x = 0.4 and confirmed the bulk nature of the superconductivity. The evolution of the Seebeck coefficient and lattice constant by In doping suggests that In valence state is In+3, and the In doping generates electron carriers in the (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe system. Keywords New superconductor Metal telluride High-pressure synthesis Carrier doping 2 1. Introduction Metal tellurides (MTe) with a NaCl-type structure, such as SnTe, PbTe, and InTe, have been extensively studied because of their unique physical properties as a topological insulator , thermoelectric materials , and superconductors . In SnTe, a topological crystalline insulator, superconductivity is induced by career doping by partial substitutions of In or Ag for the Sn site . Without those doping, SnTe shows low-temperature superconductivity below 0.3 K due to Sn defects (Sn1-xTe) , but the In and Ag doping increases the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) to 4.2 and 2.4 K, respectively . In particular, In-doped SnTe has been studied as a candidate of a topological superconductor . Therefore, further development of new NaCl- type telluride superconductors has been desired to expand the material variation. In this work, we used alloying technique to design new superconductors. In a previous report, (Ag+0.5Bi3+0.5) was used to replace the Sn site in SnTe, which preserves the crystal-structure type and the total valence states ; (Ag0.5Bi0.5) could be considered as a virtual divalent atom. By substituting (Ag+0.5Bi3+0.5) for Sn, lattice constant (a) can be systematically controlled, but no carriers were doped. For SnTe-based materials, band calculation suggested that the band gap changes with lattice constant, and a band inversion transition occurs at around a = 6.35Å. In terms of thermoelectric materials, substituting (Ag+0.5Bi3+0.5) for Sn lowers thermal conductivity then a high thermoelectric figure ZT is achieved . Furthermore, equimolar AgSnBiTe3 exhibits superconductivity by In doping . As another MTe with a NaCl-type structure, PbTe has been widely studied as a thermoelectric material , and PbTe shows superconductivity below 5 K after In doping for the Pb site . From the analogy between SnTe and PbTe, (Ag+0.5Bi3+0.5) could be partially substituted at the Pb site like in SnTe, and AgPbBiTe3 was studied as a thermoelectric material . However, heavy carrier-doping effects with an aim of the emergence of superconductivity have not been studied in AgPbBiTe3. AgPbBiTe3 does not exhibit superconductivity at ambient pressure. By applying pressure (P), superconductivity is induced at P = 2.6 GPa, and the highest Tc was 6.5 K at P ~ 25 GPa . Two-step structural phase transitions occur in AgPbBiTe3 at P ~ 10 GPa (from NaCl-type to Pnma) and at P = 14.28 GPa (from Pnma to CsCl-type) . In the CsCl-type phase, band gap is suppressed, and AgPbBiTe3 becomes metallic. Therefore, to induce superconductivity at ambient pressure, heavy carrier doping is needed. Here, we studied In-doping effects on structural and physical properties in AgPbBiTe3 and investigated the superconductivity properties of In-doped compositions. 2. Experimental details Polycrystalline sample of (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe with x = 0 was prepared by a melting method in an evacuated quartz tube under ambient pressure. Powder of Ag (99.9%up) and grains of Pb (99.9%), Bi (99.9999%) and Te (99.999%) were mixed with normal compositions and melted in an evacuated quartz tube; the quartz tube was heated at 800°C for 15 h. The obtained sample was powdered, pelleted, sealed in an evacuated quartz tube, and heated at 400°C for 15 h. For x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5, high-pressure annealing of respective precursor powders was used to obtain In-doped samples. InTe under ambient pressure is orthorhombic and not cubic NaCl-type; with the effects of external pressures, NaCl-type structure is achieved . The precursor powders were synthesized by a melting method. In addition to the above materials, grains of In (99.99%) were used. The samples were heated at 800°C for 20 h, and the obtained sample was powdered and pelleted into a diameter of 5 mm. The pellet was set in a high- 3 pressure cell consisting of a BN sample capsule, carbon heater capsule, electrodes, and pyrophyllite cubic cell. The high-pressure annealing was performed using a cubic-anvil-type 180-ton press (CT factory) under P = 3 GPa at 500°C for 30 minutes. The high-pressure annealing condition was optimized after testing various temperature and pressure conditions. To examine the phase purity and crystal structure of the obtained (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe samples, powder X- ray diffraction (XRD) was performed by the θ-2θ method with a Cu-Kα radiation using a MiniFlex600 diffractometor (RIGAKU) equipped with a high-resolution detector D/tex-Ultra. The obtained XRD patterns were refined by the Rietveld method using Jana2020 software to estimate the crystal structural parameters. The schematic image of the crystal structure was created using VESTA software . The actual chemical composition of the samples was analyzed by an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) with a SwiftED analyzer (Oxford) equipped on a scanning electron microscope TM-3030 (Hitachi Hightech). The temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility was measured using a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) on a magnetic property measurement system (MPMS3, Quantum Design) at zero-field- cooling (ZFC) and field-cooling (FC) conditions with a magnetic field of B = 10 Oe. The temperature dependence of electrical resistivity was measured by a four-probe method with an applied DC current of 5 mA on a Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design) under magnetic fields. The temperature dependence of specific heat was measured by a relaxation method on the PPMS under 0 and 5 T using a 3He probe system (Quantum Design). Seebeck coefficient (S) at room temperature was measured by a four-probe method with a ZEM-3 (Advance Riko) instrument for x = 0 and on a prober system for x = 0.1–0.5. The thermo-electromotive force (ΔV) and the temperature difference (ΔT) were measured simultaneously, and S was estimated from the liner slope of ΔV/ΔT. 3. Result and discussion The actual compositions of the obtained samples estimated by EDX are listed in Table 1. The estimated compositions are reasonably consistent with the nominal values. Hence, we use nominal x to discuss results in this paper. patterns coincided with that of a NaCl-type structure (space group: Fm-3m, #225, Oh5), as shown in Fig. 1(b). For x = 0–0.3, single-phase samples were obtained, although the XRD peaks of x = 0.3 are broader than of x = 0–0.2. For x = 0.4, tiny peaks are observed at 2 slightly lower than the major peaks, which indicates the presence of a NaCl- type impurity phase with a larger lattice constant. As x increased to 0.5, the impurity peaks became clear. Similar trend was reported in (AgSnPbBi)(1-x)/4InxTe , and the appearance of impurity is caused by solubility limit of In in the MTe structure. This trend is understood by the fact that InTe does not have a NaCl-type structure by orthorhombic structure at ambient pressure. Only when the effects of external pressure were applied, InTe becomes a NaCl-type compound. In the current system, the solubility limit of In in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe is between x = 0.4 and 0.5. With increasing x, the major peaks shift to higher angles, which indicates that the lattice constant decreases with increasing In concentration. Figure 1(c) shows the nominal x dependence of the lattice constant a, which was estimated by Rietveld refinements. Lattice constant decreases with increasing x; a similar trend was observed in other NaCl-type MTe . For x = 0.3, the lattice constant deviates from the trend of other compositions. This 4 would be caused by the broad XRD peaks for x = 0.3, which suggests inhomogeneity of compositions in the x = 0.3 sample. In solid solution systems, lattice constant could be calculated by Vegard’s law. For (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe, a is calculated in following formula: a = a1(1-x) + a2x, where a1 and a2 are lattice constant of AgPbBiTe3 and InTe, respectively. This function is shown by the dashed line in Fig. 1(c). None of the lattice constants agreed with the Vegard’s law. This suggests that the average In valence is smaller than +2 because InTe has evenly mixed valence state with In+1 and In+3. The ionic radius of In3+ is smaller than that of In+1. Therefore, in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe, the average In valence state is greater than +2. susceptibility (Tcmag) for (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe. Nominal x Actual composition Lattice constant a (Å) Tcmag (K) 0 Ag0.29Pb0.31Bi0.34Te - 0.1 Ag0.34Pb0.28Bi0.30In0.11Te - 0.2 Ag0.27Pb0.24Bi0.27In0.21Te 2.3 0.3 Ag0.23Pb0.23Bi0.25In0.32Te 2.6 0.4 Ag0.20Pb0.20Bi0.21In0.41Te 2.8 0.5 Ag0.18Pb0.15Bi0.15In0.55Te 2.6 5 Nominal x dependence of lattice constant. To investigate the effect of In-doping on superconductivity, the temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility (4πχ) was measured for x = 0.1–0.5. As reported in , AgPbBiTe3 (x = 0) does not exhibit superconductivity above 1.8 K under ambient pressure . For x = 0.1, superconductivity was not observed above 1.8 K. For x = 0.2–0.5, superconducting diamagnetic signals were observed as shown in Fig. 2(a). Each signal showed a large shielding volume fraction, suggesting the emergence of bulk superconductivity. It should be mentioned that the data were not corrected by demagnetization effect. From the susceptibility results, Tc was estimated as a temperature where the shielding volume fraction exceeds 1% (Tcmag). Fig. 2(b) shows the x dependence of Tcmag. As increasing x, Tcmag increases and reaches the maximum value of Tcmag = 2.8 K at x = 0.4. Further increase in x resulted in a decrease in Tcmag. This behavior may be due to excess carrier doping and/or the presence of impurity. The In- present system is higher than (AgSnBi)(1-x)/3InxTe at all x. 6 Fig. 2. (a) temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility (4πχ) for x = 0.2–0.5. (b) superconductivity phase diagram of (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe To investigate the superconductivity properties in the (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe system, the temperature dependence of electrical resistivity and specific heat were measured for x = 0.4 with the highest Tcmag. Figure 3(a) shows the temperature dependence of resistivity of x = 0.4 under magnetic fields up to 0.7 T with an interval of 0.1 T. At B = 0 T, the Tconset is around 2.7 K, and zero resistivity was observed below Tczero = 2.6 K. By applying magnetic fields, both Tczero and Tconset shift to lower temperatures. Tczero was not observed at B > 0.3 T, and Tconset was not observed at B > 0.5 T. To estimate the upper critical field (Bc2), the estimated Tconset were plotted in Fig. 3(b). We applied Ginzburg Landau (GL) theory: where t = T/Tc is the reduced temperature, and Bc2(0) is the upper critical field at T = 0 K . As a result, Bc2(0) was estimated as 1.5 T. 7 Fig. 3. (a) Temperature dependence of electrical resistivity for x = 0.4 under magnetic fields of 0–0.8 T. (b) Temperature dependence of Bc2 for x = 0.4. The red plotted points are Tconset. The blue dashed line indicates the GL model fitting. low-temperature specific heat is described as C = γT + βT3 + δT5, where the first, second, and third terms represent contributions from electron, lattice, and anharmonicity of the lattice, respectively. By fitting the data for B = 5 T, γ, Boltzmann constant; the calculated θD was 175.6(4) K. The electronic contribution of specific heat (Cel) was calculated by subtracting phonon contribution from the total specific heat for B = 0 T. Cel/T was plotted as a function of T in Fig. 4(b). The Cel/T shows a clear jump and decreases with decreasing temperature. It suggests the emergence of bulk superconductivity, which is consistent with the result of magnetic susceptibility measurement. Tc and superconducting jump (ΔCel) at Tc were estimated by considering the entropy balance, and the calculated values are Tc = 2.33 K and ΔCel = 1.49γTc, respectively. This result is comparable to ΔCel = 1.43γTc which is expected from the BCS theory with a weak-coupling fully-gapped superconductor . To investigate the carrier type, Seebeck coefficient (S) was measured at room temperature for (AgPbBi)(1- x)/3InxTe. Figure 5 shows the nominal In concentration (x) dependence of S. For x = 0, S is -348 μV/K, which suggests that AgPbBiTe3 is a n-type semiconductor. By In substitution, the absolute value becomes very small, even at 10% doping. The S was negative for all compositions, which suggests that electrons are doped by In substitution, and is consistent with the discussion on In valence state in the lattice constant part. Therefore, we conclude that the average In valence is greater than +2 in the present system. This trend in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe is quite similar to those observed in In-doped AgSnBiTe3 . Since the band structure of (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe expected from the lattice constants 8 possesses band inversion , the observation of bulk superconductivity in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe will expand the field to explore exotic superconducting states including topological superconductivity. Therefore, growth of single crystals of (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe is needed for the next step, and further experimental and theoretical investigations on MTe superconductors are desired. Fig. 4. (a) Specific heat (C/T) data for x = 0.4 plotted as a function of T2 under magnetic fields of 0 and 5 T. (b) Temperature dependence of specific heat of superconducting states (ΔCel/T) for x = 0.4. The green dashed line guides the assumed transition by considering the entropy balance. Fig. 5. Nominal x dependence of the room-temperature Seebeck coefficient for (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe. 9 4. Conclusion 0–0.5). From powder XRD analyses, NaCl-type structure was confirmed for all compositions. The solubility limit of In is x = 0.4–0.5, i.e. 40–50% In for the M site. For x = 0.2–0.5, superconducting transitions were observed in magnetic susceptibility measurements, and the highest Tcmag was 2.8 K for x = 0.4. Each Tcmag is higher than that of (AgSnBi)(1- x)/3InxTe system , which is consistent with the common trend on the correlation between Tc and lattice constant in MTe . For x = 0.4, the upper critical field was estimated as 1.5 T by GL model fitting of temperature dependence of electrical resistivity under various magnetic field. Bulk nature of the superconductivity was confirmed by the specific heat jump at Tc. From the evolution of Seebeck coefficient by In doping and the deviation of x dependence of lattice constant from the Vegard’s law, we concluded that the average In valence is greater than +2, and electron carriers are generated in (AgPbBi)(1-x)/3InxTe system by In doping. CRediT authorship contribution statement Takahiro Sawahara: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft Hiroto Arima: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - review & editing Takayoshi Katase: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing Aichi Yamashita: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Supervision, Visualization, Writing - review & editing Ryuji Higashinaka: Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing Yoshikazu Mizuguchi: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing Declaration of Competing Interests The authors declare no competing interests.