1 Spatio-Temporal Coupled Mode Theory for Nonlocal Metasurfaces Adam Overvig1, Sander A. Mann1, and Andrea AlГ№1,2,* 1Photonics Initiative, Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, New York, NY 10031, USA 2Physics Program, Graduate Center of the City University of New York, New York, NY 10016, USA *Corresponding author: aalu@gc.cuny.edu Abstract Diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces have recently opened a broad range of exciting developments in nanophotonics research and applications, leveraging spatially extended - yet locally patterned - resonant modes to control light with new degrees of freedom. Their operation generalizes the response of periodic gratings, which conventionally resonate only for selected plane waves at specific combinations of incident angle and frequency (momentum-frequency selectivity). Nonlocal metasurfaces, empowered by quasi-bound states in the continuum (q-BICs), can be tailored to fully resonate for specific combinations of custom shaped wavefronts and frequencies (space-frequency selectivity). While conventional grating responses are elegantly captured by temporal coupled mode theory (TCMT), which is commonly employed to model and design grating responses across a wide application space, TCMT is not well equipped to capture the more sophisticated response observed in the nascent field of nonlocal metasurfaces, in which the eigen-states are arbitrarily shaped in space and hence not well confined in terms of momentum. Here, we introduce spatio-temporal coupled mode theory (STCMT), capable of elegantly capturing the key features of the resonant response of wavefront- shaping nonlocal metasurfaces. This framework can quantitatively guide nonlocal metasurface design, and is compatible with local metasurface frameworks, making it a powerful tool to rationally design and optimize a broad class of ultrathin optical components. We validate this STCMT framework against full-wave simulations of various nonlocal metasurfaces, demonstrating that this tool offers a powerful semi-analytical framework to understand and model the physics and functionality of these devices, without the need for computationally intense full-wave simulations. We also discuss how this model may shed physical insights into nonlocal phenomena in photonics and into the functionality of the resulting devices. As a relevant example, we showcase STCMTвҖҷs flexibility by applying it to study and rapidly prototype nonlocal metasurfaces that spatially shape thermal emission. 2 I. Introduction Over the years, coupled mode theory (CMT) has become a powerful tool to model and understand the scattering response of complex resonant electromagnetic structures -. Central to CMT is the phenomenological identification of: (i) the resonant modes supported by the system, and (ii) ports, or channels, that carry energy to and from the resonant scatterer. In turn, CMT provides an intuitive and accurate framework to study a wide range of resonant devices. In the spatial domain -, it is commonly used to study waveguide modes and their coupling; while in the time domain temporal coupled mode theory (TCMT) - has found marked success in modelling spectral features such as Fano resonances and the construction of scattering matrices. This technique can be applied both to localized resonances - and to extended resonances supported by metasurfaces, photonic crystal slabs and subwavelength gratings -. However, in TCMT the spatial distribution of the mode is ignored: the modal amplitude a is assumed to be function only of time. This feature in turn limits TCMT to studying the spectral features of the device, while detailed spectro-spatial information of the modes themselves is not captured. For this reason, TCMT is primarily effective at studying infinitely periodic grating structures, while finite and spatially varying gratings cannot be straightforwardly modeled. The spectro-spatial properties of photonic resonant systems are important in various settings, particularly when the optical energy is correlated across distances larger than the wavelength, i.e., when nonlocality, also known as spatial dispersion, cannot be neglected. In turn, these systems exhibit strong dependence of the optical response on the momentum of light -. A sharp response in momentum space is referred to as nonlocal because the corresponding extent of the resonant modes in real space is necessarily broad. Nonlocality in the material permittivity has been studied in plasmonic systems for decades -, associated with delocalized material responses that link the polarization field at a given point to the electromagnetic fields at neighboring points. More recently, epsilon-near-zero materials - and metamaterials - have been 3 shown to support stronger nonlocal interactions with light. In dielectric thin film platforms, the dispersion of guided modes provides an engineerable mechanism to control even longer-range nonlocal phenomena -. In this context, nonlocal metasurfaces - have been gaining increasing attention for their capability of enhancing the control of light by tailoring it in momentum space, of particular interest for signal processing , image differentiation -, spectral and chiral sensing , augmented reality applications , and for mimicking the effects of free- space wave propagation within compact systems -. This class of devices employs subwavelength, transversely invariant structures, hence the spatial features of their extended resonant modes do not escape the near field of the device. As a result, when applied to infinitely periodic systems TCMT remains very effective, because it can lump their resonance into a spatially invariant modal parameter ( ) a t [Fig. 1(a)]. Recent reviews , perspectives - and studies on the fundamental role of nonlocality in optics suggest that embracing nonlocality is a budding area of inquiry and a compelling direction for the maturing field of metasurfaces. In particular, it has been realized that engineered nonlocalities can be combined with locally varying features to enable diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces . These ultrathin optical devices support highly selective resonant responses combined with tailored spatial variations, which are capable of patterning the optical wavefront engaging the resonance -. Leveraging the physics of quasi-bound states in the continuum (q- BICs) , these devices support long-lived, spatially-extended resonant states that couple to free- space with amplitude, phase and polarization properties spatially tailored across the aperture through symmetry-controlled perturbations. By spatially varying the perturbations with a uniform phase gradient, for instance, light can be anomalously diffracted with near-unity efficiency and circular polarization selectivity . Their functionality is not limited to beam steering: by nonperiodically tailoring the local perturbations across the device, the resonant response can efficiently engage arbitrarily tailored optical wavefronts of choice. As a remarkable example, a 4 nonlocal metalens with hyperbolic phase distribution across the aperture can selectively engage only fields originating from its focal spot, while it remains transparent for other wavefront shapes . This spatially selective response, for which the metasurface is only resonant for specific incoming wavefront shapes that match its local pattern of perturbations, generalizes the angular selectivity well-known for resonant gratings, which is limited to plane waves. Since their response is spectro- spatial in a nontrivial way, however, it cannot be captured by TCMT. Rather, a new theoretical framework featuring a spatially varying modal parameter ( , ) a x t is required [Fig. 1(b)]. Figure 1(c) depicts an example nondiffractive nonlocal metasurface (based on Ref. ), whose meta-unit cells are subwavelength and transversely invariant, hence compatible with a TCMT description. Figure 1(d) on the contrary depicts an example diffractive nonlocal metasurface based on the same meta- unit cells, but with a spatially varying orientation angle (from left to right), incompatible with a TCMT description and requiring a generalized CMT model. To address this need, here we introduce a general spatio-temporal coupled mode theory (STCMT) that extends TCMT to capture spatially varying resonant modes. We show excellent agreement with full-wave simulations of spatially selective diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces , demonstrating the validity and relevance of this model. Our theory introduces a nonlocality length, which quantifies the degree of nonlocality of a given device, and it establishes how this parameter directly controls the degree of spatial selectivity. We clarify two distinct regimes of operation for nonlocal photonic devices, governed by the numerical aperture of the anomalous diffraction encoded into the device, and we demonstrate the relation between spatial selectivity and the supported eigenmodes. As such, STCMT elegantly captures the fundamental working mechanisms of spatially varying resonant photonic systems, and it provides physical insights into the nature of nonlocality in this emerging class of novel devices, enabling rational designs and rapid, computationally efficient analysis of next-generation photonic systems. 5 modal amplitude ( ) a t is spatially invariant, wherein the scattered field j E is the product of the scattering matrix Sij and the incident field iE . (b) STCMT is necessary when the complex modal amplitude ( , ) a x t is spatially varying, wherein the scattered field E j is the convolution of the scattering kernel пҒіij and the incident field iE . (c) Example nondiffractive nonlocal metasurface with spatially invariant meta-unit cells. (d) Example diffractive nonlocal metasurface with spatially varying meta-unit cells, varying from left to right. II. Spatio-temporal coupled mode theory In the following, we develop STCMT by writing down the appropriate dynamical equations, determining the constraints stemming from time-reversal invariance, reciprocity and energy conservation, and then computing the scattering from a general nonlocal device by appropriately specifying its parameters. II.A Dynamical equations 6 We obtain the spatio-temporal dynamical equations by appropriately manipulating and tailoring standard TCMT equations . Under an e i t вҲ’ пҒ· time convention, and focusing on a single resonance, these equations are * ( ) ( ) da i a s dt t t пҒ« + = вҲ’ пҒ— + (1) ( ) ( ( ) ) s C s a t d t t вҲ’ + = + . (2) Equation (1) describes the dynamics of the complex modal amplitude ( ) a t excited by an incoming wave s ( ) + t , where ( )2 a t is normalized as the energy stored in the q-BIC per unit area at time t and s s + + is the incident intensity. The in-coupling vector пҒ« contains the coupling coefficients to the mode from free-space excitation, and 0 i пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ— = вҲ’ is a complex frequency, with пҒ·0 being the (resonant) modal frequency and пҒ§ being the total scattering rate, which we take to be purely radiative throughout. Extension to include absorption loss is straightforward. Equation (2) describes the dynamics of the outgoing (scattered) waves sвҲ’ (also normalized such that s s вҲ’ вҲ’ is the outgoing intensity) as the interference of the вҖңbackgroundвҖқ scattering, described by the matrix C , and the mode leaking to free space, described by the out-coupling vector d (see Supplementary Section S1 for additional background). Notably, the first-order nature of the temporal dynamics in conventional TCMT is rooted in MaxwellвҖҷs equations, regardless of the modal properties . In contrast, the dynamical equations for a device with space-varying modal properties must inherently depend on the nature of the mode itself. In other words, we need at the outset to know the form of the dispersion of the mode in order to capture its spatial properties. We expect, for instance, the phenomenology of a travelling wave to differ from the one of a standing wave, and hence we expect distinct dynamical equations. The most general approach to capture this 7 dependence is a Taylor expansion for the resonance frequency in terms of its momentum k dependence: ( ) 2 2 2 0 0 1 ... . 2 .. 2 b ck k k k k i пҒ§ пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ§ пғҰ пғ¶ пғҰ пғ¶ пҒ— = + пғ· + + + + + пғ§ пғ· пғ§ пғЁ пғё пғЁ пғё . (3) For instance, a traveling wave is captured by the linear term with speed c , while a standing wave with parabolic dispersion, such as near a band edge, is captured by the coefficient b . As detailed in Supplementary Section S2, transforming Eqns. (1) and (2) into the frequency domain, including its momentum dependence and the expansion (3), and then transforming to the space-time domain, yields the dynamical equations (up to second order) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 0 0 1 2 2 , , , , , da x t da x t d a x t i i a x t c i i b i dx x x s x dt dx dx пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ§ пҒ§ пҒ« + пӮў пӮў пӮў + + вҲ’ + + + =пғІ (4) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , , s x dx C x x s x a x d x x + вҲ’ пӮў пӮў пӮў пӮў = + пғІ . (5) Equations (4) and (5) are the dynamical equations for STCMT, including spatial dispersion in both the coupling properties (convolution terms on the right-hand sides) and the modal properties (spatial derivative terms on the left-hand sides). We note that this is can be readily extended to higher order expansions if needed, but in the most common scenarios the coefficients in Eqn. (4) are sufficient вҖ“ often even some of the lower order expansion coefficients may be neglected. For instance, a pure traveling wave is characterized by a first-order spatial derivative, with Eqn. (4) simplifying to a form akin to the one-way wave equation; a standing wave at a band edge, modeled parabolically, is characterized by a second-order spatial derivative, with Eqn. (4) simplifying to an effective mass, non-Hermitian SchrГ¶dinger equation. The Taylor expansion coefficients ,c b therefore quantify the spatial dispersion of two overlapping modes of different type, each of which can be captured by STCMT. Similarly, we see that the radiative decay profile, captured by the coefficient пҒ§1,2 , also describes a form of nonlocal effect, with or without the presence of ,c b . 8 Next, we specialize our general STCMT to capture the novel functionalities demonstrated by recent diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, as in Refs. -. These devices leverage q-BIC modes, whose Q-factors are sufficiently large such that the background varies slowly compared to the resonant features . In their infinitely periodic implementation, they abide a TCMT description with 1 2 0 c пҒ§ пҒ§ = = = near normal incidence. In other words, they are well captured by a parabolic band with a Q-factor that is not a function of the incident angle . Their design assumes that the scattering of a q-BIC can be spatially tailored by locally changing a small symmetry-breaking perturbation, and that distant perturbations do not affect the local polarization or phase . Hence, the nonlocality of these devices is assumed to be purely modal, or captured by the spatial derivatives in the left-hand side, while the coupling to and from the mode is spatially instantaneous (local): ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , ' , ' , ' x C x x x x d x x x x x x x пҒӨ пҒ« пҒӨ пҒӨ пӮў пӮө вҲ’ пӮў пӮө вҲ’ пӮў пӮө вҲ’ . (6) Together, these assumptions yield the dynamical equations ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 0 2 , , , , da x t d a x t i i a x t ib x s x t dt dx пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ« + + + + = , (7) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , , , s x t C x s x t a x t d x вҲ’ + = + , (8) where we simplify the notation to 0 пҒ§ =пҒ§ . Supplementary Section S2b derives the same set of equations using the leading order terms of a cosine series expansion. II.B Scattering Matrix, Propagator and GreenвҖҷs Function In TCMT, the scattering matrix is obtained by assuming time-harmonic solutions, solving Eqn. (1) for ( ) a t , and then inserting the result into Eqn. (2) to yield ( ) ( ) ( ) s S s пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· вҲ’ + = (9) 9 ( ) ( ) ( ) * d k S C i пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· = + пҒ—вҲ’ . (10) In comparison, in STCMT we must solve Eqn. (7) before inserting it into Eqn. (8). To do so, we recognize that, when no source is present, we obtain a SchrГ¶dinger equation with complex potential 0 V i пҒ· пҒ§ = + , recognizable by the rearrangement: ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 , , , 2 da x t b d a x t i Va x t dt dx = вҲ’ + . (11) Compared to the conventional SchrГ¶dinger equation, we have =1 and 1/ b m = , consistent with the expectation that the band curvature plays the role of an inverse effective mass. We also note that non-Hermiticity (a complex valued potential) is expected of an open or damped system. In absence of the potential V , we have the equation for a free particle, for which the solution is described by the propagator K and the initial condition ( ) 0 ( ) , 0 a x t a x = = : ( ) ( ) 0 ( ) , , , a x t K x x t a x dx пӮў пӮў пӮў =пғІ (12) ( ) ( ) 2/2 1 , , 2 i x x bt ib K x x t e t пҒ° вҲ’ пӮў пӮў = . (13) The addition of a spatially constant V adds a phase factor independent of x . Hence, in our case the propagator is ( ) ( ) 2 0 /2 1 , , 2 i x bt x i t t K x x t e e b e i t пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ° вҲ’ пӮў вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮў = . (14) In addition to solving the homogenous equation, the propagator yields the GreenвҖҷs function tG for the inhomogeneous equation (7): ( ) ) 1 , , , , 2 tG x x t t K x x t пҒ§ пӮў пӮў пҒ‘ = , (15) 10 where ( ) пҒ‘ t is the Heaviside step function. Using these functions, we may apply physical constraints such as conservation of energy (which takes the form of a continuity equation), time-reversal invariance and reciprocity (see Section II.C and Supplementary Section S4). In practice, we are interested in the response to monochromatic waves [ ( ) exp вҲ’iпҒ·t ], i.e., we seek the solution to the scattering problem in the space-frequency domain. In this case, Eqn. (7) becomes ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 0 2 , , , d a x i i a x ib x s x dx пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ· пҒ« пҒ· + вҲ’ + + = , (16) and we seek the GreenвҖҷs function satisfying ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 0 2 , , , , d x G x x i i G x ib x x dx пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ· пҒӨ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ + + вҲ’ пӮў = , (17) which yields the modal amplitude ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , , , , a x dx G x x x s x пҒ· пҒ· пҒ« пҒ· + пӮў пӮў пӮў пӮў =пғІ (18) Insertion of Eqn. (18) into the space-frequency form of Eqn. (8) yields the scattering equation ( ) ( ) ( ) , , , , s x x x x x d s пҒ· пҒі пҒ· пҒ· + вҲ’ = пӮў пӮў пӮў пғІ (19) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * , , , , , x x C x x x G x d x x x пҒі пҒ· пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ« пӮў пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ пӮў + , (20) where the scattering kernel пҒі correlates input positions xпӮў with output positions x , and where the closed form of the GreenвҖҷs function is ( ) ( ) ( ) p 1 , ex G x x , i x x b пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пӮў пғё = вҲ’ , (21) parameterized by the complex coefficient ( ) ( ) 0 ib/2 i пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ· пҒ· = + вҲ’ . (22) 11 This quantity was originally introduced to capture the spatial coherence of thermal metasurfaces, derived with alternative methods . Its real part takes an especially simple form at the band edge ( ) 0 0 Re / r b b пҒё пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒҙ пғ© пғ№ = = = пғ« пғ» , (23) which we call the nonlocality length. This length is the characteristic distance that light travels in- plane before scattering out when engaging with the band-edge mode; in other words, it is a quantitative measure of the nonlocality of the metasurface at the band-edge frequency. Since nonlocality is equivalently defined as a dependence on the incident wavevector, no optical interface is truly local. However, as a rule of thumb, if the nonlocality length is larger than the wavelength in the surrounding media, the resulting device may be considered nonlocal, since its nonlocality cannot be neglected (see Supplementary Section S3 for a comparison of a nonlocal metasurface to a bare interface between two media). II.C Physical Constraints Before proceeding with the application of STCMT to practical metasurface devices, we must determine the relevant physical constraints to our system, including time-reversal invariance, reciprocity and conservation of energy. In TCMT, these constraints impose the well-known requirements 2 d d = пҒ§ (24) пҒ« = d (25) C d* = вҲ’ d . (26) These results hold, for instance, in infinitely periodic devices supporting q-BICs (see Supplementary Section S1). As detailed in Supplementary Section S4, we find that in our STCMT all these conditions hold locally, i.e., ( ) ( ) 2 d x d x = пҒ§ (27) 12 ( ) ( ) x d x пҒ« = (28) ( ) ( ) ( ) C x d* x = вҲ’ d x . (29) We stress that this result is not obvious a priori and, indeed, it does not hold for the general case described by Eqns. (4) and (5). Future work may explore systems with nonlocal coupling (i.e., devices for which Eqns. (6) do not hold), in which case Eqns. (28) and (29) are no longer valid. The significance of this result for modelling diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces should not go underappreciated. This property stems from the shift-invariance of the GreenвҖҷs function in Eqn. (21) , meaning that the spatial dependence of the nonlocal scattering is wholly contained in the coupling coefficient ( ) d x in Eqn. (20) [where we note ( ) ( ) * * x d x пҒ« пӮў пӮў = per Eqn. (28)]. The assumption that the modal properties , 0 ,b пҒ§ пҒ· are space-invariant, i.e., that the local perturbations tailoring the spatial response of the metasurface do not affect them, and that the coupling is spatially instantaneous [Eqn. (6)], confer a major simplification to model this class of systems and enables the introduction of a semi-analytical model to describe them. In particular, each unit cell of a nonlocal metasurface may be modeled as if it were in an infinite array, allowing easy correlation between geometric and phenomenological degrees of freedom, compatible with TCMT in the momentum- frequency domain. Then, a given space-varying nonlocal metasurface may be modelled by simply specifying a spatial profile of the coupling coefficients, wherein the correlations across the surface are captured in STCMT by the shift-invariant GreenвҖҷs function. This design flow is compatible with the foundational design principles of local metasurfaces , wherein a library of pre-computed optical scatterers may be arrayed across the surface as if they operate independently of their nearest neighbors. This ubiquitous design approach is sometimes called the вҖңlocal phase approximationвҖқ. Yet, we find that, when Eqn. (6) holds, the same design principles are applicable even in the much more complex scenario discussed in this work, considering arbitrarily nonlocal responses due to a guided mode. 13 II.D Eigenwaves STCMT enables us to rigorously define characteristic вҖҳeigenwavesвҖҷ for nonlocal metasurfaces with arbitrarily varying spatial profiles. An eigenwave can be defined as a spatially varying wavefront that a nonlocal metasurface is selective for: maximal reflectance is achieved when the eigenwave is incident, and the reflected wave is the eigenwaveвҖҷs time-reversed copy (preserving coordinate system handedness, in contrast to specular reflection) . Using 11 пҒІ =пҒі as the reflection kernel for light incident from side 1, the eigenwave from side 1 is solution to the relation * ) ( , , ) ( , ) ( , i e e ig g E x x x x d E x пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮў пӮў =пғІ , (30) or equivalently * * ) ( , , ) ( , ) eig( , eig E dx x x x E x пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮў пӮў =пғІ . (31) Combing Eqns. (30) and (31) we find * ) ) ( , , ) ) ( ( , , , ( , eig eig E x dx dx x x x E x x пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮў пӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў = пӮў пӮўпӮў пғІ пғІ , (32) suggesting that the eigenwave of interest is the eigenvector of * ) ( , ( , , , , ) ) ( , ) ( eig eig eig dx dx R E E x x x x x x пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў =пғІ пғІ (33) that has the largest eigenvalue Reig , i.e., the eigenvector with maximal reflectance. Equation (33) implies the existence of higher-order eigenwaves that reflect to their time-reversed copy but with non-maximal reflectance. It also suggests the existence of eigenwaves for frequencies other than the band-edge frequency 0 пҒ· . III. Diffractive Nonlocal Metasurfaces In this section, we apply the introduced STCMT to illustrative examples, confirming that our analytical framework reproduces the results of full-wave simulations, quantitatively captures the underlying physics and enables rational designs for relevant functionalities. Schematically depicted 14 in Figure 2(a), we explore systems based on Refs. and , composed of four elliptical inclusions controlling the scattering (polarization angles пҒҰ and пҒұ ) at the top and bottom interfaces simultaneously and independently [Fig. 2(b)]. Figure 2(c,d) show the calculated reflectance and reflected phase for an example meta-unit based on this system, computed using the finite difference time domain (FDTD) method. Figures 2(e,f) depict the TCMT modelling of the infinitely periodic meta-unit (developed in Supplementary Section S1), with (in units such that c =1 ) the band edge frequency 0 / 2 be пҒ· пҒ° пҒ¬ = with be m пҒ¬ пҒӯ = , the band curvature b пҒӯ = , and the lifetime 250 r m пҒҙ пҒӯ = . In particular, we use the chiral q-BIC system in Refs. and , in which the response was shown to: (i) have zero background reflection, (ii) exclusively engage circularly polarized light of one handedness, and (iii) decay with a geometric phase of 2пҒЎ for a meta-unit characterized by in-plane orientation angle пҒЎ . After judiciously choosing the geometrical parameters defining the ellipses, we may use a scalar basis (i.e., ignore the opposite handedness of circularly polarized light, which does not engage the resonance), and up to a constant reference phase we have (see Supplementary Section S1) пҒӣ пҒқ пҒӣ пҒқ exp 2 exp 2 i d i i i пҒЎ пҒ§ пҒЎ пғ© пғ№ = пғӘ пғә вҲ’ вҲ’ пғ« пғ» , (34) where the first element is the coefficient scattering to side 1 and the second element is the coefficient scattering to side 2. In diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, we allow пҒЎ to vary spatially: ( ) ( ) ( ) exp 2 exp 2 i d x x x i i i пҒЎ пҒ§ пҒЎ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғ« пғ» пғӘ пғә = пғ© пғ№ вҲ’ вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» . (35) For a system based on the meta-units in Fig. 2 (and Refs. -), this yields [from Eqns. (20) and 15 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 , , ( )exp 0 ( ) i x i x i x i x i x i x i x i x x x i e e ie e x x x x i i b ie e e e пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒ§ пҒі пҒ· пҒӨ пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’ пғ© пғ№ пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’ пғ© пғ№ пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ + вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғӘ пғә пғ§ пғ· пғ«вҲ’ пғ» вҲ’ вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғЁ пғёпғ« пғ» . (36) To improve clarity, in what follows we detail the behavior for light incident from side 1, in which case we may separate the complex scattering kernel into a complex reflection kernel 11 пҒІ =пҒі and a complex transmission kernel 21 пҒҙ =пҒі : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 ( , , ) ( )exp e e ( ) ( , , ) ( ) ( )exp e e ( ) i x i x i x i x x x x x i b x x x x i x x b пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒЎ пҒ§ пҒІ пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒҙ пҒ· пҒӨ пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў = пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ вҲ’ + пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё . (37) The other kernels пҒі12 and пҒі22 are treated equivalently, but omitted here for brevity. Figures 2(g,h) show the magnitude and phase of пҒі11 for the meta-unit corresponding to Figs. 2(e,f). Note that in this case the phase angle ( ) пҒЎ x =пҒЎ is constant, and there is only one diffraction order on each side, meaning that this metasurface can be handled with conventional TCMT. In the following examples, however, the angle is spatially varied, and the use of regular TCMT is not possible. We will then demonstrate that STCMT readily offers excellent agreement with numerical simulations and captures the underlying physics. III.A Linear phase gradient: analytical model In this sub-section, we focus on nonlocal metasurfaces with a linear phase gradient. In particular, we consider a gradient in the geometric angle following 2 ( ) Gx x k пҒЎ = вҲ’ . (38). In this case, the nonlocal kernels take the form ( , , ) ( )exp e e ( ) ( , , ) ( ) ( )exp e e ( ) G G G G x x x x ik ik ik ik x x x x i b x x x x i x x b пҒ§ пҒІ пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒҙ пҒ· пҒӨ пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮў вҲ’ пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў = пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ вҲ’ + пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё . (39) 16 inclusions. The lattice parameter a satisfies 0 2a пҖј пҒ¬ , eliminating all but 1 diffraction order on each side. (b) Schematic of the coupled mode theory approximation of the scattering in (a), wherein independent scattering events occur at the interfaces, each of which may generally couple to both response of an example meta-unit, computed by Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD). Reflectance (e) and reflection phase (f) in the momentum-frequency response of an example meta-unit, modeled using TCMT. Amplitude (g) and phase (h) of пҒі11 in the space-frequency domain of the same meta- unit, a key object for modeling this system using STCMT. When 0 G k = , we recover the nonlocal reflection kernel without phase gradient, which we denote with the subscript 0 : 17 0 0 ( , , ) ( )exp ( ) ( , , ) ( ) ( )exp ( ) x x x x i b x x x x i x x b пҒ§ пҒІ пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒҙ пҒ· пҒӨ пҒё пҒ· пҒё пҒ· пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў = пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё пӮў пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ вҲ’ + пғ§вҲ’ пғ· пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё . (40) Since a phase gradient provides a spatially constant momentum kick, it is natural to study these devices in momentum space. In particular, we seek the scattering matrix 12 2 1 2 1 21 ( , , ( , , ( , , ( , , ) ) ) ) , ( ) , k k k k S k S S S k k k k k S пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пғ© пғ№ = пғӘ пғә пӮў пӮў пғ« пӮў пӮў пғ» пӮў , (41) where kпӮў and k are the basis wavevectors of the incoming and outgoing wavevectors, respectively, and the indices refer to the top and bottom sides of the metasurface. We then need to relate this scattering matrix to the scattering kernel пҒі , which, as shown in Supplementary Section S5, is the mixed Fourier transform ) ( , , )exp( )e ( xp( , ) , ij ij x S i k dx dx x ik x k kx пҒ· пҒі пҒ· пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пӮў пӮў пӮў =пғІ пғІ . (42) Using this relation, the scattering components for a metasurface without phase gradient are ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 0 11 0 21 0 0 2 2 2 11 0 0 1 2 0 0 2 21 , , 2 , , 2 , , , , , , , 1 , 1 r r k k S k k b k S k k k k b k i k S k i S k k S k k S k k i i пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒӨ пҒ· пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· вҲ’ = пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ вҲ’ пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё = вҲ’ + пғҰ пғ¶ вҲ’ вҲ’ пғ§ пғ· пғЁ пғё вҲ’ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пғ© пғ№ пғӘ пғә пғӘ пғә пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пғӘ пғә вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғ« = пғ» = пӮў пӮў пӮў пӮў . (43) Notably, this result is consistent with TCMT, with the explicit addition of a Dirac пҒӨ term enforcing scattering only when k = kпӮў (conservation of momentum in a specular process). Meanwhile, the scenario with nonzero G k in terms of Eqn. (40) yields ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 0 0 , , , e e e , e , , G G G G x x x x ik ik ik ik x x x x x x x x пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пҒҙ пҒ· пӮў пӮў вҲ’ вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ пӮў = вҲ’ = пӮў , (44) 18 which implies, due to the basic properties of the Fourier transform ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 0 11 0 21 0 11 0 12 12 11 21 22 ) ) , , , , ( , , , , , , , , ( , , , , G G G G G G G G S k k S k k k k S k k S k k k k S k k S k k k k S k k S k k k k пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮў + вҲ’ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮў пӮў вҲ’ + пӮў пӮў = + + = = = . (45) The impact of a nonlocal phase gradient is to shift the scattering matrices in k-space, in both the input and output spaces. In particular, in the transmission elements [ 12 ) ( , , S k k пҒ· пӮў and 21 ) ( , , S k k пҒ· пӮў ] the shift in input and output momentum is identical, with +kG when light is incident from side 2 and kG вҲ’ when incident from side 1. In contrast, in the reflection elements [ 11 ) ( , , S k k пҒ· пӮў and 22 ) ( , , S k k пҒ· пӮў ] the shift in input and output momentum is equal and opposite, producing anomalous reflection. Since we have nonzero scattering only when the Dirac delta functionвҖҷs argument is 0, from side 1 we see that reflection occurs only when 2 G k k k = пӮў + , and from side 2 only when 2 G k k k = пӮў вҲ’ . Hence, our results confirm that the anomalous reflection is associated with the m= пӮұ2 diffraction orders, and the direction of momentum kick imparted by the nonlocal metasurface depends on which side light is incident from. III.B Linear phase gradient: numerical simulations We now validate our analytical model numerically for 2 / kG W = пҒ° and 6.4 W пҒӯm = , focusing here on the band-edge frequency. Supplementary Section S6 extends the following analysis to a representative frequency off the band edge. To aid in this, it is useful to cast STCMT in matrix form, detailed in Supplementary Section S7. In this case, the scattering kernels are discrete, and we write them as пҒ’ and пҒ” (capital пҒІ and пҒҙ ). We write the input electric field as a column vector in E , where each entry is the electric field at a different discretized position x , and we compute the reflected r E and transmitted t E fields with 19 in t in r пҒ’ = пҒ” = E E E E . (46) The main diagonal of пҒ’ and пҒ” correspond to x = xпӮў , i.e., the local response, while the off-diagonal components contain the correlations across distant positions, i.e., the nonlocal response. Meanwhile, the scattering matrix defined in Eqn. (41) also becomes discrete, and relation (42) may be conveniently computed using the Fast Fourier Transform method. Finally, given the finite nature, boundary conditions must be specified; Supplementary Section S8 details both periodic and radiative boundary conditions. Supplementary Section S9 describes the extension of this procedure to 2D metasurfaces. Using this discretized form of STCMT, Figure 3 compares the scenario without a phase former case may be straightforwardly treated with conventional TCMT, the latter may not. Figure 3(a) schematically shows resonant reflection at the band-edge frequency, 0 пҒ· =пҒ· , depicting specular reflection at normal incidence when incident from either side. Figure 3(b) shows the reflectance profile as a function of wavelength and incident momentum from side 1, showing a parabolic band profile typical of a q-BIC. Figure 3(c) shows the corresponding amplitude and phase of the nonlocal reflection and transmission matrices from side 1, пҒ’ and пҒ” (note that пҒ” is identical to пҒ’ except along the main diagonal, where its magnitude is much higher). Finally, Fig. 3(d) shows the scattering matrix elements for this case, confirming that specular transmission arises except at normal incidence from either side, wherein specular reflection occurs. In order to achieve sufficient resolution in k-space, Fig. 3(d) was computed using the mixed Fast Fourier Transform of a version of the plot in Fig. 3(c) including 10 metasurface periods. 20 phase gradient device with 0 G k = at the band-edge frequency. (b) Reflectance as a function of incident momentum kпӮў for the device in (a), where the dashed line indicates the band-edge frequency. (c) Nonlocal kernel matrices for the device in (a) at the band-edge frequency. (d) Scattering matrix for the device in (a), showing unity specular reflectance only at normal incidence. (e-h) Same as in (a-d) but for a device with 2 / kG W = пҒ° operated at the band-edge frequency. In contrast, in the presence of a phase gradient the device retroreflects light at the resonance frequency, as shown in Fig. 3(c). From side 1, the band edge mode is shifted in k-space by G k , meaning that the resonance only occurs for G k пӮў = k . In particular ( ) 2 0 2 ( ) G k b k k пҒ· пҒ· пӮўвҲ’ пӮў = + . (47) This shift, as well as the anomalous reflection, is encoded in пҒ’ and пҒ” within the phase information [Fig. 3(g)], and the scattering matrix at the band-edge frequency is shown in Fig. 3(h), confirming that the resonant mode occurs at G k пӮў = k and G k = вҲ’k when light is incident from side 1, while it occurs at G k пӮў = вҲ’k and G k = k when light is incident from side 2. Note that this behavior is consistent with the 21 requirements stemming from reciprocity: the scattering matrices must be symmetric about the main diagonal, which corresponds to k = вҲ’kпӮў , or retroreflection (see also Supplementary Section S5). Hence, we see that the action of the phase gradient is to shift the response along the retroreflection condition by an amount ( ) G , G k вҲ’k in S11 . Notably, the corresponding shift in S22 is ( ) G , G k k вҲ’ , again consistent with reciprocity [symmetry about the dashed line in Fig. 3(h)] and conservation of energy [the dip and peak occurring at the same k in S12 and 22 S , and likewise for S11 and S21 ]. That is, the behavior of a nonlocal phase gradient is to tilt the response in k-space [Fig. 3(e)] rather than add a unidirectional momentum kick irrespective of incident direction: it is a vertical asymmetric phenomenon, requiring vertically asymmetry in the structure to achieve (see also the discussion in ). III.C Nonlocal metalens While the previous section confirmed that our STCMT extends conventional TCMT modeling to phase gradients, we now demonstrate how this accurate modeling is actually retained even when G k varies arbitrarily across the device . We consider nonlocal metalenses as a canonical example of spatially varying nonlocal metasurfaces of broad relevance for applications. We first analytically study the eigenwaves of nonlocal metalenses, and then numerically demonstrate excellent agreement with the spatial selectivity demonstrated in Ref. . Our validation with full-wave simulations then motivates us to use STCMT to more thoroughly study nonlocal metalenses with this quick yet accurate tool, shedding more light on their operation. In particular, we demonstrate that, as a function of the band structure b , the Q-factor 0 r Q =пҒ· пҒҙ , and the numerical aperture of the metalens NA , a nonlocal metalens can transition between two regimes of operation: wavefront- selective and wavefront-shaping. We also explore in Supplementary Section S10 the eigenwaves for frequencies off the band edge, showing their relation to spatial selectivity and the underlying band structure of the q-BIC. 22 In this section, we study nonlocal metalenses described by hyperbolic phase gradients of the form 2 2 0 x k f = вҲ’ + пҒҶ . (48) To find the eigenwave we use relation (33), which uses the terms ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 0 0 2 2 2 2 0 0 * 0 0 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) , , , , ik f ik f ik f ik f x x x x x x x x e e x x x x e e пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пӮў + + вҲ’ пӮў пӮў + + вҲ’ пӮў пӮў пӮў вҲ’ = вҲ’ пӮў пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў вҲ’ = вҲ’ . (49) The eigenwave of the metalens is therefore the solution to ( ) ( ) 2 2 2 2 0 0 ( ) 0 ( ) /2 /2 * 0 /2 /2 ( , ( , ) , , ) W W ik f ik f eig eig x W x eig W R dx dx x x x x e e E E x x пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮўпӮў + вҲ’ + вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў = вҲ’ вҲ’ пғІ пғІ . (50) By inspection, as W вҶ’ пӮҘ (i.e., ignoring boundary effects), we have 2 2 0 ) ( , ik f ei x E g e x пҒ· + = , (51) because in this case ( ) ( ) /2 /2 * 0 0 /2 /2 , , 1 W W eig W W R dx dx x x x x пҒІ пҒ· пҒІ пҒ· вҲ’ вҲ’ пӮў пӮўпӮў пӮў пӮў пӮўпӮў вҲ’ вҲ’ = = пғІ пғІ , (52) which is identical to the spatially invariant q-BIC modeled by the subscripted kernels. For finite W and radiative boundaries, Eqn. (52) does not yield a perfectly unity result, as expected for a finite device and as discussed in Supplementary Section S8. Nevertheless, the idealized solution (51) captures the underlying idea: this nonlocal metalens is selective to a point source set at z = f , just as described in Ref. ; the eigenwave is the condition in which the phase profile is cancelled everywhere across the device, yielding the same reflectance analogous to a normal incident plane wave exciting a periodic grating. However, our quantitative definition of an eigenwave introduced here allows us to numerically describe non-ideal eigenwaves for finite structures, including radiative boundary conditions. To do so, we employ again the discrete matrix form of our STCMT. The nonlocal reflection matrix for this scenario is seen in Fig. 4(a,b), from which the eigenwave Eeig is computed, depicted in Fig. 6(c) 23 overlaid with the reflected wave ( пҒ’Eeig ), which is the time-reversed copy of the input as expected. We also may numerically compute the reflectance due to waves incident from side 1 with ( ) 2 0 0 2 0 ) x ( , e p Ein x x x z ik пҒ· пғҰ пғ¶ = пғ§ пғ· пғЁ + пғё вҲ’ . (53) metalens of width 50 W пҒӯm = with q-BIC parameters b пҒӯ = , 0 пҒ¬ пҒӯ = , and 297 r m пҒҙ пҒӯ = , and NA , matched to the system in Ref. . (c) Eigenwave and reflected wave, showing unchanged amplitude and conjugated phase profiles upon reflection. (d) The reflectance due to excitation by point sources placed at locations 0 z on the optical axis ( , ) (0,0) x y = for STCMT model. (e) Full-wave simulations reported in Ref. . These waves are idealized point sources placed at locations ( ) 0 0 x , вҲ’z relative to the metasurface centered at ( ) 0,0 . For now, we keep 0 x =0 fixed and vary 0 z . Using the metasurface introduced in Ref. , we numerically compute the reflectance as a function of wavelength and 0 z [Fig. 4(d)], and find remarkable agreement with the results from full-wave simulation in Fig. 4(e). The peak reflectance in the STCMT is near-unity, while full-wave simulations predict peak reflectance near 24 70% . This shows that the metalens has room for optimization in its design. Regardless, our STCMT can clearly capture the response of the nonlocal metalens. 75 W пҒӯm = and varying NA , with q-BIC parameters b пҒӯ = , 0 пҒ¬ пҒӯ = , and 250 r m пҒҙ пҒӯ = , due to excitation by point sources placed at locations 0 z on the optical axis ( , ) (0,0) x y = . (e) Peak reflectance due to a normally incident plane wave for a device with NA = 0.1 as a function of b and Q . (f) Peak reflectance due to a normally incident plane wave for a device with b as a function of NA and Q . Next, we explore the response of the system in Fig. 2 as a function of b , Q , and numerical aperture, 2 2 /2 NA= ( /2) ( /2) W n W f + , where n is the index of refraction of the surrounding medium. TheNA characterizes the range of deflection angles encoded into the q-BIC, and hence it also characterizes the range of resonant wavelengths across the device for normally incident light. As the NA increases, the part of the nonlocal metalens resonating at a given frequency is reduced, and the reflectance also 25 diminishes. In other words, as expected, spatial selectivity increases with the lens numerical aperture. This feature is confirmed numerically in Figs. 5(a-d), which show the spectral reflectance as a function of 0 z for four values of NA . When NA=0.8 , representing a very large range of deflection angles, only point sources placed near 0z = f reflect substantial power at the band-edge frequency. Point sources near the eigenwave experience large reflectivity, while point sources away from the eigenwave are transmitted through without resonant interactions with the device. In other words, the nonlocal metalens is strongly spatially selective, and the eigenwave is the optimally selected wavefront to trigger the resonance. When the NA lowers, we observe an increase in reflectance away from the eigenwave condition, e.g., for large 0 z , which approaches a plane wave in the limit that 0z вҶ’ пӮҘ . This study suggests that, when NA = 0.8 , we have a wavefront-selective device, only reflecting when the incident light closely matches the eigenwave condition. Yet when NA = 0.1 , we have a wavefront-shaping device, abiding large reflectance under a larger range of incident conditions. Notably, away from the eigenwave condition the response to plane waves, 0z f , is better than the response of point sources near the device, 0z f , and it plateaus after a certain distance. This is because point sources near the device launch a large range of spatial frequencies (k- vectors), while point sources far from the device (nearly plane waves) launch a very narrow range. The eigenwave may be considered the condition in which the spatial frequencies launched by the source and encoded the device are matched; the NA is characteristic of the range of k-vectors encoded by the device. Since plane waves represent a lower bound on range of k-vectors, the response plateaus for 0z f to a value function of the NA . Importantly, the transition from wavefront-selective to wavefront-shaping is also a function of the degree of locality. When the nonlocality length is substantially larger than the free-space wavelength, the device is highly wavefront-selective, i.e., it only acts as a wavefront-shaping device 26 for very low NA . But when the nonlocality length is comparable to the free-space wavelength, i.e., it supports a large degree of a localization, the device is highly wavefront-shaping, i.e., it acts as a wavefront-shaping device for a large range of NA . We find (Supplementary Section S11) that the wavefront-shaping regime is satisfied when 2/ 0 NA k b Q пҖј , (54) or equivalently 0 0 1 NA 2 пҒ¬ пҒё пҒ° пҖј . (55) We therefore may quantitatively conclude that the degree of spatial selectivity is due to the degree of nonlocality of the q-BIC. Supplementary Section S12 further quantifies this feature by discussing the expansion in the eigenbasis of the device, an analysis related to modal expansions in optics . We now explore devices with varying b , Q , and NA to demonstrate the transition between wavefront-selective and wavefront-shaping recipes. Figure 5(e) shows the peak reflectance for a normally incident plane wave 0z = пӮҘ for a device with NA = 0.1 as a function of b and Q : when they are both large, i.e., a highly nonlocal device, the plane wave is transmitted unperturbed through the device, indicating wavefront-selectivity. When they are both small, i.e., a highly local device, the plane wave is anomalously reflected with near-unity efficiency, and the device is wavefront-shaping. The transition Q-factor for a given value of b is overlaid on Fig. 5(e) by rearranging Eqn. (54), showing good agreement between the numerical calculations and the physical arguments outlined here. Additionally, Fig. 5(f) shows a device with пҒӯ b =0.021 m as a function of NA and Q , showing similar agreement in the transition between the two regimes. The individual scenarios in Fig. 5(a-d) are marked in Fig. 5(f). 27 IV. Thermal metasurfaces As an additional relevant application, we use STCMT to model thermal metasurfaces ,. Engineered nonlocalities have been recently shown to provide a powerful platform to shape thermal emission and photoluminescence from metasurfaces, and STCMT may enable rapid study and prototyping of focused incoherent light emission with respect to the defined nonlocality length and the design parameters. To tackle this problem, we need to extend the STCMT formulation in three ways: we (i) account for polarization ports in a reflection- and absorption-only scattering problem, (ii) incorporate a spatially varying local metasurface response in the background scattering matrix ( ) C x , and (iii) add absorption loss, distinguishing the radiative scattering rate rпҒ§ and the nonradiative scattering (loss) rate пҒ§nr . Our scattering matrix Sij is now indexed by linear polarizations , ,i j пғҺx y , and we allow the background scattering to follow an idealized geometric phase metasurface implemented by pillars with orientation angles ( ) пҒұ x : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) cos 2 sin 2 sin 2 cos 2 C x x x x x пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пҒұ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғӘ пғә = пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» . (56) Meanwhile, for perturbations governing the q-BIC defined by an orientation angle пҒЎ , the coupling coefficients are ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) cos 2 cos 2 2 sin 2 sin 2 2 r d x x x x i x x x пҒЎ пҒұ пҒЎ пҒ§ пҒЎ пҒұ пҒЎ пғ¬ пғј пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ вҲ’ пғҜ пғҜ пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғӘ пғә пғӘ пғә вҲ’ пғӯ пғҪ пғ© пғ№ пғ© пғ№ вҲ’ пғӘ пғә пғӘ пғә пғҜ пғҜ пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ» пғ« пғ® = пғ»пғҫ . (57) Finally, to account for the presence of loss, we make the simple adjustment ( ) ( ) 0 /2 r nr ib i пҒё пҒ· пҒ§ пҒ§ пҒ· пҒ· + = + вҲ’ . (58) For clarity, we may also separate the scattering kernel into its local and nonlocal components ( ) ( ) ( ) , , , , loc nonloc x x x x x пҒі пҒ· пҒІ пҒІ пҒ· пӮў пӮў = + , (59) where ( ) ) loc C x x x x пҒІ пҒӨ = вҲ’ пӮў (60) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * , , , , nonloc x x G x x d x x d пҒІ пҒ· пҒ· пӮў пӮў пӮў = . (61) 28 Then, assuming that the power not reflected is absorbed by the device, the absorption of a given input wave can be simply computed as ( ) ( ) ( ) * , , 1 , , x x x s s x пҒ· пҒі пҒ· пҒі пҒ· + + пӮў пӮў = вҲ’ , (62) while the corresponding thermal emission is described by the time-reversed wave, following the universal modal radiation laws . nonlocal reflection kernel пҒ’nonloc at the band edge frequency of a thermal metalens that is 500 W пҒӯm = wide, focusing to a point 500 f пҒӯm = away with 0 4 m пҒ¬ = пҒӯ . (c) The corresponding local reflection kernel пҒ’loc (central 80 m пҒӯ depicted for visual clarity). (d) Computed absorption for sample point sources placed at positions ( ) 0 x , 0 z due to a thermal lens with 0.15 b пҒӯm = for three example Q- factors. As a canonical example, Fig. 6 studies a thermal metalens that preferentially emits to a focal point f with a circular polarization, encoded using the profiles 29 ( ) 2 2 0 2 f x x пҒ° пҒұ пӮұ пҒ¬ + = (63) ( ) ( ) 2 4 x x пҒ° пҒЎ =пҒұ пӮұ (64) for the chosen polarization пҒӣ пҒқ 1 i / 2 . Figures 6(a,b) show пҒ’nonloc , the matrix form of пҒІnonloc for an example thermal metalens, where the four quadrants correspond to the input and output polarization states in an ,x y basis. Figure 6(c) shows пҒ’loc , the matrix form of пҒІloc , which in contrast to the lossless, scalar nonlocal metalens of the previous section, encodes a varying birefringent axis along the main diagonals of each quadrant [Eqn. (56) with Eqn. (63)]. Then, we compute the absorption of the metalens due to excitation by point sources placed at positions ( ) 0 x , 0 z above the metasurface. Figure 6(d) shows the spatial absorption maps for three example Q-factors operating at the band-edge frequency, showing that as the lifetime of the q-BIC grows, the focal spot tightens. This directly corresponds to an increase in the nonlocality length 0 b r пҒё пҒҙ = , i.e., the metasurface becomes increasingly wavefront selective; increasing b has the same effect at the band-edge frequency. Supplementary Section S13 discusses the response as a function of incident frequency. Beyond specific examples, we may rapidly compute the full width at half maximum (FWHM), пҒ„x of the thermal metalens response as a function of Q-factor and NA . Figure 7(a) shows how 0 пҒё and the peak absorption peak depend on Q . Notably, we see a drop off in peak around the point where 0 пҒё =W , i.e., when the nonlocality length is comparable to the aperture size (width) of the lens. This naturally stems from incomplete interference: the finite size of the lens is too small, and the q- BIC leaks out the sides of the metalens instead of building up a complete Fano resonance through destructive interference. Figure 7(b) shows the absorption at the focal plane 0z = f as a function of Q , showing a continuous trend consistent with Fig. 6(d) when 0 пҒё пҖјW . However, when 0 пҒё пҖҫW we notice instead that the FWHM plateaus, as confirmed in Fig. 7(c) above a certain Q . Below that 30 threshold Q-factor, the target NA , together with Q , determine x пҒ„ ; above that threshold Q-factor, пҒ„x is determined only by the NA . From this, we learn that increasing the Q-factor does not linearly improve the performance of a thermal metalens. Instead, there is a threshold Q above which the focal spot does not continue to tighten; instead, increasing the Q-factor only reduces the intensity of the response. While the transition near 0 пҒё =W is gradual, yielding a вҖҳgray areaвҖҷ rather than a sharp threshold, the distinction between the two regimes is clear. Figure 7 suggests, intuitively, that to improve the response further (i.e., reduce пҒ„x while maintaining peak пӮ»1 ) we must increase the metalens aperture (W ) while also increasing the coherence across the aperture ( 0 пҒё ). V. Discussion and Conclusion TCMT is the foundational model and framework for studying infinite, periodic resonant flat optics. In analogy, here we have introduced STCMT as the framework to model space-varying resonant flat optics. Given the success of TCMT, we expect STCMT to become a foundational tool for design nonlocal meta-optics before implementing a concrete geometry in full-wave simulations and experiments. STCMT qualitatively and quantitatively clarifies the classification of nonlocal metasurfaces into two functionalities: wavefront-selective nonlocal metasurfaces and wavefront- shaping nonlocal metasurfaces. In practice, this allows rapid classification and prototyping of a system for comparison to the selectivity requirements of an application. More generally, STCMT enables computation of the idealized performance of a given system, taking into account finite size, space-varying properties, and degrees of freedom manipulatable across the surface. In other words, it sets goalposts (upper bounds on performance) to be reached for in practical implementation under a given set of assumptions (geometry, number of layers, loss, size, reciprocity, etc.). 31 0 b r пҒё пҒҙ = and peak absorption peak [i.e., for a source placed at ( ) ( ) 0 , 0 0, x z f = ] as a function of Q . The horizontal black dashed line marks a length of W ; the vertical gray dashed line marks the Q at which 0 пҒё =W . (b) Absorption for point sources placed in the focal plane at 0z = f as a function of Q . (c) Full width at half maximum x пҒ„ of the response at the focal plane as a function of Q and numerical aperture NA , showing two regimes of behavior. In addition to its practical advantages, among the key benefits of CMT is the potential to add quantitative and qualitative understanding to the underlying physics of a resonant response. STCMT captures and provides insight into several novel aspect of recent efforts on nonlocal metasurfaces: directly stemming from STCMT, we clarified that: (i) the two hallmarks of a nonlocal phase gradient (shift of band structure in input angle, and anomalous reflection) are simple consequences of a mixed 32 Fourier transformation in the context of STCMT; (ii) a symmetric response after such mixed Fourier transformation is enforced by reciprocity, revealing that a near-unity efficiency nonlocal phase gradient is a vertically asymmetric phenomenon, in turn revealing the requirement of vertical asymmetry in the structure; and (iii) that the spatial selectivity is intrinsically tied to the eigenwave encoded into the metasurface, to a degree controlled by the nonlocality length 0 пҒё of the q-BIC (a quantitative measure of the lateral interaction length, thereby setting the minimum metasurface size required to observe a Fano response, as seen in Fig. 7(c)). While we demonstrated the utility of STCMT for understanding and studying diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, we emphasize that this represents a unified framework capable of describing metasurfaces with or without the assumption of locality. For instance, the local assumption is recovered if only the main diagonal of the nonlocal matrices is populated, and the effects of nearest neighbors are included when more elements than just the main diagonal are nonzero. As discussed further in Supplementary Section S14, our framework may enable future work explicitly taking into account neighbor-neighbor (nonlocal) interactionsвҖ”that is, to go beyond the so-called вҖңlocal phase approximationвҖқ foundational to metasurface design (perhaps by extension to quasi-normal modes ). Additionally, our framework is readily adapted to include both local and nonlocal metasurface behaviors simultaneously, allowing rapid study and prototyping of thermal metasurfaces originally reported in Ref. and recently experimentally demonstrated in Ref. . Future directions may also extend our results to study the resonant dynamics of several spectrally overlapping nonlocal modes (as in Ref. ), leaky-wave metasurfaces based on travelling wave q-BICs , the effects due to partial coherence (i.e., study the effects of nonlocal scattering on the cross-spectral density ), and even nonreciprocal behavior . Finally, Supplementary Section S15 discusses the limitations of the present study. In summary, in this work we have extended the coupled mode theory formalism to capture the resonant physics of space-varying metasurfaces. We demonstrated excellent agreement with full- 33 wave simulations of devices within the rapidly emerging paradigm of diffractive nonlocal metasurfaces, which are capable of wavefront and thermal emission manipulation via the physics of q-BICs. This emerging platform is capable of unprecedent control of light for applications such as augmented reality, secure optical communications, compact optical sources, and nonlinear and quantum optics. STCMT elegantly captures the essential physics of these systems, and enables rapid, analytical and numerical study and design of next-generational meta-optical system. Acknowledgements This work was supported by AFOSR (FA9550-18-1-0379) and the Simons Foundation. We thank Nanfang Yu and Stephanie Malek for discussions on the regime of wavefront-shaping metasurfaces.