Observation of the anomalous Hall effect in a layered polar semiconductor Seo-Jin Kim,1 Jihang Zhu,2 Mario M. Piva,1 Marcus Schmidt,1 Dorsa Fartab,1 Andrew P. Mackenzie,1, 3, ∗ Michael Baenitz,1 Michael Nicklas,1 Helge Rosner,1 Ashley M. Cook,1, 2 Rafael Gonz ́alez-Hern ́andez,4, 5 Libor ˇSmejkal,4, 6, † and Haijing Zhang1, ‡ 1Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, 01187 Dresden, Germany 2Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01187 Dresden, Germany 3Scottish Universities Physics Alliance, School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, St Andrews KY16 9SS, United Kingdom 4Institut f ̈ur Physik, Johannes Gutenberg Universit ̈at Mainz, 55128 Mainz, Germany 5Grupo de Investigaci ́on en F ́ısica Aplicada, Departamento de F ́ısica, Universidad del Norte, Barranquilla, Colombia 6Institute of Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Cukrovarnick ́a 10, 162 00 Praha 6, Czech Republic Progress in magnetoelectric materials is hindered by apparently contradictory requirements for time-reversal symmetry broken and polar ferroelectric electronic structure in common ferromagnets and antiferromagnets. Alternative routes could be provided by recent discoveries of a time-reversal symmetry breaking anomalous Hall effect in noncollinear magnets and altermagnets, but hitherto reported bulk materials are not polar. Here, we report the observation of a spontaneous anomalous Hall effect in doped AgCrSe2, a layered polar semiconductor with an antiferromagnetic coupling between Cr spins in adjacent layers. The anomalous Hall resistivity 3 μΩ cm is comparable to the largest observed in compensated magnetic systems to date, and is rapidly switched off when the angle of an applied magnetic field is rotated to ∼ 80◦ from the crystalline c-axis. Our ionic gating experiments show that the anomalous Hall conductivity magnitude can be enhanced by modulating the p-type carrier density. We also present theoretical results that suggest the anomalous Hall effect is driven by Berry curvature due to noncollinear antiferromagnetic correlations among Cr spins, which are consistent with the previously suggested magnetic ordering in AgCrSe2. Our results open the possibility to study the interplay of magnetic and ferroelectric-like responses in this fascinating class of materials. Keywords: anomalous Hall effect, magnetism, polar structure, ionic gating, Berry curvature The anomalous Hall effect (AHE), in which electrons acquire a transverse velocity relative to an applied elec- tric field in the absence of a magnetic field, is one of the most fundamental phenomena in condensed matter physics . Developments in theory based on Berry- phase concepts have provided a comprehensive frame- work for understanding the AHE, which may occur not only in ferromagnets, but also more generally in mag- netically compensated systems with broken time-reversal symmetry (TRS) in their momentum space electronic structure, such as noncollinear kagome magnets and al- termagnets [3–11]. Among many predictions and observations in this rapidly-moving field, the case of an AHE associated with a polar structure stands out. Polar materials can ex- hibit ferroelectricity and spin-orbit interaction induced spin polarization . When TRS breaking in elec- tronic structure coexists in such a system, the interplay between magnetic order and polarity creates a promising platform for the development of spintronic and magneto- electric devices with rich functionality [14–16]. Although there are reports that combine magnetic order and po- larity at the interfaces or in heterostructures , it ∗ andy.mackenzie@cpfs.mpg.de † lsmejkal@uni-mainz.de ‡ haijing.zhang@cpfs.mpg.de is a formidable task to realize the coexistence in a single bulk material platform. In terms of material physics, a minimal ingredient for such an observation is a system with a crystal and mag- netic structure that allows for the coexistence of a polar vector, P , and a Hall pseudovector, σ = (σyz, σzx, σxy), where the components represent anomalous Hall conduc- tivities . Particularly interesting classes with po- lar interfaces intrinsic to their layered structure include layered triangular-lattice delafossite systems . Pre- vious work has reported ferroelectricity in AgCrS2 and CuCrS2—layered magnetic semiconductors that have a similar triangular-lattice framework [20–22]. This sug- gests that a large effect may be visible in related lay- ered polar materials, and an outstanding question arises whether this class of crystals can also exhibit an AHE. Here, we report that one such a doped semiconductor, AgCrSe2, fulfills the symmetry requirements of polar crystal structure, and shows a spontaneous AHE. We demonstrate that it is an intrinsic AHE by comparing its evolution to that of the magnetization, and perform a consistency check by showing that the magnitude of the anomalous Hall conductivity is temperature- and scattering-independent below 50 K. We also report and discuss the observation of a rather pronounced plateau in the Hall resistivity as a function of the angle of the applied field relative to the crystalline c-axis, and show that the magnitude of the observed AHE is tunable by arXiv:2307.03541v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 7 Jul 2023 2 Crystal structure and magnetic susceptibility of AgCrSe2. (A) Crystal structure of AgCrSe2 (space group R3m). The polarization direction P and the symmetry al- lowed Hall pseudovector σ (corresponding to an anomalous Hall conductivity σxy) are marked. (B) Magnetic suscepti- bility measured with an applied 1 T magnetic field along and perpendicular to the c-axis, respectively. the application of an ionic gate. AgCrSe2 has a layered structure with alternate Ag lay- ers and edge-sharing CrSe6 octahedral layers repeating along the c-axis [23–27], as illustrated in Fig. 1A. The compound crystallizes into the noncentrosymmetric R3m space group. The polar structure is realized by the alter- nating layers of Ag and CrSe6, which break the inversion symmetry and allow for a polarization direction along the c-axis (Fig. 1A) [20–22]. The Cr atoms in each layer form a triangular lattice and host S = 3/2 spins. Pre- vious neutron diffraction characterization and magneti- zation measurements reveal that the adjacent octahedral layers couple antiferromagnetically. A noncollinear spin structure in the ab-plane has been reported , revealing interplay between various channels of intralayer exchange couplings. In Fig. 1B we present the temper- ature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility χ of a AgCrSe2 single crystal, measured with a magnetic field applied along the c-axis (χc) and in the ab-plane (χab), respectively. The susceptibility is isotropic at high tem- peratures, but χab and χc deviate from each other below T ∗ = 50 K, the characteristic temperature at which spin order begins to become long-ranged. For the magneto-transport measurements, we realized microfabricated devices based on exfoliated AgCrSe2 crystals with thicknesses ranging from 100 nm to 800 nm and compared our results with those from bulk single crystal devices. As expected in a material with a layered crystal structure, the resistive anisotropy ρT OT zz /ρT OT xx is large, rising from 25 at 50 K to 100 at 2 K, and the in-plane resistivity at 2 K is approximately 2 mΩ cm, which may be the result of doping due to an intrinsic non-stoichiometry. Throughout the paper we map the Cartesian coordinates commonly used to describe the Hall effect to the crystalline ones, with the z axis being the crystalline c axis, the xy plane being the ab plane of the crystalline layers. We first discuss our main experimental evidence for the AHE, which was observed by measuring the Hall resis- tivity ρT OT xy upon applying the magnetic field H perpen- dicular to the ab-plane. The measurements were carried out employing the setup as illustrated by the schematic in the inset of Fig. 2A. From 300 K to 100 K, the Hall re- sistivity ρT OT xy is linear as a function of H (Fig. 2A). The Hall coefficient is positive, indicating that the majority charge carriers in the system are holes. With further cool- ing, ρT OT xy exhibits a clear hysteresis loop with a sizable jump and width 2Hc, when the magnetic field is swept back and forth. The Hall resistivity jump and Hc become more pronounced upon lowering the temperature. In con- trast to the presence of large jumps in ρT OT xy , the longitu- dinal resistivity ρT OT xx measured concomitantly does not exhibit significant variations in this temperature regime, as shown in Fig. 2B. A common question regarding hysteretic AHE signals is their relationship to the magnetization. Because the Hall effect can have a variety of origins, the total Hall conductivity σT OT xy can be expressed as a sum of con- tributions: σT OT xy = σ0 xy + σA xy, where σ0 xy is the tradi- tional Hall conductivity from orbital electronic motion and σA xy is the term resulting from k-space Berry curva- ture. Written in terms of the measured quantities which are resistivities, σT OT yx = ρT OT xy /((ρT OT xy )2 + (ρT OT xx )2). If (and only if) (ρT OT xx )2 ≫ (ρT OT xy )2 and ρT OT xx has a weak magnetic field dependence, a similar separation can be made, to a good approximation, in the Hall resistivity: ρT OT xy (H) = R0μ0H + ρA xy (1) Here, R0 is the ordinary Hall coefficient, μ0 is the per- meability, and we use ρ0 xy to represent R0μ0H. In our AgCrSe2 microcrystals, ρT OT xx varies between 1.5 and 3 mΩ cm between 2 K and 300 K, with a magnetoresistance of less than 2% for μ0H < 4 T. Inspection of Fig. 2 shows that the above condition is therefore very well satisfied, so the decomposition of Eq. 1 is justified. The field-linear part of ρT OT xy (H) enables the identi- fication of R0, and the subtraction of ρ0 xy. As shown in Fig. 2C, the anomalous Hall resistivity, ρA xy, is seen to be hysteretic with Hc = 2 T at 2 K and a sizable resistivity jump of ∼= 6μΩ cm. We also measure the magnetization M as a function of the applied field, and plot it in Fig. 2D. Clearly the large hysteresis shown in ρA xy (Fig. 2C) cannot be explained by the linear contribution from M (Fig. 2D), which is distinct from the conventional ferromagnetism. One diagnostic sometimes used for the existence of an intrinsic AHE is an anomalous Hall conduc- tivity, σA yx, that is independent of scattering . In Fig. 2E we show the temperature dependence of the zero-field component ρA xy(H = 0). The corresponding 3 Spontaneous AHE observed in AgCrSe2. (A) Hall resistivity (ρT OT xy (H)), as well as (B) normalized longitudinal resistivity (ρT OT xx (H)/ρT OT xx (H = 0)), measured simultaneously with H applied along the c-axis. The curves are offset vertically for clarity. Inset of (A): a schematic illustrating the measurement setup. (C) ρA xy = ρT OT xy − ρ0 xy is plotted as a function of H at 2 K. The resistivity shows a clear jump and saturates at a critical field Hc. (D) Magnetization M vs H measured at 2 K with the magnetic field applied along the c-axis. (E) Temperature evolution of the zero-field component ρA xy(H = 0) and (F) the corresponding σA yx obtained by inverting the resistivity tensor. Error bars include the uncertainty in extracting the zero-field resistivity from the Hall measurements. σA yx(H = 0) obtained by inverting the resistivity tensor σA yx = ρA xy/((ρT OT xx )2 + (ρA xy)2), is plotted in Fig. 2F, and σA yx is found to saturate. The fact that σA yx remains constant over a range of temperature in which σT OT xx and hence ρA xy are both temperature dependent is consistent with the scattering rate independence expected for a momentum-space Berry-curvature related effect. The data shown in Fig. 2 establish one of our key ex- perimental findings, namely the existence of an AHE in AgCrSe2. In order to investigate further, we study the dependence of ρA xy on the angle of the magnetic field rel- ative to the crystalline c-axis, rotating it by angle θ in the plane of the c-axis and the applied current, as shown in Fig. 3A. The result, shown in Fig. 3B and summa- rized in Fig. 3C, is striking: ρA xy remains approximately angle-independent before ‘switching off’ for θ > 80◦. At first sight, such an observation seems to be consistent with a topological response of some kind, in which ρA xy is fixed at a topologically-controlled value, insensitive to changes in external conditions. However, the simplest in- terpretations of this kind are inconsistent with the size of the AHE that we observe. A topological contribu- tion to the AHE in a two-dimensional system leads to a quantized conductance in units of e2/h, where e is the electronic charge and h is the Planck constant. Al- though our measured ρA xy is large—comparable with the largest seen in any antiferromagnetic system [30–33]— inverting the resistivity tensor and converting to two di- mensions by factoring out the layer separation of 7 ̊A gives σA yx ∼= 7 × 10−4e2/h per atomic layer. This low value of σA yx means that we are far from a topological response based on any bulk physics of AgCrSe2. However, one other form of topological response is wor- thy of consideration. A net non-zero Chern number due to surfaces could result in the reduction of the observed σA yx from the quantized value by the ratio ns/nb, where ns is the number of topologically non-trivial layers at or near the sample surface and nb is the number of topo- logically trivial bulk layers. This intriguing hypothesis can be checked experimentally by studying samples of varying thickness. We did this, with the results shown in Fig. 3D. The observed σA yx shows no systematic de- pendence on sample thickness, and hence none on ns/nb. We therefore believe that our observation is that of a non-quantized σA yx whose origin is in the bulk physics of AgCrSe2. Another, even more direct, way to investigate the sur- face layers of a material such as AgCrSe2 is to apply an ionic gate using an ionic liquid. We now demonstrate that an ionic gate drastically modulates the AHE. We employ an ionic field effect transistor setup, in the config- uration schematically illustrated in the inset of Fig. 4A. The device includes an exfoliated AgCrSe2 thin flake, a large-area side gate pad, as well as the ionic liquid that covers both the thin flake and the gate electrode. Due to 4 Illustration of the measurement setup for the angular depen- dent AHE. The current is applied in the ab-plane, and the magnetic field is rotating relative to the c-axis. (B) ρA xy(H) measured at different rotation angles at fixed temperature 5 K. (C) Angular dependence of the zero-field resistivity ρA xy. ρA xy remains a plateau up to θ ∼ 80◦, and then drops abruptly to near zero when H is aligned to the ab-plane (θ = 90◦). Er- ror bars reflect an estimate of the uncertainty in extracting the resistivity jumps. (D) Thickness dependence of σA yx. The dashed line is the quantum conductance e2/h normalized by the thickness t. the screening effect, the induced conductivity takes place in the surface layers of the material. Fig. 4A shows the in-plane conductance tuned as a function of applied gate voltage, VG. A moderate VG of a few volts can change the conductance by orders of magnitude. The high dop- ing level of an ionic gate also leads to a drastic change in the AHE, and we show the results of such experiments in Figs. 4B-D. In the experiment, we applied both negative and positive gate voltages, producing sheet carrier densities per layer that are both smaller and larger than the carrier density per layer of the bulk devices. As is seen in Fig. 4B, an AHE with similar characteristics to that of the bulk is observed, with a magnitude that is tuned to be larger (at densities of 6.5, 7.8 and 8.1 × 1014 cm−2) and smaller than that observed in the bulk. As with the bulk case, the pronounced hysteresis seen in the AHE is absent in the magnetoresistance, shown in Fig. 4C. The AHE is modulated to be vanishing at carrier densities smaller than 1.8 × 1014 cm−2. By isolating the carriers to a quasi-two-dimensional sheet at the surface of the AgCrSe2 crystals, and demon- strating that σA yx remains far from a quantized value, we provide further strong evidence for a non-quantized anomalous Hall origin of the signal. We will show be- low, through symmetry arguments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, that its origin is still Berry curvature, but a carrier-density-dependent one in the va- lence band of these p-type doped crystals. We start from the symmetry analysis to look for nec- essary conditions for the occurrence of a nonzero anoma- lous Hall conductivity, i.e. σxy. The out-of-plane spin tilting that is favored by Dzyaloshinsky-Moriya interac- tion can, in principle, break symmetries in the crystal and give rise to a ferromagnetic behavior. How- ever, as previously discussed, the resulting net moment alone cannot fully explain the observed large hysteresis loop in the Hall resistivity, and an additional component in the Hall resistivity is still observed after taking the moment into account. Therefore, we resort to other nec- essary conditions that can possibly explain the observed phenomena. Inspection of the magnetic space group for various possible magnetic orderings reveals that an anomalous Hall conductivity can be generated either by (a) an in-plane magnetic moment and/or (b) by the noncollinear spin structure. As shown in the left panel of Fig. 5A, for spins parallel to the y-axis (m//y), the mirror symmetry My is retained which excludes the Hall vector. It is worth noting that the Hall conductivity components correspond to the antisymmetric part of the 2nd rank conductivity tensor and thus we can write them as components of a pseudovector, Hall vector, σ = (σyz, σzx, σxy) . In contrast, for spins parallel to the x-axis (m//x), the mirror symmetry is augmented by time-reversal T My which allows for a Hall vector component perpendicular to the xy-plane (right panel of Fig. 5A). Furthermore, we consider two types of antifer- romagnetic states and show that while simple collinear antiferromagnetic ordering cannot explain the observed signal, a nonzero anomalous Hall conductivity is antici- pated in the noncollinear antiferromagnetic states for the AgCrSe2 crystal structure. We construct the collinear antiferromagnetic state by doubling of the unit cell along the c-axis. In the collinear antiferromagnetic states, the Cr sublattices are connected by the unit cell translation combined with time-reversal, tT symmetry, as shown in Fig. 5B, which forces the Hall vector to vanish. In contrast, the noncollinear antiferromagnetic state (inherent to the experimentally indicated cycloidal spin structure ]) can break TRS in electronic structure and lift Kramers spin degeneracy . To emulate the effect of noncollinear antiferromagnetic ordering we have considered in our calculations a simplified noncollinear spin structure, as shown in Fig. 5C, constructed by tripling the unit cell along the c-axis. The noncollinear antiferromagnetic sublattices are, in this case, related by three fold rotation combined with translation, tC3z, 5 230 K. The inset shows a schematic of the device measurement setup. The ionic liquid (DEME-TFSI) covers both the side gate electrode and the thin flake. (B) σA yx(H) and (C) normalized longitudinal resistivity (ρT OT xx (H)/ρT OT xx (H = 0)) modulated by the ionic gating. The data were obtained at T = 10 K with the magnetic field applied along the c-axis. The applied VG and the carrier density n2D extracted from the field linear part of the Hall effect at each VG are labeled beside the curves. (D) σA yx as a function of the doping level. and thus allow a Hall vector perpendicular to the xy-plane . To further investigate the interplay between the mag- netic order and the polar structure, as well as to cor- roborate the aforementioned symmetry analysis, we per- formed DFT calculations including SOC and calculated the anomalous Hall conductivity based on the relativistic DFT band structures. The obtained results for various spin configurations are plotted in Figs. 5D-G. For spins aligned parallel to the x-axis (right panel of Fig. 5A), the energy bands, as shown in Fig. 5D, are spin split along the high-symmetry axes and asymmetric to Γ point. This asymmetric band dispersion is a direct manifestation of the interplay between the polarization and the mag- netic order: the polar structure introduces a Rashba-like spin-splitting and the magnetic moment along the x-axis (m//x) leads to an asymmetric deformation. As a result of the band dispersion asymmetry, TRS is broken and an anomalous Hall conductivity up to 80 S/cm is obtained for energy levels lower in the valence band (Fig. 5E). In addition, for the simplified noncollinear spin structure in the antiferromagnetic states, as shown in Fig. 5C, the bands once again exhibit TRS breaking. The calcula- tions yield the order of magnitude of σxy consistent with the experimental data and capture Hall conductivity in- crease with a lowering Fermi level towards the bottom of the valence bands in the range probed by the gating experiments. The above-described models are based on copla- nar spin configurations which generate a Hall vector perpendicular to the plane. This is distinct from the con- ventional ferromagnetism that a Hall vector is generated by a moment along the same direction. The scenario involving a more complex noncollinear spin structure has been examined on model level, and is consistent with the main conclusions based on DFT results. We emphasize that these models discuss possible origins of the Hall signal only. Nevertheless, our theoretical analysis and calculations demonstrate that the AgCrSe2 crystal structure family can host intriguing in-plane magnetization or noncollinear magnetism driven AHE. It also demonstrates that the kind of bands that exist in AgCrSe2 can yield the anomalous Hall signals with a magnitude consistent with that we have observed, and thus the layered crystal structure allows for the coexistence of polar and TRS broken effects. 6 symmetry plane My is marked in gray color. The mirror symmetry translation coupled with time reversal symmetry T My allows for a Hall vector (right panel). (B) Model of Cr atoms in the collinear antiferromagnetic states. The unit cell translation coupled with time reversal tT cancels the Hall vector. (C) Model of Cr atoms in the noncollinear states. The unit cell translation coupled with rotation symmetry tC3z is marked. (D, E)) Spin-projected energy bands (D) and energy dependent anomalous Hall conductivity (E) in ferromagnetic states with spins aligned parallel to the x-axis. (F, G)) Spin-projected energy bands (F) and energy dependent anomalous Hall conductivity (G) in antiferromagnetic states in a simplified noncollinear structure. The calculations, for stoichimetric AgCrSe2, put the Fermi level in the band gap. In the real crystals, non-stoichiometry places it in the hole bands, where the calculations give a finite σxy with a strong doping dependence, qualitatively in accord with the results of our gating experiments. In conclusion, we have observed a spontaneous AHE in the polar, layered, triangular-lattice material AgCrSe2, and have shown how its magnitude can be tuned by an ionic gate. Although the measured anomalous Hall resistivity is comparable with the largest observed in any magnetic material, the anomalous Hall conductivity is far from the quantized value. We show that it can be substantiated by symmetry analysis and DFT calculations. However, the microscopic origin of the TRS breaking remains to be understood, as does the hysteresis in the AHE. Our work motivates further theoretical investigation and detailed neutron scattering studies of this fascinating material class, which we have demonstrated to be an appealing candidate for the coex- istence of ferroelectric- and ferromagnetic-like responses and functionalities. Moreover, the gate-controllable AHE in this material provides a new possibility for the local manipulation of spin states, which can facilitate the realization of stable and compact spintronic and magnetoelectric devices. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank B. Doucot, P.D.C. King, B. Schmidt and V. Sunko for useful discussions, and S. Seifert for ex- perimental support. Research in Dresden benefits from the environment provided by the DFG Cluster of Excel- lence ct.qmat (EXC 2147, project ID 390858940). S.- J.K. acknowledges support from the International Max Planck Research School for Chemistry and Physics of Quantum Materials (IMPRS-CPQM). LˇS acknowledges support from Johannes Gutenberg University Grant Top- Dyn, and support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein- schaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) for fund- ing through TRR 288 – 422213477 (projects A09 and B05). We thank U. Nitzsche for technical support. We are grateful to the Max Planck Society for financial sup- port. 7 N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and N. P. Ong, Anomalous Hall effect, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, L. ˇSmejkal, A. H. MacDonald, J. Sinova, S. Nakatsuji, and T. Jungwirth, Anomalous Hall antiferromagnets, Nat. Rev. Mater. 7, 482–496 (2022). D. Xiao, M.-C. Chang, and Q. Niu, Berry phase effects on electronic properties, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1959 (2010). L. ˇSmejkal, R. Gonz ́alez-Hern ́andez, T. Jungwirth, and J. Sinova, Crystal time-reversal symmetry breaking and spontaneous Hall effect in collinear antiferromagnets, Sci. Adv. 6, eaaz8809 (2020). K. Samanta, M. Leˇzai ́c, M. Merte, F. Freimuth, S. Bl ̈ugel, and Y. Mokrousov, Crystal Hall and crystal magneto- optical effect in thin films of SrRuO3, J. Appl. Phys. 127 I. I. Mazin, K. Koepernik, M. D. Johannes, R. Gonz ́alez- Hern ́andez, and L. ˇSmejkal, Prediction of unconventional magnetism in doped FeSb2, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. S. N. Guin, Q. Xu, N. Kumar, H.-H. Kung, S. Dufresne, C. Le, P. Vir, M. Michiardi, T. Pedersen, S. Gorovikov, et al., 2D-Berry-curvature-driven large anomalous Hall effect in layered topological nodal-line mnalge, Adv. Mater. 33, 2006301 (2021). L. ˇSmejkal, J. Sinova, and T. Jungwirth, Emerging re- search landscape of altermagnetism, Phys. Rev. X 12, L. ˇSmejkal, J. Sinova, and T. Jungwirth, Beyond conven- tional ferromagnetism and antiferromagnetism: A phase with nonrelativistic spin and crystal rotation symmetry, Phys. Rev. X 12, 031042 (2022). R. D. Gonzalez Betancourt, J. Zub ́aˇc, R. Gonzalez- Hernandez, K. Geishendorf, Z. ˇSob ́aˇn, G. Springholz, K. Olejn ́ık, L. ˇSmejkal, J. Sinova, T. Jungwirth, S. T. B. Goennenwein, A. Thomas, H. Reichlov ́a, J. ˇZelezn ́y, and D. Kriegner, Spontaneous anomalous Hall effect arising from an unconventional compensated magnetic phase in a semiconductor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 036702 (2023). Z. Feng, X. Zhou, L. ˇSmejkal, L. Wu, Z. Zhu, H. Guo, R. Gonz ́alez-Hern ́andez, X. Wang, H. Yan, P. Qin, et al., An anomalous Hall effect in altermagnetic ruthenium dioxide, Nat. Electron. , 735–743 (2022). Y. A. Bychkov and ́E. I. Rashba, Properties of a 2D elec- tron gas with lifted spectral degeneracy, JETP Lett. 39, A. Manchon, H. C. Koo, J. Nitta, S. Frolov, and R. Duine, New perspectives for Rashba spin–orbit cou- pling, Nat. Mater. 14, 871 (2015). C. O. Avci, K. Garello, A. Ghosh, M. Gabureac, S. F. Alvarado, and P. Gambardella, Unidirectional spin Hall magnetoresistance in ferromagnet/normal metal bilayers, Nat. Phys. 11, 570 (2015). M. Fiebig, T. Lottermoser, D. Meier, and M. Trassin, The evolution of multiferroics, Nat. Rev. Mater. 1, 1 (2016). T. Ideue, K. Hamamoto, S. Koshikawa, M. Ezawa, S. Shimizu, Y. Kaneko, Y. Tokura, N. Nagaosa, and Y. Iwasa, Bulk rectification effect in a polar semicon- ductor, Nat. Phys. 13, 578 (2017). J. Br ́ehin, Y. Chen, M. D’Antuono, S. Varotto, D. Stor- naiuolo, C. Piamonteze, J. Varignon, M. Salluzzo, and M. Bibes, Coexistence and coupling of ferroelectricity and magnetism in an oxide two-dimensional electron gas, Nat. Phys. 19, 823 (2023). L. Landau, E. Lifshitz, and L. Pitaevskii, Electrodynam- ics of Continuous Media: Volume 8, Course of theoretical physics (Elsevier Science, 1995). V. Sunko, H. Rosner, P. Kushwaha, S. Khim, F. Maz- zola, L. Bawden, O. Clark, J. Riley, D. Kasinathan, M. Haverkort, et al., Maximal Rashba-like spin splitting via kinetic-energy-coupled inversion-symmetry breaking, Nature 549, 492 (2017). S. Seki, Y. Onose, and Y. Tokura, Spin-driven ferro- electricity in triangular lattice antiferromagnets ACrO2 (A = Cu, Ag, Li, or Na), Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 067204 K. Singh, A. Maignan, C. Martin, and C. Simon, AgCrS2: A spin driven ferroelectric, Chem. Mater. 21, 5007 X. Xu, T. Zhong, N. Zuo, Z. Li, D. Li, L. Pi, P. Chen, M. Wu, T. Zhai, and X. Zhou, High-Tc two-dimensional ferroelectric CuCrS2 grown via chemical vapor deposi- tion, ACS Nano 16, 8141 (2022). F. Gascoin and A. Maignan, Order–disorder transition in AgCrSe2: A new route to efficient thermoelectrics, Chem. Mater. 23, 2510 (2011). B. Li, H. Wang, Y. Kawakita, Q. Zhang, M. Feygen- son, H. Yu, D. Wu, K. Ohara, T. Kikuchi, K. Shibata, et al., Liquid-like thermal conduction in intercalated lay- ered crystalline solids, Nat. Mater. 17, 226 (2018). J. Ding, J. L. Niedziela, D. Bansal, J. Wang, X. He, A. F. May, G. Ehlers, D. L. Abernathy, A. Said, A. Alatas, Y. Ren, G. Arya, and O. Delaire, Anharmonic lattice dy- namics and superionic transition in AgCrSe2, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 3930 (2020). M. Baenitz, M. M. Piva, S. Luther, J. Sichelschmidt, K. M. Ranjith, H. Dawczak-Debicki, M. O. Ajeesh, S.- J. Kim, G. Siemann, C. Bigi, P. Manuel, D. Khalyavin, D. A. Sokolov, P. Mokhtari, H. Zhang, H. Yasuoka, P. D. C. King, G. Vinai, V. Polewczyk, P. Torelli, J. Wos- nitza, U. Burkhardt, B. Schmidt, H. Rosner, S. Wirth, H. K ̈uhne, M. Nicklas, and M. Schmidt, Planar trian- gular S = 3/2 magnet AgCrSe2: Magnetic frustration, short range correlations, and field-tuned anisotropic cy- cloidal magnetic order, Phys. Rev. B 104, 134410 (2021). H. Takahashi, T. Akiba, A. H. Mayo, K. Akiba, A. Miyake, M. Tokunaga, H. Mori, R. Arita, and S. Ishi- wata, Spin-orbit-derived giant magnetoresistance in a layered magnetic semiconductor AgCrSe2, Phys. Rev. Mater. 6, 054602 (2022). F. Engelsman, G. Wiegers, F. Jellinek, and B. Van Laar, Crystal structures and magnetic structures of some metal (i) chromium (iii) sulfides and selenides, J. Solid State Chem. 6, 574 (1973). F. Damay, S. Petit, S. Rols, M. Braendlein, R. Daou, E. Elka ̈ım, F. Fauth, F. Gascoin, C. Martin, and A. Maig- nan, Localised Ag+ vibrations at the origin of ultralow thermal conductivity in layered thermoelectric AgCrSe2, Sci. Rep. 6, 1 (2016). S. Nakatsuji, N. Kiyohara, and T. Higo, Large anomalous Hall effect in a non-collinear antiferromagnet at room temperature, Nature 527, 212 (2015). 8 A. K. Nayak, J. E. Fischer, Y. Sun, B. Yan, J. Karel, A. C. Komarek, C. Shekhar, N. Kumar, W. Schnelle, J. K ̈ubler, et al., Large anomalous Hall effect driven by a nonvanishing Berry curvature in the noncolinear anti- ferromagnet Mn3Ge, Sci. Adv. 2, e1501870 (2016). N. J. Ghimire, A. Botana, J. Jiang, J. Zhang, Y.-S. Chen, and J. Mitchell, Large anomalous Hall effect in the chiral- lattice antiferromagnet CoNb3S6, Nat. Commun. 9, 1 S. H. Lee, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang, L. Miao, T. Pillsbury, H. Yi, S. Kempinger, J. Hu, C. A. Heikes, P. Quarterman, et al., Spin scattering and noncollinear spin structure-induced intrinsic anomalous Hall effect in antiferromagnetic topo- logical insulator MnBi2Te4, Phys. Rev. Res. 1, 012011 I. Dzyaloshinsky, A thermodynamic theory of “weak” fer- romagnetism of antiferromagnetics, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 4, 241 (1958). T. Moriya, Anisotropic superexchange interaction and weak ferromagnetism, Phys. Rev. 120, 91 (1960). X. Liu, H.-C. Hsu, and C.-X. Liu, In-plane magnetization-induced quantum anomalous hall ef- fect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 086802 (2013). H. Chen, Q. Niu, and A. H. MacDonald, Anomalous Hall effect arising from noncollinear antiferromagnetism, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 017205 (2014).