1 Superconducting-Spin Reorientation in Spin-Triplet Multiple Superconducting Phases of UTe2 Katsuki Kinjo1*†, Hiroki Fujibayashi1, Hiroki Matsumura1, Fumiya Hori1, Shunsaku Kitagawa1, Kenji Ishida1*, Yo Tokunaga2, Hironori Sakai2, Shinsaku Kambe2, Ai Nakamura3, Yusei Shimizu3, Yoshiya Homma3, Dexin Li3, Fuminori Honda3,4, and Dai Aoki3,5 1Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University; Kyoto, Kyoto, 605- 0953, Japan. 2Advanced Science Research Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency; Tokai, Ibaraki, 319- 1195, Japan. 3Institute for Materials Research, Tohoku University, Oarai, Ibaraki, 311-1313, Japan 4Central Institute of Radioisotope Science and Safety, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 819- 0395, Japan 5University Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Grenoble INP, IRIG, PHELIQS; F-38000 Grenoble, France †Present address: Institute of Multidisciplinary Research for Advanced Materials, Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, 980-8577, Japan *Corresponding author. Email: katsuki.kinjo.c6@tohoku.ac.jp (K.K.); kishida@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp (K.I.). Abstract: Superconducting (SC) state has spin and orbital degrees of freedom, and spin-triplet superconductivity shows multiple SC phases due to the presence of these degrees of freedom. However, the observation of spin-direction rotation occurring inside the SC state (SC spin rotation) has hardly been reported. UTe2, a recently discovered topological superconductor, exhibits various SC phases under pressure: SC state at ambient pressure (SC1), high-temperature SC state above 0.5 GPa (SC2), and low-temperature SC state above 0.5 GPa (SC3). We performed nuclear magnetic resonance and AC susceptibility measurements on single-crystal UTe2. The b-axis spin susceptibility remains unchanged in SC2, unlike in SC1, and decreases below the SC2-SC3 transition with spin modulation. These unique properties in SC3 arise from the coexistence of two SC order parameters. Our NMR results confirm the spin-triplet superconductivity with SC spin parallel to b in SC2, and unveil the remaining of spin degrees of freedom in superconducting UTe2. One-Sentence Summary: Multiple superconducting phases with spin rotation in the superconducting state was observed. 2 Introduction What kind of an ordered state is realized under competing interaction is a central issue in condensed matter physics. Superconductivity and superfluidity are most remarkable macroscopic quantum phenomena produced by two-fermion pairs, so-called the Cooper pair. In conventional superconductivity, which covers almost all superconductors discovered so far, the Cooper pairs have zero total spin and orbital angular momenta, and have no degrees of freedom. Therefore, only one superconducting (SC) state is realized. Theoretically, it is possible that either or both of the two angular momenta are non-zero, and hence the coexistence of two SC phases, and/or multiple SC phases was anticipated. The well- known example of such multi-phases is superfluid 3He, in which two phases (A and B) with lowest energy are realized in zero field, and becomes more complex under magnetic fields and/or anisotropic environment (1-4). The presence of the Majorana particles, which is applicable to “qubits” in quantum computer was suggested in the surface state of the B phase (5). However, in superconductors, there are only limited examples for such multiple SC phases, for example, UPt3 (6), Th-doped UBe13 (7), and CeRh2As2 (8) are known so far. In addition, SC-spin rotation, which is the smoking gun for the spin-triplet SC multiphase due to the presence of the spin degrees of freedom, has hardly been observed, because of the tiny difference between the two critical temperatures (9). It is quite important to find the textbook examples of the spin triplet superconductivity, corresponding to the superfluid 3He, and to find the phenomena related to the spin and orbital degrees of freedom. Herein, we focus on a recently discovered uranium-based superconductor uranium ditelluride (UTe2) with SC transition temperature Tc ∼ 1.6 K (10). UTe2, crystallizing orthorhombic structure with space group Immm (#71, D2h), as shown in Fig. 1A, has the multiple SC phases. Under pressure (P), the Tc of UTe2 increases to about 3 K at 1.2 GPa (11-13), as shown in Fig. 1B. Below 1.6 GPa, the two jumps in the temperature (T) dependence of specific heat indicate the existence of at least two SC phases (11, 13): one exists at ambient pressure (SC1) and its Tc gradually decreases with applying P, and the other is an SC phase induced by P above 0.5 GPa (SC2), whose Tc has a maximum at 1.2 GPa. As a result, Tc of SC1 is below Tc of SC2 above 0.5 GPa, and thus we call this SC state SC3 in this paper. Above 1.6 GPa, superconductivity suddenly disappears and a magnetic anomaly, which is considered as the antiferromagnetic state, was observed (13). In addition, UTe2 shows multiple SC phases even at ambient pressure. For H || b, Tc first decreases with increasing H and shows a minimum at around 16 T, then Tc increases up to 35 T (14). The bulk SC properties in the high-field (HF) SC phase were recently confirmed by thermodynamic and χAC measurements (15, 16), suggesting that the pairing interaction grows up above 16 T (15). Furthermore, recent nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements revealed a tiny change of spin susceptibility just below Tc for H || b and H || c (17-19), and almost no change in the a-axis spin susceptibility (20). Above 14 T for H || b, spin susceptibility remains constant below Tc (16, 18). These results indicate that UTe2 is a spin-triplet superconductor with the spin degrees of freedom and the SC order parameter d-vector, which is perpendicular to the SC spin, having the b and c components in the low-field (LF) region. In UTe2, a complex interplay of various interactions was reported, such as Ising-like ferromagnetic fluctuations from NMR studies (21) and the antiferromagnetic fluctuations from the inelastic neutron scattering measurements (22, 23). Such competing interactions are thought to induce rich physics such as the HFSC phase in H || b 3 and multiple SC phases under pressure. Thus, identifying the SC properties of the SC2 and SC3 states is the last piece to understanding the multiple SC phases of UTe2. To elucidate the SC properties of the multiple SC phases in UTe2, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) serves as a highly effective tool. NMR is a technique that probes nuclear spins, which interact with electron spins through strong hyperfine interactions. Consequently, it enables us to investigate the electron spin susceptibility microscopically. While the spin susceptibility in the SC state cannot be measured due to the SC diamagnetism by the bulk magnetization measurement, NMR can detect it with the hyperfine interaction. Moreover, to measure spin susceptibility in the multiple SC states under pressure, NMR is a unique measurement that meets these requirements. Here, we report the results of the NMR Knight shift K for H || b (Kb) at 1.2 GPa, at which Tc of SC2 is maximum. We found that the spin susceptibility along the b axis is unchanged in SC2, which is different from that observed in SC1 at ambient pressure. More surprisingly, at the SC2- SC3 transition, Kb suddenly decreases and the NMR-spectral width becomes broader. These results suggest that the SC order parameter of SC1 and SC2 is different and that SC2 is a spin-triplet superconductivity with spin oriented toward the b axis and SC spin reoriented in SC3 state. These results suggest that the SC order parameter d-vector was changed at the SC3 transition, and the spin degrees of freedom remains in the superconductivity of UTe2. Results and Discussion As there are two crystallographically inequivalent Te sites in UTe2, we observed two 125Te-NMR peaks as reported in the previous paper (17–19). An NMR peak with the smaller NMR spectrum of Te(2) at P = 1.2 GPa is shown in the Fig. 2A, and the T dependence of the full width at half maximum (FWHM), the NMR Knight shift (K) determined with the NMR spectrum, and χAC are shown in Fig. 2B. Here, the NMR Knight shift is proportional to the spin susceptibility and the FWHM is proportional to the distribution of magnetization. As reported in the previous paper (24-26), Kb exhibits a broad maximum at Tχmax and gradually decreases with decreasing T, similar to the T dependence of χ (24). Owing to the increase in Tc and the decrease in Tχmax with increasing P (24), Kb highly depends on T around Tc at 1.2 GPa, unlike the case of ambient pressure (0 GPa). To clarify the change in the Knight shift related to the SC transition, we calculate ∆K ≡ KSCspin − Knormalspin as shown in Fig. 3A. Here, Knormalspin (KSCspin) is Kspin in the normal (SC) state, and is estimated from the extrapolation above Tc. Although the absolute value of the spin part in K (Kspin) decreases with decreasing T, ∆K is almost zero above 0.5 K, indicating that the spin susceptibility in SC2 is the same as that in the normal state for H || b. This T dependence of the spin susceptibility in SC2 is similar to that in the A phase of the 3He superfluid (27). Below 0.5 K, we observed a sudden decrease in Kb and a broadening of the NMR spectrum, although no additional change was observed in χAC. The magnitude of the decrease in Kb below 0.5 K is almost the same as that in K at 0 GPa (17). This is further evidence of the occurrence of the phase transition inside the SC state from the microscopic point of view. Now, we consider possible SC order parameters suggested by the present NMR results. As discussed in the previous papers (17-20), the order parameter of spin-triplet superconductivity is d-vector, which is perpendicular to the SC spin components. In other words, Ki proportional to the spin susceptibility along the i axis decreases when d-vector has the i component, but is unchanged 4 when the d-vector has no i component. This corresponds to the SC spin pointing to the i direction. The possible SC phases at zero field are listed in Table 1 of Ref. (16). Our findings indicate that the d-vector has no b component (the SC-spin is oriented to the b axis) in SC2, and has a finite b component in SC3, which is the same as that of SC1. This is the d-vector rotation, evidencing the spin-triplet multiple SC phases with spin-degrees of freedom. Another important point of Fig. 2B is that the FWHM of the Te(2) site shows an additional increase below 0.5 K. Figures 3A, 3B, and 3C show the temperature dependence of the FWHM divided by the applied fields (μ0H), which reflects the distribution of the spin-susceptibility, ∆K measured at the Te(2) site, and χAC measured at 0.8, 1.0, and 2.5 T, respectively. To clarify the increase in line width due to the normal-SC2 transition and the increase in line width due to the SC2-SC3 transition, we defined the values ΔFWHMMeissner and ΔFWHMSC-SC. ΔFWHMMeissner and respectively, as shown in Fig. 3D. In general, the FWHM of the NMR spectrum increases below Tc due to SC diamagnetism. This effect is related to the SC penetration depth and was observed below 3.0 K in SC2, and was suppressed with increasing μ0H, as shown in Fig. 3E. Decrease of ΔFWHMMeissner/μ0H with applying H is interpreted by the conventional SC diamagnetic effect. However, the additional increase in the FWHM below 0.5 K (ΔFWHMSC-SC/μ0H) cannot be explained by such SC diamagnetic effect, since χAC shows no anomaly around 0.5 K, and ΔFWHMSC-SC/μ0H is independent of the applied field, as shown in Fig. 3F. In addition, from the comparison of the NMR spectra between 0.6 K (SC2) and 0.13 K (SC3), it is noted that the spectrum shows a tail to the larger Knight-shift side than the Knight shift in SC2 as shown in Fig. 4A. This is quite unusual for the NMR spectrum in the SC state, as the spin susceptibility decreases in the SC state. Such an NMR spectrum variation in the SC state was not observed in SC1 [Fig. 4 (A)], although the spectrum broadening due to the SC diamagnetic effect was observed. The ratio between the FWHM of the Te(1) and Te(2) spectra in SC3 is almost unchanged to that in the normal state (28). These results indicate that the additional linewidth broadening in SC3 arises from the unusual inhomogeneity of the spin susceptibility, which was not observed in SC1. Thus, SC3 is a different SC state from SC1. We consider the several possibilities of the origin of linewidth broadening in SC3. One is due to the SC vortex state in SC3. Since spin susceptibility is unchanged in SC2, the NMR signal from the vortex core is observed at almost the same position as the SC NMR signal outside the vortex. On the other hand, the spin susceptibility decreases in SC3, and the signal from the vortex core should be observed at the different position from the SC NMR signal, resulting in the NMR signal becoming broader in the mixed state of SC3. However, this possibility would be unlikely, because the measurement fields are far below Hc2orb ~ 70 T expected from Werthamer, Helfand, and Hohenberg (WHH) theory (29). Thus, the area fraction of vortex is approximately 1%, and the contribution to the NMR spectrum is negligibly small. Another possibility is the spatial inhomogeneity with coexistence of the two SC states in the sample. However, this possibility is ruled out, as the observed spectra could not be explained by the simple coexistence of the SC2 and SC3 states (28). These results indicate that, whatever the inhomogeneities in the sample, the NMR linewidth broadening intrinsically occurs below the SC2-SC3 transition, and is proportional to the magnetic field. In other words, it represents an increase in the distribution of the magnetic susceptibility in the SC3 state. At present we have no clear interpretation of this phenomenon, but we believe that we observed an effect due to the mixing of the two SC order parameters as in the case of (U,Th)Be13 (30, 31). Actually, it was pointed out that the nonunitary spin triplet superconductivity leads to a spin-density wave type modulation of d-vector from the theoretical studies (32). 5 diagram of UTe2 at ambient pressure (A) and 1.2 GPa (B), respectively (13, 15, 18, 26). At ambient pressure, Tc(H) decreases in the LFSC (Low field superconducting) state, and increases in the HFSC (High field superconducting) state up to the metamagnetic field 35 T (Hm). In the LFSC state, Kb slightly decreases below Tc (17) (see Fig. 5B). As mentioned above, Kb is unchanged in the HFSC state (16) as shown in Fig. 5C, indicating that the SC spin align to the b axis. At the pressure ∼ 1.2 GPa where Tc becomes maximum, Hm is suppressed to almost half of Hm at P = 0 and there is no more L-shape behavior in Hb-T phase diagram (26). Considering the similarity in spin susceptibility in the SC state between the HFSC and SC2 states and first order transition like disappearance of SC state and Kondo coherent state with applying field or pressure (25, 33, 34), we conclude that the HFSC evolves into SC2 with applying pressure. In addition, the SC1 phase hides under the SC2 phase and becomes the SC3 phase (coexisting phase of SC1 and SC2), while the SC3 phase appears only inside the SC2 phase. Another similarity between HFSC and SC2 is that Tc increases with increasing Kb; Figure 6 shows the values of Kb under magnetic field or under pressure. When a magnetic field is applied, the zero-field extrapolated Tc continues to increase with the application of the field (34), and Kb also increases. This tendency was also observed in the pressure experiment. When Kb is above 6.0 %, indicating the sample in SC2, Tc increases up to 3 K with increasing Kb. The Tc vs Kb curves show similarity between under pressure and under magnetic field. It strongly suggests that HFSC and SC2 are the similar phase and have the same origin. Based on this scenario, we suggest that the spin susceptibility along the b axis (χb) is an important parameter for HFSC and SC2, which determine the Tc of these states. In conclusion, we have performed 125Te-NMR measurement on UTe2 under pressure to investigate the SC properties and determine the SC order parameter of SC2 and SC3 phases. The b-axis spin susceptibility in SC2 has the same value as that of the normal state below 3.0 K above 0.5 K. Below 0.5 K, spin susceptibility decreases, and the NMR linewidth increases. These results indicate that the SC order parameter is changed, i.e., SC spin rotation occurs at the SC2-SC3 transition, and the novel SC state with two SC order parameters in SC3. This is microscopic evidence for the remaining the spin-degrees of freedom in the superconductivity of UTe2, inherent to the spin-triplet superconductivity. Materials and Methods Sample Preparation A high-quality single-crystal UTe2 sample was grown by the chemical vapor transport method with Iodine as a transport agent, details of which are described in ref. (10, 36). The single crystal of UTe2 was an almost rectangular shape with 2 × 1 × 1 mm3, with 2 mm along the a axis. To improve 125Te-NMR signal intensity, the sample was synthesized with the 125Te-enriched (99.9 %) metal as discussed in ref. (18). The transition temperature (Tc) of this sample is 1.6 K at ambient pressure. AC susceptibility measurements In order to confirm Tc, we measured the high-frequency AC susceptibility χAC using the NMR tank circuit. In the superconducting state, the impedance of the circuit changes due to the Meissner effect, and thus the tuning frequency of the circuit drastically changes just below Tc. Applying pressure and pressure estimation 6 The hydrostatic pressure is applied using a piston-cylinder-type cell made of NiCrAl and CuBe alloys as described in ref. (37). Daphne 7373 was used as a pressure medium. The applied pressure was estimated by the SC transition temperature of Pb with the formula of P = (7.181 − Tc(P))/0.364 (38). Field Alignment We used a split-pair magnet to apply horizontal fields to the sample and a 3He-4He dilution refrigerator that can be rotated about the vertical axis. With this setup, we could rotate the magnetic field direction within the bc plane of the sample. The direction of the magnetic field was confirmed by measuring the Te1 signal as described in ref. (24). NMR measurements An NMR spectrometer with a 100 W (at 0 dB input) power amplifier (Thamway Product: N146- 5049A) was used for the measurements. A conventional spin-echo method was used for NMR measurements in the temperature range from 0.1 to 4.2 K and in the magnetic field range from 0.8 to 2.5 T. All measurements were carried out with the 3He-4He dilution refrigerator, in which the pressure cell was immersed into the 3He-4He mixture to reduce radio frequency heating during measurements. The NMR spectrum was obtained by summation of the FFT spectrum with a 5 kHz step. The applied field is estimated by 65Cu-NMR measurements as discussed here (39). 7