Mottness and spin liquidity in a doped organic superconductor κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 H. Oike,1, 2, ∗ H. Taniguchi,3 K. Miyagawa,2 and K. Kanoda2, 4, 5, 6, † 1PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi 332-0012, Japan 2Department of Applied Physics, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 3Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama University, Saitama 338-8570, Japan 4Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 5Physics Institute, University of Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, D-70569 Stuttgart, Germany 6Department of Advanced Materials Science, University of Tokyo, Kashiwanoha 5-1-5, Kashiwa 277-8561 Chiba, Japan (Dated: July 20, 2023) It has been more than 40 years since superconductivity was discovered in organic conductors, and the way scientists view organic superconductors has changed over time. At first, the fact that organic conductors exhibit superconductivity was a novelty in itself, and subsequently it was shown that behind the superconductivity is the physics of electron correlation, which has been a focus in condensed matter physics at large. Amid the remarkable development of correlation physics, the unique characteristics of organic conductors, e.g., a variety of lattice geometries and the highly com- pressible feature, led to the elucidation of fundamental principles and the finding of new phenomena, such as bandwidth-controlled Mott transitions and possible quantum spin liquids. However, most organic superconductors have commensurate band fillings, such as a half or a quarter, whereas in- organic superconductors, such as high-Tc cuprates and iron-based superconductors, have often been investigated under the variation of their band fillings. Thus, the physical linkage between organic and inorganic superconductors has remained unresolved. In this review article, we focus on the layered nonstoichiometric superconductor, κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8, which is exceptional among organic conductors in that the nonstoichiometry serves as doping to a half-filled band. Moreover, the strong correlation of electrons and a geometrically frustrated triangular lattice make this system exhibit the unique phenomena involved in Mottness, spin liquidity, and superconductivity, which are key concepts of correlated electron physics. This review will summarize what we learned from the pressure study of κ-(BEDT-TTF)4Hg2.89Br8 and how they relate to the extensively studied issues in inorganic materials. PACS numbers: xxxx Contents 1. Introduction 2 2. Electronic states of κ-type BEDT-TTF compounds 2 A. Crystal and band structures 3 B. Bandwidth-controlled Mott transition 3 C. Quantum spin liquid 5 D. Superconductivity and energetic hierarchy 6 3. Synthesis and crystal structure of the doped organic conductor 7 A. Synthesis 7 B. Crystal structure 8 4. Mottness in the doped organic conductor 9 A. Charge transport under pressure 9 B. Hall effect and Mottness 11 ∗Electronic address: oike@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp †Electronic address: kanoda@ap.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp C. Bandwidth-controlled Mottness transition at a finite doping level 12 5. Spin liquidity in the doped organic conductor13 A. Spin-charge separation 13 B. Spin excitations and interlayer charge transport 14 C. Exotic excitations in the doped quantum spin liquid 16 6. Superconductivity in the doped organic conductor 17 A. Pressure dependence of the superconducting transition temperature 17 B. Mottness-Driven BEC-BCS Crossover 18 C. How does the doped quantum spin liquid form superconductivity? 19 7. Summary 20 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 21