1 In the previous version an error was discovered in the calculation of residual stresses, and also in the use of silica substrates. This is the corrected version, where the conclusions have changed. Elastic Modulus of Polycrystalline Halide Perovskite Thin Films on Substrates Madhuja Layek, Anush Ranka, In Seok Yang, Zhenghong Dai, Truong Cai, Brian W. Sheldon, Eric Chason, and Nitin P. Padture * School of Engineering, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA *Email: nitin_padture@brown.edu ABSTRACT Using an innovative combination of multibeam-optical stress-sensor (MOSS) curvature and X-ray diffraction (XRD) techniques, the Young’s modulus (E) of polycrystalline MAPbI3 metal-halide perovskite (MHP) thin films attached to Si substrates is estimated to be 10.2±3.4 GPa. This is comparable to the E of corresponding MAPbI3 single-crystals. This generic method could be applied to other systems to estimate hard-to-measure E of thin films. GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT Estimation of Young’s Modulus (E) of Polycrystalline MHP (MAPbI3) Thin Film on Si Substrate KEYWORDS perovskites; thin films; mechanical properties; elastic modulus; residual stress Tremendous progress has been made in enhancing the efficiency, scalability, and operational-stability of solar cells based on metal-halide perovskites (MHPs).1 Recently, a positive correlation between the operational-stability of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) and mechanical adhesion toughness of PSC interfaces has been demonstrated.2, 3 ,4 Thus, progress is also needed in the area of mechanical reliability, a key attribute that contributes towards the overall durability of PSCs, before they can be successfully commercialized.5 Unfortunately, the most basic of mechanical properties, such as the Young’s modulus (E) (stiffness) of MHP thin films within PSCs, are not known reliably. Methylammonium lead triiodide (CH3NH3PbI3 or MAPbI3), a 3D MHP, is the most studied by far in this regard, and the summary of its E measurements are listed in Table S1 in Supplementary Information (SI). The thin-film E values measured using techniques such as uniaxial tensile testing (free-standing thin films) 6 and nanoindentation 7 range widely, from 5.54 to 23 GPa. The single-crystal E values measured using uniaxial compression testing,8 2 nanoindentation,9 and neutron scattering 10 also range widely, from 10.4 to 23.92 GPa. The reasons for these wide ranges are manyfold.11 Here we have measured the E of polycrystalline MAPbI3 thin films using a new method which takes advantage of the equi-biaxial tensile residual stress (R) present in these thin films when they are attached to Si substrates. The primary source of R is the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch () between the MHP thin film and the substrate, which is given by:12-14 σR = EΔαΔT (1−ν) , (Eqn. 1) where E and  is the thin-film Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio, respectively, and T is the difference between the heat-treatment and the use temperatures. Here we have used an innovative combination of multi-beam optical stress sensor (MOSS) curvature (Fig. 1a)14 and X-ray diffraction (XRD) sin2 (Fig. 1b)15 techniques to measure E. We take advantage of the fact that the MOSS technique measures residual stress (R) in the thin film, which does not require a priori knowledge of the thin-film E. And the XRD sin2 technique measures residual strain thin-film E, assuming in-plane biaxial isotropy. SEM image of a MAPbI3 thin film. 3 High-quality MAPbI3 thin films were deposited on polished top surfaces of Si substrates, using procedures described in the SI. The average thin-film thickness is 475-500 nm. The bare backside surfaces of the Si substrates are also polished and reflective. Figure 2 presents top-surface XRD patterns of the thin films confirming pure perovskite-phase MAPbI3. The inset in Fig. 2 is top-surface SEM image of the thin films showing a uniform, dense microstructure with an average grain size of ~225 nm. Reference curvatures of the substrates from the bottom side were measured using the MOSS technique, before and after thin-film deposition, using the procedure described in the SI. The residual strain in the very same thin films were measured using the XRD sin2 technique (see SI). are linear fits. The R in the thin films from the steady-state MOSS curvature measurements were calculated using the Stoney equation:15 σR = EShS 2 6(1−νS)h ( 1 RC − 1 Ro), (Eqn. 2) where ES is the substrate Young’s modulus, S is the substrate Poisson’s ratio, hS is the substrate thickness, h is the film thickness, and RO and RC are measured radii of curvature before and after thin-film deposition, respectively. The equi-biaxial tensile R is estimated at 34.6±11.5 MPa (average and standard deviation of six specimens). This average R are put into the following XRD sin2 relation to calculate EF of the thin film:16 E = (1 + ν)σR ( do n ), (Eqn. 3) where n is the slope of fitted line to the interplanar d-spacing vs. sin2 data, and dO is the y- intercept. Figure 3 presents d-spacing vs. sin2 data (linear fits) for MAPbI3 thin films on Si substrate (six specimens). The estimated E value using Eqn. 3 of MAPbI3 thin films on Si substrate is found to be 10.2±3.4 GPa. This E value, which is most relevant to PSCs because it is measured for polycrystalline thin films attached to a substrate, is comparable to single-crystal E of 10.6±1.0 GPa measured in our laboratories using uniaxial compression.8 (Note that MOSS and XRD sin2 techniques were utilized by Rolston, et al.13 to measure R in mixed-cation-halide MHP thin films. 4 However, the MOSS and the XRD sin2 measurements were for thin films on Si and glass substrates, respectively. Also, no effort was made to measure E from those data in that paper.) According to Eqn. 1, the predicted R in MAPbI3 thin film, with a CTE of ~5010-6 °C-1 (ref. 17) on Si, with a CTE of ~2.610-6 °C-1 (ref. 18), for T of 75 °C is ~54 MPa. This is greater than the measured average R of 34.6±11.5 MPa. This is possibly because the underlying assumptions in Eqn. 1 — the thin film fully attaches to the substrate only at the heat-treatment temperature and that there is no stress relaxation during cooling — may not be strictly valid. However, this is not expected to affect the E estimation. To study the possible relaxation of the MAPbI3 thin films at room temperature, time- dependent R and R measurements using MOSS and XRD sin2, respectively, were performed, as described in the SI. Figure 4 present these data for four different specimens. While the MOSS measurements are continuous (after initial 2-3 minutes delay), each XRD sin2 measurement takes ~12 min. The MOSS results show initial rapid (~12 min), but modest, relaxation in R of 4-5 MPa. No appreciable relaxation in R is observed because the XRD sin2 measurement duration is relatively long. Since MOSS measurements were performed after >12 min, the E estimation above is not expected to be affected by the initial rapid stress relaxation. thin films on Si substrates (two different specimens for R and R measurements each). In summary, using a combination of MOSS and XRD techniques, the E of polycrystalline MAPbI3 thin films attached to Si substrates is estimated to be 10.2±3.4 GPa, which is comparable to that of corresponding E of MAPbI3 single-crystals. This generic method could be applied to other systems to estimate hard-to-measure E of thin films. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Funding for this work was provided by the Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014- 20-1-2574) and the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 2102210).