1 Exciton Confinement in Two-Dimensional, In-Plane, Quantum Heterostructures Gwangwoo Kim1, Benjamin Huet2, Christopher E. Stevens3,4, Kiyoung Jo1, Jeng-Yuan Tsai5, Saiphaneendra Bachu6, Meghan Leger6, Kyung Yeol Ma7, Nicholas R, Glavin8, Hyeon Suk Shin7, Nasim Alem2,6, Qimin Yan5, Joshua R. Hedrickson3, Joan M. Redwing2,6, Deep Jariwala1,* 1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 22D Crystal Consortium-Materials Innovation Platform, Materials Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. 3Air Force Research Laboratory, Sensors Directorate, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433, USA. 4KBR Inc., Beavercreek, OH 45431, USA. 5Department of Physics, Northeastern University, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. 6Department of Materials Science and Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802 USA 7Department of Chemistry, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), UNIST-gil 50, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea. 8Air Force Research Laboratory, Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433, USA. *Corresponding Authors E-mail Addresses: dmj@seas.upenn.edu 2 Abstract Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors are promising candidates for optoelectronic application and quantum information processes due to their inherent out-of-plane 2D confinement. In addition, they offer the possibility of achieving low-dimensional in-plane exciton confinement, similar to zero-dimensional quantum dots, with intriguing optical and electronic properties via strain or composition engineering. However, realizing such laterally confined 2D monolayers and systematically controlling size-dependent optical properties remain significant challenges. Here, we report the observation of lateral confinement of excitons in epitaxially grown in-plane MoSe2 quantum dots (~15-60 nm wide) inside a continuous matrix of WSe2 monolayer film via a sequential epitaxial growth process. Various optical spectroscopy techniques reveal the size-dependent exciton confinement in the MoSe2 monolayer quantum dots with exciton blue shift (12-40 meV) at a low temperature as compared to continuous monolayer MoSe2. Finally, single-photon emission was also observed from the smallest dots at 1.6 K. Our study opens the door to compositionally engineered, tunable, in-plane quantum light sources in 2D semiconductors. 3 Introduction Exciton confinement in low-dimensional materials modifies the density of states and enhances the Coulomb interaction between electrons and holes, resulting in a range of novel effects for both fundamental physics and device applications. Over the past decade, atomically thin two-dimensional (2D) crystals have been extensively explored in developing quantum optical devices. However, the lack of lateral confinement of excitonic wave functions in such structures has limited their potential for quantum applications. Single photon emission from point defects1-6 and localized strains7-11 in the 2D crystals have been extensively reported with optically detected magnetic resonance12-14, such as spin coherence, spin relaxation time, and the nature of spin-spin interactions. However, deterministic positioning of individual defects and achieving uniform emission wavelength have remained a frontier challenge in this field. Several groups have also attempted to solve this challenge of individual exciton confinement in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) monolayers by physically shaping them into quantum dots (QDs) via both top-down15-19 and bottom-up processes20-22. Many such attempts have demonstrated that decreasing the lateral dimensions of the TMD QDs results in a distinct blue shift in both emission and absorption spectra, widely recognized as a signature of quantum confinement15, 19-22. However, in all cases, these QDs are produced in a manner such that their one-dimensional (1D) edges are exposed. This leads to edge oxidation or covalent chemistry with other functional groups resulting in energy levels and trap states that affect radiative recombination rates and cause a broader distribution of electronic states. Therefore, achieving a seamless and defect-free interface between 2D QDs and matrix materials within an in-plane 2D combination is a significant milestone that remains to be achieved. Further, even though some evidence of lateral quantum confinement has been observed before, 4 demonstration of single-photon quantum emission from compositionally confined 2D QDs remains unachieved. In this study, we have successfully demonstrated the lateral confinement of excitons in large area 2D MoSe2 QD@WSe2 matrix heterostructures grown by a metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) method. These heterostructures were created using sequential epitaxial growth to achieve an ultraclean interface. By controlling the reaction time, we can manipulate the size of the triangular MoSe2 QDs in the range of 15-60 nm. Our optical spectroscopic measurements prove size-dependent exciton confinement within the MoSe2 monolayer QDs. Further, our confined heterostructures exhibited quantum emission with ~0.6 nm spectral line width at cryogenic temperatures for dots as small as 10 nm and a single photon purity of g2(0) = ~0.4. Our results serve as an important milestone in achieving quantum- confinement and quantum emission in bottom-up grown 2D QDs at scale opening new avenues for exploring confined excitonic physics and developing novel quantum photonic devices. 5 Results Fabrication and characterization of 2D quantum heterostructures quantum dots (QDs) embedded in a single-layer WSe2 matrix by a sequential epitaxial growth using a horizontal MOCVD system. As a first step, the triangular MoSe2 QDs are grown on a c-plane sapphire substrate at a growth temperature of 950 oC for short reaction times (1, 5, 10 min) using Mo(CO)6 metal precursor and H2Se chalcogen gas (see Methods for details of MOCVD conditions). Note that the size of the MoSe2 QDs can be varied by adjusting the growth time, and this aspect will be discussed further in characterization. After the MoSe2 QD growth, we sequentially grow a single-layer WSe2 matrix around the QDs in the same chamber without taking out the samples. The growth of the WSe2 monolayer is carried out at the same temperature while supplying W(CO)6 metal precursor and keeping the H2Se throughout the growth to minimize decomposition of the QDs. A strict 2D in-plane growth along the edges of the MoSe2 QDs can be attained in this manner. Before cooling down, the in-plane heterostructure is further exposed to the chalcogen source to heal any vacancies that could have happened during the growth and prevent the formation of vacancies via hydrogen etching. The atomic structure of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix was examined using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Figure 1b shows a low-magnification annual dark- field scanning TEM (ADF-STEM) image of the in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures after the film was detached from the sapphire substrate and transferred to a TEM grid (see Methods for details). The presence of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix is confirmed owing to the Z contrast mechanism of the ADF-STEM imaging technique23, wherein the MoSe2 QDs appear darker compared to the WSe2 matrix. It is worth noting that the size of 6 the MoSe2 QDs can be reduced to 15-60 nm by controlling growth time (Supplementary interface illustrates that the atomically sharp interface formed between the QD and the matrix ensures the in-plane heteroepitaxy of the 2D heterostructures. This is further supported by the clear spatial separation of the Mo and W signals in the energy dispersive spectroscopy (STEM- EDS) maps (Figure 1d-g). In addition, the formation of the MoSe2 QDs was confirmed using micro-Raman spectroscopy with a 633 nm laser on the heterostructures transferred onto SiO2 substrates (Supplementary Raman signals of MoSe2 and WSe2, including the characteristic A1g symmetry Raman modes of MoSe2 (red) and WSe2 (blue) at 242 and 250 cm-1, as well as WSe2 resonance peak (green) with 633 nm laser at 239 cm-1. All Raman modes showed no change in the peak position depending on the QDs growth time, but the intensity of both A1g peaks varied. Supplementary of the growth time, which indicates a substantial drop in the intensity ratio with the QDs population. These findings are consistent with the increase in the average size and density of the QDs as the growth time is prolonged. 7 Fig. 1. Sequential epitaxial growth of the in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2. (a) Schematic representation of sequential epitaxial growth of in-plane QDs heterostructures via MOCVD. (b) Low magnification ADF-STEM image of the heterostructures consisting of the 5 min- MoSe2 QDs and the WSe2 matrix. The MoSe2 QDs are marked with the red arrows. (c) Atomic- resolution ADF-STEM image showing an interface between the MoSe2 QDs and the WSe2 matrix (bottom left and top right, respectively). (d) ADF-STEM image of the heterostructures and Se atoms (g) for the Figure d. The boundaries between the MoSe2 QD and the WSe2 matrix are marked with a white dot line from Figure d. Nano-optical and electrical imaging of the quantum heterostructures The far-field Raman spectroscopic results described above sample an ensemble of QDs in the WSe2 matrix since the laser spot size (~1 um) is much larger than the average diameters or spacing between the QDs. Therefore, it is difficult to display the actual QD size and distribution via purely optical means because of the resolution limitations of the instrument. To determine the spatial position and study the band alignment between the MoSe2 QDs and the WSe2 matrix, 8 we perform tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) combined with Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) on the heterostructures. First, an epoxy-assisted template stripping procedure was used to prepare the 5min-MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures buried in a metallic Au substrate (Figure 2a, see Methods in details) which enhances optical signals due to the high local electric field and the Purcell effect for Raman scattering phenomena24, 25. As shown in the atomic force microscopy (AFM) height image (Figure 2b), despite a slight interface gap between the heterostructures and the Au template, they displayed a smooth topography with minimal surface roughness (Heterostructure: 0.09 nm, Au: 0.13 nm). This suggests that the flat sample prepared by the Au stripping process offers more spatially uniform contact. KPFM mapping of the quantum heterostructures in Figure 2c exhibits a noticeable contrast in the contact potential difference (CPD) between the MoSe2 QDs (dark, marked with black dotted circles) and the surrounding WSe2 matrix (bright). This potential difference (~40 mV) arises due to the disparity in work functions between the two materials26. Although we measured a smaller difference than expected (~190 meV) due to the quantum-confined dots structure, the difference in potential allows the two materials to be clearly distinguished. The built-in potential of the quantum heterostructure will drive the electrons to diffuse from the WSe2 matrix to the MoSe2 QDs along the direction of the built-in field, demonstrating its characteristic as type II semiconductor heterostructures27, 28. Additionally, it is noted that the size of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix was found to be 50 nm (Figure 2d), which is consistent with the size observed from the TEM measurement (Figure 1b). TERS spectra were collected from the MoSe2 QDs (red) and the WSe2 matrix (blue) regions in Figure 2f. Unlike the previous far-field measurement using a 633 nm laser, a 785 nm laser used for gap mode TERS measurement between the tip and the underlying Au template was weakly 9 resonant with both materials. The TERS spectra from the MoSe2 QD and the WSe2 matrix exhibited several features similar to resonant far-field Raman peaks (Supplementary Figure S2). Still, we analyzed the out-of-plane A1g mode, which was prominent by signal enhancement in the gap mode. Interestingly, the corresponding TERS maps in the ranges of 300-307 cm-1 (WSe2 A1 mode, Figure 2e) and 240-244 cm-1 (MoSe2 A1g mode, Figure 2g) allowed for the identification of the 50 nm-sized MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix. By using different color channels to render the intensity for the WSe2 (blue) and the MoSe2 QDs (red), a color- integrated image (Figure 2f) shows the spatial composition distribution in these in-plane quantum heterostructures. WSe2 matrix. (a) Schematic representation of nanoscale scanning probe techniques (top) on the 5min-MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures buried in an Au templates (bottom: cross- 10 sectional view). The samples are prepared by Au-assisted transfer process24, 25. (b, c) AFM height image and surface potential map of the heterostructures consisting of the 50 nm-sized MoSe2 QDs and the WSe2 matrix. (Inset) Height profile marked with white line in Figure b showing no discernible height difference across the crystal proving truly in-plane epitaxy (embedding) of the MoSe2 QD in the WSe2 matrix. The MoSe2 QDs are marked with black dotted circles. (d) Surface potential profile following the green dotted line in Figure c. (e-g) TERS spatial maps of the quantum heterostructures following the red dotted squares in Figures b and c. The TERS images were created within the spectral ranges of 245-255 cm-1 (e, WSe2 A1 mode) and 235-245 cm-1 (g, MoSe2 A1g mode) with a step size of 20 nm. The MoSe2 QDs are marked with yellow dotted circles. (f) Overlaid image of Figures (e) and (g). (h) TERS spectra of the MoSe2 QD regions (red) and the surrounding WSe2 matrix (blue) as highlighted in the TERS map. Exciton confinement in the quantum heterostructures Thin hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) films (Supplementary Figure S3) were employed to encapsulate the top and bottom of the quantum heterostructures, as shown in Figure 3a, creating stable structures with confined excitons and protecting the samples from unwanted contamination during the measurements. The large area-h-BN tri-layers were grown on a c- plane sapphire substrate by a CVD method29. These tri-layers were then stacked vertically with the in-plane heterostructures, using a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)-assisted wet-transfer technique on a SiO2 substrate (see the detailed process in Supplementary Figure S4). Note that, in the transfer process, we modified the order of a layer-by-layer stacking to minimize the PMMA residue between the layers. The PMMA-coated top h-BN layers were first transferred to the as-grown quantum heterostructures on the sapphire substrate, followed by coating the samples with PMMA again and then transferring them onto the bottom h-BN film. This method 11 allowed residues to be left on the h-BN while ensuring that clean interfaces were established without residues on either side of the quantum heterostructures. Finally, the stacked samples were transferred onto the SiO2 substrate and annealed at 300 °C with Ar flow (50 sccm) in a vacuum tube furnace. This facilitated better contact by eliminating any trapped solvent or gas molecules at the interface between each layer. The confinement of excitons in the encapsulated quantum heterostructures was examined using micro-photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy with a 633 nm-excitation laser. Figure 3b,c show the temperature-dependent PL spectra of the MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 quantum heterostructures encapsulated in h-BN films, where the MoSe2 QDs were grown for 5 min (Figure 3b) and 10 min (Figure 3c). The PL peaks showed a considerable shift to higher energies with decreasing temperature due to the lattice shrinkage and reduced electron-phonon interaction at low temperatures30. At room temperature (red spectra in Figure 3b and c), the PL intensities of the MoSe2 QDs on both samples were not large due to the small size and low density of the QDs. However, at ~80K, the emission signal from the QDs signal is clear as compared to that of the WSe2 matrix. The PL intensities (neutral exciton + charged exciton, X0+X+) ratio of MoSe2 to WSe2 is plotted in Supplementary Figure S5b, showing strong enhancement at low temperature, possibly due to dominant electron transfer from the WSe2 matrix to the MoSe2 QDs by the band structure modulation31. Furthermore, the confined excitons in the heterostructures can be modulated through electrostatic gating. We fabricated a gate-tunable device using mechanically exfoliated graphene and h-BN flakes as the top-gate electrode and the dielectric, respectively. By adjusting the Fermi level in two materials with Type II band alignment, we further demonstrate via emission spectroscopy that efficient electron transfer can be controlled via gating in these in-plane quantum heterostructures (see 12 details in Supplementary Figure S6). The quantum confinement of excitons in the MoSe2 QDs can also be confirmed by comparing their PL energy positions with those of large-area MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers grown on sapphire substrates in the same MOCVD system. The PL energy position of the neutral exciton of MoSe2 (right) and WSe2 (left) on the quantum heterostructures (MoSe2 QD growth time of 5 min: red, 10 min: blue) and reference monolayers (MoSe2 and WSe2: black) were compared as shown in Figure 3d. Depending on the samples, there was no change in the WSe2 PL position. Still, the excitonic features of the MoSe2 PL were blue-shifted on the QD samples, indicating the exciton confinement. The confinement effect was larger in the 5 min-MoSe2 QDs heterostructures (~20 meV) than in the 10 min sample (~15 meV), indicating a stronger blue shift with a smaller lateral size of the QDs. It is worth noting that although the QDs lateral size is larger than the exciton Bohr radius (~1.5 nm) in the TMD monolayers32, 33, the excitons can still be in a weak lateral confinement regime15, 19-22. Theoretical calculations will be discussed below to explore this confinement effect further. We performed first-principle calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) to investigate the shift of optical transitions due to the confinement effects in QDs with various sizes. Equilateral triangular MoSe2 quantum dots embedded in WSe2 with edge lengths ranging from 2.7 to 5.3 nm were studied. As the size of the QDs decreases, the absolute energy of the conduction band minimum (CBM) rises due to the quantum confinement effect, while that of the valence band maximum (VBM) decreases at a much slower rate. The energy difference between the CBM and the VBM increases with increasing dot size (Supplementary Figure S7). For instance, in the 2.7-nm quantum dot, the projected density of states reveals that the CBM is mainly contributed by the quantum dot, with the corresponding wave function being 13 spatially localized within the dot (Supplementary Figure S8). Note that the electronic state at the VBM is delocalized, while the state at 0.25 eV below the VBM turns out to be confined by the quantum dot. This observation is consistent with the type-II band alignment between MoSe2 and WSe2, which effectively forms quantum dots for electrons but does not imply confinement for those holes at the VBM. Next, we evaluate the effect of quantum confinement on the intra-dot optical transition by defining an energy shift between two relevant energies: (1) the energy difference between the CBM of QDs and the VBM of pristine MoSe2; (2) the optical gap of pristine MoSe2. To account for the excitonic effects and the underestimation of band gaps by DFT, we increase the calculated band energy differences by 0.11 eV (which is the energy difference between the calculated band gap and the measured optical gap of MoSe2) to roughly evaluate the optical transition energies. The energy shift is plotted as a function of the inverse size of QDs. Due to the limitations in computational capacity, linear extrapolation is used to estimate the results for more sizable QDs. The energy shift is estimated to be 40, 20, and 12 meV for 15, 30, and 50- nm quantum dots, respectively (Figure 3e). The predicted shift of transition energies in 30- and 50-nm quantum dots are comparable with the observed energy shifts of 20 and 15 meV in the 5 min- and 10 min-MoSe2 QDs (Figure 3d). It is noted that the discussion of results pertaining to the 1 min-MoSe2 QDs will be addressed in more detail later. Although our calculations do not explicitly include the excitonic effects, which can be significant in two- dimensional materials, the consistent results suggest that the change in the band energies of those electronic states involved in optical transitions may be dominant in the observed shift of transition energies. This finding is consistent with the conclusions of previously reported theoretical19, 34 and experimental results15, 19, 35-37 in the 2D TMD QDs. 14 In addition to PL analysis, the confinement effect in the quantum heterostructures was also verified through reflectance measurements (Figure 3f and Supplementary Figure S9). Figure 3f displays the reflectance spectra of the 10 min-MoSe2 QDs heterostructures (black) and reference monolayers (MoSe2: red, WSe2: blue) obtained at ~80 K. As observed in the PL results, the confinement of the MoSe2 QDs is evident in the reflectance spectra, while the positions of WSe2 absorption peaks are nearly identical between the heterostructures and the WSe2 monolayer. These two optical measurements provide clear proof of the optical confinement effect. Schematic representation of the in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures encapsulated in top and bottom h-BN tri-layers. The Mo, W, Se, B, and N atoms are represented in red, green, yellow, pink, and blue, respectively. (b, c) Temperature-dependent PL spectra (280 K to 80 K) 15 of the heterostructures with different growth times of the MoSe2 QDs (b: 5min, c: 10 min). These spectra were obtained by continuous 633 nm-laser with an excitation power of 20 μW and a 50x lens with 0.35 NA. (d) Comparison of PL energy position of the main neutral excitons of MoSe2 and WSe2 in the heterostructure samples (red: 5 min, blue: 10 min) with reference monolayers (black). The points are plotted from the peak positions measured at 80 K in Figure b and c. The reference MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers are prepared in the same MOCVD chamber. (e) Relation between the energy shifts on size of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix. The dashed blue line represents the linear fit of the energy shifts with respect to the inverse size of QDs. The blue dots represent the computationally estimated energy shifts in the QDs with sizes ranging from 2.7 to 5.3 nm. The three red dots are predicted energy shifts in 15, 30, and 50-nm quantum dots using linear extrapolation. The experimentally determined optical band gap of pristine MoSe2 is set as zero of energy and associated with an infinitely large (R = ∞) quantum dot. (f) Reflectance spectra of the heterostructures (10 min- MoSe2 QD: black) and reference monolayers (MoSe2: red, WSe2: blue) measured at 80 K. In our previous analysis of temperature-dependent PL, a stronger confinement effect was expected on the heterostructures of the 1 min growth time-MoSe2 QDs with smaller sizes (approximately 15 nm). However, due to the limited size and density of the quantum dots, it was challenging to detect the MoSe2 PL signal (Supplementary Figure S10). This was mainly because the confocal Raman system, with a nitrogen-cooling stage with a large beam size from a 50x, 0.35 NA lens, was not able to probe and detect the small dots effectively. Therefore, to address this limitation and directly explore the quantum confinement on the QD heterostructures, we performed cryogenic PL measurements (down to 1.6 K) with a 100x lens with 0.82 NA. Figure 4a lists the temperature-dependent PL characteristics of the 1 min-MoSe2 QDs sample, showing a clear MoSe2 PL signal. A gradual blue-shift of the peaks (MoSe2 QD, WSe2, and defect states) with decreasing temperature is clearly observed, as in the previously shown Figure 3b-c. 16 Additionally, we had also observed a distinct and sharp MoSe2 PL emission when the temperature approached 1.6K. We hypothesize that they originate from the quantum-confined main excitons of the MoSe2 QDs because of the matching energy values as discussed above. which were obtained with a pulsed excitation laser (640 nm, 1 MHz) with 100 nW power at 1.6 K showing an emission with a narrow line width (612 ± 124 μeV) at an energy of 1.675- 1.692 eV. However, this narrow emission also resembles single photon emitters from dark excitons and defect states in WSe2 monolayers, as reported in several prior studies1, 2, 7, 11. To eliminate the possibility for these narrow emission lines to be attributed to defect states of the WSe2 matrix, we prepared and measured MOCVD-grown pure 2D WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers in the same chamber with identical growth conditions. As shown in Supplementary Figure S11b, the emission from the defect state of WSe2 was observed at a slightly lower energy position (1.65-1.66 eV), and it has a quite broad band, as compared to the quantum heterostructures. Further, the main neutral exciton in pure MoSe2 samples was observed at 1.652 eV (Supplementary Figure S11a, bottom). It is worth noting that the quantum emission observed on the heterostructures (Figure 4d, inset) was blue-shifted by ~40 meV due to the confined excitons in the quantum dots, which is consistent with the theoretically predicted value in Figure 3e. To further validate that the emission acts as a truly quantum light source, we measure the second-order correlation function g2(t) using a Hanbury-Brown-Twiss (HBT) set-up with two single photon-counting avalanche photodiodes (APDs). Figure 4c shows the second-order correlation under continuous-wave (CW) excitation of the emitter on one of the selected sharp emission lines binned in between the dotted lines (Figure 4d, inset) using a broad band-pass 17 filter and tunable short and long pass filters. By fitting the measured data with a standard two level antibunching function, we calculate a g2(0) = 0.4 ± 0.02, which drops below the threshold for a single quantum emitter of 0.5 (more spectra on several other positions on the sample are provided in Supplementary Figure S12). This confirms that the MoSe2 QD is truly a single photon emitter. Figure 4d shows the PL lifetime of the MoSe2 QDs on the heterostructures, which was measured by excitation with a 640 nm, ~200 ps, 10MHz pulsed diode laser and sending the spectrally filtered output around the quantum dot wavelength to a single-photon- counting APD. The measured long lifetime of ~ 3 ns from the exponential fitting (black line) is consistent with the behavior shown by typical III-V semiconductor quantum dots38-41. 18 heterostructures. (a) Temperature-dependent PL spectra (90 K to 1.6 K) of the heterostructures with the 1 min growth time-MoSe2 QDs, measured using a pulsed laser excitation (500 nW, 640 nm, 1 MHz). The emission peaks from defect states, MoSe2 QDs, and WSe2 matrix are marked with yellow, red, and blue regions, respectively. (b) Representative cryogenic PL spectrum of the QD heterostructures with an excitation power of 100 nW at 1.6 K. (c) Second-order photon correlation curve for the PL signal of the MoSe2 QDs. (d) TRPL spectra for the sharp emission of the MoSe2 QDs (1.688 eV), shown in Figure b. The time- resolved PL data (blue line) are convoluted (black line) with the instrument response function, using an exponential function I = A* exp(−t/τ). 19 Conclusions In conclusion, we have successfully demonstrated the lateral confinement of excitons via compositionally controlled in-plane 2D quantum heterostructures of the MoSe2 QDs embedded in the WSe2 matrix. These heterostructures show quantum-confined emission that is significantly blue-shifted from the main neutral excitons of pure 2D monolayer MoSe2. Further, the wavelength and intensity of the emission can be modulated passively according to the QD size and actively via electrostatic gating since the QDs are embedded in the WSe2 matrix. Our work represents a significant step towards the synthetic control of truly two-dimensional in- plane epitaxial QDs, making them a versatile and tunable quantum light source. To fully exploit their potential for future, high-fidelity quantum light sources, further work must focus on their controllability in terms of spatial position, density, and composition. 20 Methods Growth of the in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures The in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures were synthesized on sapphire substrates in a horizontal MOCVD reactor42. The process involved introducing Mo(CO)6 or W(CO)6 metal precursors and H2Se chalcogen source at a growth temperature of 950 oC. After the heating ramp, a 10 min high-temperature annealing step is carried out under a pure H2 atmosphere to remove surface impurities and stabilize the sapphire surface. The growth of the MoSe2 QDs was initiated by introducing Mo(CO)6 metal precursor (6.1 x 10-3 sccm) and H2Se chalcogen source (200 sccm) simultaneously. Pure H2 was used as a carrier gas to transport the metal carbonyl in the chambers via a bubbler which was maintained at a controlled pressure of 760 Torr and temperature of 20 oC. The desired size of the MoSe2 QDs (10-50 nm) is typically adjusted by the growth time (1-10 min). Sequentially, stopping the Mo precursor supply, W(CO)6 precursor (8.7 x 10-4 sccm) was introduced to grow the WSe2 matrix around the MoSe2 QDs. During the growth of the heterostructures, the identical flow of H2Se gas continued to be supplied, and the system pressure was maintained at 200 Torr. Finally, after the growth, the furnace was cooled to 300 oC in a mix of H2/H2Se and was then cooled further to room temperature in N2. Preparation of buried heterostructure in the Au templates A thin gold film (100 nm) was deposited onto the surface of The in-plane MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructures grown on the sapphire substrate by using an e-beam evaporator (Kurt J. Lesker PVD-75) under a high vacuum. Then, a Si wafer was attached to the outer gold surface using an epoxy resin. Once the epoxy was cured at 80 oC for 2h, the gold-sapphire interface was 21 separated by peeling. The in-plane heterostructures are more strongly bound to the Au film and are thus separated from the sapphire substrate. The process results in the transfer of the heterostructures from the sapphire surface to being inlaid in the gold film, exposing the pristine surfaces of the heterostructures that were previously in contact with the sapphire substrate. Device fabrication for electrostatic gating. For electrostatic gating device preparation, the mechanically exfoliated h-BN and graphene layers were transferred over the sample by using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)-based dry transfer process to use them as each a dielectric and a top gate electrode. Next, the fabrication of Ti (10 nm)/Au (100 nm) electrode contacts was achieved by using electron beam lithography (Elionix ELS-7500EX) and the e-beam evaporator (Kurt J. Lesker PVD-75). Finally, the samples were cleaned in acetone for the lift-off process. Optical and structural characterization. Far-field Raman and PL spectroscopy were performed in a Horiba LabRam HR Evolution confocal microscope with 633 nm excitation lasers. The signals were collected through a 50× microscope objective (Olympus SLMPLN, NA = 0.35) for low-temperature measurements (from room temperature to 80 K). Also, for the low-temperature analysis, samples were placed in a Linkam stage with a liquid nitrogen supply while cooling and heating and pumped to 5 × 10−3 Torr during the measurement. Additionally, for electrostatic gating, the electrical bias was applied using a Keithley 2450 sourcemeter. An OmegaScope Smart SPM (AIST-NT) setup was used for topography scans. For near-field PL measurements, Au coated OMNI-TERS probes (APP Nano) were used in the identical AFM setup coupled to a far-field Horiba confocal microscope with a 633 nm excitation laser. 22 For the cryogenic PL (from 80K to 1.6 K), time-resolved PL, and g(2)(τ) measurements, the sample was placed in a cryostat with an in situ 0.82 NA 100× objective. The excitation spot size was approximately 1 μm. For time-resolved PL, the sample was illuminated with 640 nm, 200 ps light generated from a PicoQuant diode laser. For PL saturation and g(2)(τ) measurements, the sample was illuminated with 640 nm CW diode laser. The signal was collected in a reflection geometry and routed to a spectrometer for PL measurements. For time- resolved PL and g(2)(τ), the SPEs were first identified using PL and then spectrally filtered with angle tunable Semrock filters before being sent to two fiber-coupled Si avalanche photodiode (APD) detectors. PL saturation measurements confirmed that all time-resolved PL and g(2)(τ) measurements of SPEs were taken well below saturation. For the TEM analysis, the as-grown MoSe2 QDs@WSe2 heterostructure films were transferred to Quantifoil Cu TEM grids using a PMMA-assisted wet transfer method43. ADF- STEM imaging and STEM-EDS mapping were performed using a dual-corrected Thermo Fisher Titan3 G2 microscope operated at 80 kV. A semi convergence angle of 30 mrad and a screen current of ~ 50-60 pA were used during the imaging. Computational methods First-principles calculations are performed by using the VASP code44 with the r2SCAN45 metaGGA functional and a plane-wave implementation. Parallel GPU computations are used to accelerate the calculations of these large-scale 2D materials systems. The MoSe2 quantum dots of various sizes are embedded in an 18x18 supercell of WSe2, and calculations are performed using the Γ point in the Brillouin zone. The calculated band gaps for pristine MoSe2 and WSe2 are 1.53 and 1.63 eV, respectively. A type-II heterostructure of MoSe2@WSe2 is formed. The CBM and the VBM of WSe2 are higher than those in MoSe2 by 0.35 and 0.25 eV, 23 respectively. A vacuum thickness of 15 Å is set to prevent the interactions between periodic images. The plane-wave cutoff energy is set to 315 eV. The structural relaxations are performed for all systems until the force acting on each ion is less than or equal to 0.02 eV/Å. The convergence criteria for total energies in structural relaxations and self-consistent calculations are 10-4 eV and 10-5 eV, respectively. 24