Induced superconducting correlations in the quantum anomalous Hall insulator Anjana Uday1,5, Gertjan Lippertz1,2,5, Kristof Moors3, Henry F. Legg4, Andrea Bliesener1, Lino M. C. Pereira2, A. A. Taskin1, Yoichi Ando1 1Physics Institute II, University of Cologne, Z ̈ulpicher Str. 77, 50937 K ̈oln, Germany 2KU Leuven, Quantum Solid State Physics, Celestijnenlaan 200 D, 3001 Leuven, Belgium 3Peter Gr ̈unberg Institute 9, Forschungszentrum J ̈ulich & JARA J ̈ulich-Aachen Research Alliance, 52425 J ̈ulich, Germany 4Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland 5These authors contributed equally Inducing Cooper pairing in a thin ferromagnetic topological insulator in the quantum anoma- lous Hall state (called quantum anomalous Hall insulator, QAHI) is a promising way to re- alize topological superconductivity with associated chiral Majorana edge states. However, finding evidence of superconducting proximity effect in a QAHI has proven to be a consid- erable challenge due to inherent experimental difficulties. Here we report the observation of crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) across a narrow superconducting Nb electrode contacting the chiral edge state of a QAHI, evinced by a negative nonlocal voltage measured downstream from the grounded Nb electrode. This is an unambiguous signature of induced superconduct- ing pair correlation in the chiral edge state. Our theoretical analysis demonstrates that CAR processes of the chiral edge are not strongly dependent on the nature of the superconductivity 1 arXiv:2307.08578v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 17 Jul 2023 that mediates them. Nevertheless, the characteristic length of the CAR process is found to be much longer than the superconducting correlation length in Nb, which suggests that the CAR is in fact mediated by superconductivity induced on the QAHI surface. The approach and re- sults presented here provide a foundation for future studies of topological superconductivity and Majorana physics, as well as for the search for non-Abelian zero modes. Inducing superconducting (SC) correlations using the SC proximity effect in the one-dimensional (1D) edge state of a two-dimensional (2D) topological system would lead to exotic topological su- perconductivity hosting non-Abelian anyons 1–7 and hence has been experimentally pursued in a couple of systems. In the case of the 1D helical edge state of a 2D topological insulator (TI), the induced SC correlations have been detected in Josephson junctions 8,9. The SC correlations in the quantum Hall edge states are less trivial due to the chiral nature of the edge and large magnetic fields required, but strong evidence has been obtained in terms of the crossed Andreev reflection (CAR) 10–13 or the formation of Andreev edge states 14–16 causing a negative nonlocal potential in the downstream edge 17–20. In the CAR process, an electron in the chiral edge entering a grounded SC electrode creates a Cooper pair by taking another electron from the other side of the electrode, causing a hole to exit into the downstream edge (see Fig.1b). This hole is responsible for the nega- tive nonlocal voltage observed experimentally 17,20. Importantly, SC correlations are induced in the chiral edge state through the CAR process. Very recently, the CAR process was observed even in the fractional quantum Hall edge states 20, which are an interesting platform to create parafermions obeying rich non-Abelian statistics 21,22. 2 In this context, the SC proximity effect in the quantum anomalous Hall insulator (QAHI), which is a ferromagnetic TI showing the quantum anomalous Hall effect (QAHE), is highly inter- esting. If the 1D edge state of a QAHI can be proximitized, one could create a non-Abelian zero mode by coupling two counter-propagating edges via the CAR process through a superconduc- tor 6,10,17. If, on the other hand, the 2D surface of the QAHI is proximitized, chiral Majorana edge state may show up 2,23. The edge vortex in the chiral Majorana edge state is a non-Abelian zero mode 24 and can be used for building flying topological qubits that transfer information between stationary qubits 25–27. Hence, proximitized QAHI is an interesting platform for Majorana physics and non-Abelian zero modes. However, no clear evidence has been reported for the SC proximity effect in a QAHI 28–30. The QAHI can be realized by doping Cr or V to a very thin (typically ≲ 10 nm thickness) film of the three-dimensional (3D) TI material (BixSb1−x)2Te3 in which the chemical potential is fine-tuned into a magnetic gap opened at the Dirac point of the surface states as a result of a ferromagnetic order 31–33. Hence, a QAHI is insulating not only in the 3D bulk but also in the 2D surface. Inducing SC correlations in bulk-insulating TIs is much more difficult than in bulk- conducting TIs 34, and this is one of the reasons for the lack of clear evidence for the SC proximity effect in a QAHI. In fact, a recent work reported the observation of Andreev reflection (AR) in a metallic regime of a magnetic TI film, but when the sample was in the QAHI regime, there was no evidence for any Andreev process 28. Another work in this context 29 had a device structure not optimal for detecting the relevant Andreev process. Recent experiments on the quantum Hall system found a robust signature of CAR even at the spin-polarized ν = 1 filling factor17,20, which 3 appears similar to the QAHI edge; however, an important difference is that the QAHI edge is not fully spin polarised35. In the present work, we have successfully observed the signature of CAR with a narrow Nb finger-electrode (down to ∼160 nm width) contacting the QAHI edge. The finger-width dependence of the CAR signal gives the characteristic length of the CAR process that is much longer than the SC coherence length of Nb, which suggests that it is not the superconduc- tivity in the Nb electrode but is the proximity-induced pairing in the QAHI beneath the Nb that is mediating the CAR process. Nonlocal detection of the crossed Andreev reflection Our samples are Hall-bar devices of V-doped (BixSb1−x)2Te3 36 contacted by superconduct- ing Nb-electrodes with widths ranging from 160 to 520 nm. Figures 1a-b show false-colour scan- ning electron microscopy (SEM) images of device A which had the narrowest Nb electrode (contact 4). All other contacts are made of Ti/Au with contact resistances of a few Ohms (see Supplemen- tary Note 1). The 1D chiral edge state propagates in the counter-clockwise direction for an upward, out-of-plane magnetization (M > 0). For the configuration shown in Fig.1a, we set a DC current to flow between contacts 1 and 4d; namely, a voltage is applied to the normal-metal contact 1 and the SC contact is grounded. In , the AR of the electrons in the 2D “bulk” states of a magnetic TI film in the metallic regime was observed in devices similar to Fig. 1a, but here we probe the SC correlations in the 1D chiral edge state of the QAHI. For our purpose, confirmation of the dissipationless edge transport without the contribution of the 2D bulk is essential. In fact, the longitudinal resistance Rxx 4 (= R1-4d,2-3 measured between contacts 2–3 with the current between 1–4d) vanishes in our devices, while the transverse resistance Ryx (= R1-4d,6-2 measured between contacts 6–2) is quantized to h/e2 without the need of electrostatic gating, as shown is Fig. 1c. Note that a breakdown of the zero-resistance state occurs when the current exceeds a critical current 36–42, and the zero-resistance region is observed to shrink with increasing magnetic fields 43,44, as shown in Fig. 1d. This fragility of the QAHI state against current makes it difficult to estimate the contact transparency using current biasing 17,28. The CAR process converts an incoming electron with energy eV smaller than the SC gap ∆ to a hole carrying a potential of −V in the downstream edge (Fig. 1b), which is detected at contact 3 as the downstream voltage VD with respect to the grounded SC contact 4a. Here, downstream refers to the chiral direction of the edge state, see Figs. 1a-b. In addition, there is a finite probability that an upstream electron tunnels directly to the downstream as an electron carrying a positive potential V ; this is called co-tunneling (CT) and it competes with the CAR process in the nonlocal transport 11–13. The downstream resistance RD ≡ VD/IDC observed in this configuration consists of RD = RQAHI + RNb,InP + RSC-QAHI, (1) where the resistance of the QAH film RQAHI is zero for low probe currents below the breakdown, RNb,InP is the resistance of the Nb section lying on the InP wafer between the film edge and the SC contact 4a (which is zero when the Nb is superconducting), and RSC-QAHI is the SC-QAHI interface resistance including the nonlocal CAR/CT contribution. Note that the present setup is a 3-terminal configuration and the contact resistance of the Nb electrode always gives a finite contribution to VD. An external magnetic field is not required for the realization of the QAHE, enabling us to 5 examine RSC-QAHI as a function of the applied magnetic field from 0 T up to the upper critical field Hc2 of superconducting Nb. This is an important difference from the previous studies of the SC proximity effect in the quantum Hall edge states 17–20. Note, however, that even in zero applied magnetic field, the magnetization of the QAHI induces vortices in the Nb electrode, which create subgap states and allow incident electrons to be dissipated without the Andreev mechanism 17,45,46. Due to the chiral nature of the edge state, no AR occurs into the upstream edge. WNb of 160 nm, measured with IDC = 2 nA (see Supplementary Notes 3–4 for additional data). Below ∼1 T, the downstream resistance is negative, signalling the CAR process across the Nb electrode. This is the most significant result of this work and demonstrates that superconducting correlations are induced in the chiral edge state across the SC finger via CAR processes in our devices. As the magnetic field is increased, RD gradually turns positive and saturates as the su- perconductivity is lost in the Nb electrode. The change in the nonlocal downstream resistance due to the suppression of the CAR/CT process is calculated as ∆RD ≡ −[RD(H > Hc2) − RD(H < Hc2)−RNb,InP]. When ∆RD is negative (positive), the CAR (CT) process is dominant. We estimate ∆RD ≈ −400 Ω after subtracting the contribution of the normal-state Nb resistance RNb,InP ≈ 120 Ω (see Fig. 1e and Supplementary Note 2). Thus, the magnetic-field dependence of RD allows us to elucidate the positive contribution of the contact resistance and conclude that the CAR process is contributing ∆RD ≃ −400 Ω, which is much larger than the measured negative RD. This ∆RD corresponds to about 3% of the maximum negative downstream resistance −h/2e2 expected for prefect crossed Andreev reflection (see Supplementary Note 8). 6 To give confidence that the negative RD is not just a result of voltage fluctuations, the I- V characteristics for the downstream voltage VD in 0 T are shown in Fig. 1f. The slope in the zero-current limit (which also gives RD) is reproducibly negative for all the measured curves for different magnetic histories, even though the magnitude of RD changes with the magnetic history (see Supplementary Note 5), which is probably caused by a change in the disorder profile. Notice that a small nonreciprocal contribution is superimposed on the I-V curves in Fig. 1f, which is likely a result of the nonreciprocity of the 1D chiral edge transport in the QAHI 47,48. Moreover, while a negative slope is observed for |IDC| ≲ 3 nA, the breakdown of the QAHE (causing RQAHI > 0) dominates the downstream voltage at high current values (see Fig. 1f inset). Temperature and finger-width dependences of the downstream resistance the RD extracted in the zero-current limit is plotted in Fig. 2b as a function of temperature. RD is negative up to ∼125 mK, which is much smaller than the critical temperature Tc of Nb. This is understood by looking at the temperature dependence of the 4-terminal longitudinal resistance Rxx, which starts to deviate from zero above ∼50 mK (see Fig. 2b), a typical behaviour of the QAHI samples available today 36–40. Hence, the CAR contribution in RD is masked by the contribution of RQAHI at T > 50 mK. To further analyze the nonlocal CAR process across the Nb contact, we investigated RD for devices with different Nb-finger widths up to 520 nm. The magnetic-field dependence of RD in device B with WNb = 235 nm is shown in Fig. 3a (see Supplementary Note 7 for the data of devices 7 C-E having larger widths). The estimated Nb finger resistance RNb,InP is also shown for compari- son. Notice that the increase in RD coincides with the suppression of the superconductivity in Nb. The RD value fluctuates around zero in this WNb = 235 nm sample when Nb is superconducting, which is an indication that the CAR contribution happened to be nearly of the same magnitude as the normal contact resistance, so that the resulting RSC-QAHI is around zero. Note that the sim- ple AR can only account for a factor of two reduction in the interface resistance 28,49 and cannot explain RD going to zero. We estimate ∆RD = −70 Ω for sample B (see Fig. 3a). For comparison, we show in Fig. 3c the data for a WNb = 160 nm sample (device F) which was fabricated several months after the film was grown. The aging of the film caused a large normal contact resistance and the CAR contribution ∆RD cannot make RSC-QAHI to become negative or zero, even though the width of this sample is the same as that of sample A. Using the estimated RNb,InP ≃ 100 Ω, we obtain the normal-state RSC-QAHI of about 420 Ω and ∆RD ≃ −170 Ω for this sample F. We note that devices A–E are of higher quality because they were fabricated on a fresh QAHI film immediately after the MBE growth. As shown in Figure 3b, although no negative downstream resistance was observed for devices B–E with wider Nb electrodes than device A, a finite negative ∆RD was always obtained up to WNb ≃ 500 nm. For device A (WNb = 160 nm), as already mentioned, different values of the negative RD(H < Hc2) were obtained for different magnetic-field sweeps due to changing disorder profiles (see Supplementary Note 5) and they are included in Fig. 3b as individual data points. One can see in the inset of Fig. 3b that, on average, the magnitude of ∆RD is exponentially 8 suppressed with increasing WNb. A fit to ∆RD = R0 exp(−WNb/ξCAR) gives R0 ≈ −750 Ω and the characteristic length of the CAR process of ξCAR ≈ 100 nm. This is much longer than the SC coherence length of dirty Nb, i.e. � ξBCSlmfp ≈ 30 nm (with ξBCS = ħνS F/π∆, νS F = 1.37 × 106 m/s, ∆ = 1.2 meV, and lmfp ≈ 3 nm)50,51. Origin of crossed Andreev reflection At first sight, the chiral edge state of a QAHI appears similar to the ν = 1 state of the quantum Hall insulator17,20. However, the spin-polarised nature of the ν = 1 state necessitates, for instance, a superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling or a nonuniform magnetic field distribu- tion in order for CAR processes to occur13,17,20. In contrast, the edge state of the QAHI considered in our work is a superposition of spin states on the top and bottom surfaces. Furthermore, when brought into proximity with a superconductor, the resultant doping of the TI surface52,53 will lead to an induced superconductivity that inherently has strong spin-orbit coupling. In a simple approx- imation and at zero-momentum, the wavefunction of the chiral edge in the x-direction of a QAHI takes the form 29,31 (see Supplementary Note 9) (2) where f(y) ∼ e−y/λ is an exponentially decaying envelope function with length-scale λ determined by the Fermi-velocity and magnetic gap opened in the 2D topological surface states 29, |t ↑⟩ (|b ↓⟩) denotes the spin-up (spin-down) state in the top (bottom) surface of the QAHI, and χ specifies the top/bottom anisotropy. In the isotropic case, χ = 1, the edge state has no net spin-polarisation and the CAR process will not be hindered as long as the SC finger is narrow enough. Superconducting 9 pairing across the finger will be only slightly suppressed by a partial spin-polarisation of the edge states, which may arise in realistic situations 29. We now turn to possible scenarios by which SC correlations could be introduced into the edge states via CAR processes, starting first with a scenario where the SC finger defines a trivial SC region, such that no chiral Majorana (CM) edge state can form. The Nb finger is itself trivial and, under certain circumstances, the induced proximitised SC state in the TI surface can also be trivial 23. Apart from the factors discussed above, this scenario is essentially identical to that of the ν = 1 quantum Hall state that has previously been extensively discussed11–13,17,46,54. We note, however, that the disordered nature of the QAHI surface would cause the Andreev edge state to become diffusive and results in an equal mixture of electrons and holes, such that the Andreev edge state will not contribute to RD. Taking ξs to be the SC coherence length of the mediating superconductor, the CAR processes induce superconducting correlations across the SC finger and gives rise to negative VD when the finger width WSC is shorter than ξs. When WSC ≫ ξs, the transport along the Andreev edge state dominates over CAR. An alternate scenario is that the proximitized TI surface realises a topological superconductor (TSC) region that hosts a single CM edge mode. This can happen, for instance, if the Nb slightly dopes the TI surface to make the chemical potential lie above the magnetic gap and only the top surface is proximitized 2. In this case, for a wide finger, an incoming electron hitting the TSC region splits into two CMs that take opposite paths enclosing the region covered by the finger. The two CMs recombine on the opposite side of the TSC region as either an electron or a hole, 10 depending, in principle, on the number of residual vortices trapped in the SC region enclosed by the path 55,56. However, since the number of vortices in our several μm long Nb finger will be large and the CMs have a finite spatial extent, these processes will likely self-average, resulting in an equal mixture of electrons and holes transmitted to the opposite side of the finger due to the CM modes, such that ∆RD ≈ 0. On the other hand, a narrow finger, WSC ≲ ξs, allows CAR processes to the opposite edge through the bulk of the proximitized TSC region and leads to ∆RD < 0, as in the previous scenario of trivial SC. We can visualize these qualitatively different regimes of the TSC scenario in quantum transport simulations (see Fig. 4a) with a microscopic tight-binding model appropriate for a proximitized QAHI in the TSC regime (see Methods for details). Our simulation results presented in Fig. 4b and 4c show that, when the SC finger is much wider than the induced SC coherence length, the current on the top surface is carried by CM modes traveling around the proximitized section, with the finger length and the width both affecting the interference. For example, the plot for a wide finger in Fig. 4b shows that the electron-hole conversion probability Teh oscillates regularly as a function of the finger length LSC when LSC ≫ ξs; here, Teh > 0.5 means that predominantly holes come out on the downstream edge due to the interference of the CM modes. In a real situation with a long finger, such an oscillating Teh self-averages to 0.5, resulting in ∆RD ≈ 0. When the finger is narrower (i.e. WSC ∼ ξs), a qualitatively different regime is obtained: Teh is very sensitive to LSC for LSC ≲ ξs, but it stabilizes at large LSC to a nearly fixed value that depends sensitively on WSC. Fig. 4b shows the behaviour of Teh for two different widths in the narrow regime, stabilized at large LSC to Teh values larger and smaller than 0.5. The simulated local current densities (Fig. 4c) suggest that there are no more well-separated 11 CM modes in this regime and that the electron-hole conversion can be attributed to a CAR process that occurs mainly near the QAHI edge. Therefore, our simulations suggest that, similar to the trivial SC case, the CAR process can indeed become dominant in the TSC case. We should nevertheless note that the stabilized value of Teh for a narrow finger at large LSC is strongly dependent on WSC in our simulation and is not always larger than 0.5 (see Supplementary Note No. 10), which implies that ∆RD would fluctuate between negative and positive as a function of WSC in the narrow-finger regime. A similar oscillatory behaviour was also predicted by theoretical calculations for the trivial SC case 11–13. However, in our experiment we found ∆RD to be always negative for narrow fingers, as was also the case with similar experiments on graphene with a trivial SC finger 17,20. This stability of negative ∆RD in narrow fingers points to the existence of additional physics that are not captured in our simulations; in fact, the reason for the stable dominance of CAR in real experiments is an interesting subject of its own 13,46,54. For example, the dissipative channel through vortices in the SC finger, which is not included in our simulations, could be playing a role 19,46. In this regard, in related experiments to probe the Andreev edge states with a wide SC electrode, oscillatory ∆RD and stably negative ∆RD are both reported 18,19. The latter is surprising 57, and possible explanations for the dominance of electron-hole conversion in the Andreev edge states have also been proposed 19,45,58,59. One can see from the above discussions that both trivial and nontrivial scenarios are consis- tent with our observations. Hence, further studies will be required to determine the exact nature 12 of the SC phase that results in CAR of the QAHI edge. Irrespective of its nature, our observation ξCAR ≫ ξNb implies that CAR occurs through the superconductivity of the proximitized magnetic TI surface, rather than the SC finger itself. This makes sense, since Nb has negligible spin-orbit coupling and the finger on the top surface does not naturally result in processes coupling to the bottom surface, while our simulations suggest that the bottom surface needs to be involved in the CAR processes in the QAHI platform. Furthermore, the dependence on the magnetic history of the device suggests that trapped vortices and/or the magnetic disorder profile play a role, which is natural in the above scenario for the CAR through the proximitized surface. Discussion A negative ∆RD cannot be explained without the Andreev processes, and therefore our result gives unambiguous evidence that SC correlations can be induced in the chiral edge state of a QAHI. The stable dominance of the electron-hole conversion observed here joins the previous similar observations 17,19,20 and calls for better theoretical understanding. Our experiment further shows ξCAR ≫ ξNb, which strongly suggests that in our devices superconducting correlations are induced in the 2D surface of the QAHI beneath the Nb electrode. An obvious next step is to confirm whether the induced 2D superconductivity is topological and is associated with CM edge states. A possible experiment to address this question would be based on a device similar to ours, but has a much shorter finger electrode, such that the interference between the two CM edge states traveling along either sides of the finger can be detected without self-averaging. If the transmitted charge switches between electron and hole depending on the number of vortices in the finger, it gives strong evidence for chiral Majoranas 55,56. Furthermore, by putting two SC fingers close 13 enough to make a Josephson junction and by applying a voltage pulse across the junction, one can inject an edge vortex in the CM edge state. This edge vortex is a non-Abelian zero mode and experiments to confirm its non-Abelian nature have been theoretically proposed 24. Therefore, the platform presented here offers ample opportunities to address topological superconductivity, Majorana physics, and non-Abelian zero modes. Methods Material growth and device fabrication. The V-doped (BixSb1−x)2Te3 thin films were grown on InP (111)A substrates by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) under ultra-high vacuum (UHV). High-purity V, Bi, Sb, Te were co-evaporated onto the substrate kept at a temperature of 190◦C to produce an uniform film of ∼8 nm thickness. The chemical potential was tuned into the magnetic gap for an optimized Bi:Sb beam-equivalent-pressure ratio of 1:4. A capping layer of 4-nm Al2O3 was made ex-situ with atomic layer deposition (ALD) at 80◦C using Ultratec Savannah S200 to protect the film from degradation in air. The Hall-bar devices were patterned using standard opti- cal lithography techniques. The narrow Nb/Au superconducting contacts (45/5 nm) and the Ti/Au normal metal contacts (5/45 nm) were defined using electron-beam lithography. The Al2O3 cap- ping layer was selectively removed in heated aluminum etchant (Transene, Type-D), prior to UHV sputter-deposition of the Ti/Au and Nb/Au layers. Devices A–E reported in this paper were fab- ricated simultaneously on the same wafer, while device F was made on a separate wafer. A clean QAHE without the need of gating was observed in all devices. Scanning electron microscopy was used to determine the width of the Nb electrodes that were covered with 5-nm-thick Au to avoid 14 oxidization. Measurement setup. The transport measurements were performed at a base temperature of 17– 25 mK in a dry dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments Triton 200) equipped with a 8 T super- conducting magnet. All the data presented in the main text were measured using a standard DC technique with Keithley 2182A nanovoltmeters and a Keithley 2450 current source. The AC data shown in Supplementary Note 4 were measured using a standard AC lock-in technique at low frequency (3–7 Hz) using NF Corporation LI5640 and LI5645 lock-in amplifiers. Quantum transport simualtions. We have performed quantum transport simulations using the KWANT 60 package, considering a 2×4-orbital two-dimensional tight-binding model (on a square lattice with lattice constant a = 2 nm), based on the following Bogoliubov-de Gennes model Hamiltonian for a proximitized magnetic TI (MTI) thin film 23,31,61: HBdG(kx, ky) =     HMTI(kx, ky) − μ −iσy(1 + ρz)∆/2 iσy(1 + ρz)∆∗/2 μ − H∗ MTI(−kx, −ky)     , (3) x + k2 y)]ρx + Mzσz, (4) with σx,y,z and ρx,y,z the Pauli matrices acting on the spin and pseudospin (for the top and bottom surfaces) degrees of freedom, respectively, and μ the chemical potential. We set the Dirac velocity ħvD = 3 eV ̊A, top-bottom surface hybridization m0 = −5 meV and m1 = 15 meV ̊A 2, out-of- plane magnetization strength Mz = 50 meV, and proximity-induced s-wave pairing potential ∆ (on nm). These model parameters yield a magnetic gap Egap = 2(Mz − |m0|) = 90 meV, meaning 15 that the magnetic gap edge is located 45 meV above the Dirac point. We consider the chemical potential μ = 25 meV, such that the Fermi level is nearly centred between the Dirac point and the magnetic gap edge. For obtaining a TSC in the region below the SC finger, we introduce a local shift of ∆μ = 75 meV, bringing the local Fermi level well above the magnetic gap. Nonmagnetic (e.g., electrostatic) disorder is considered by adding a Gaussian random field to the on-site energies of the TI thin film near the position of the SC finger, characterized by disorder strength S = 2 meV (i.e., the standard deviation of the Gaussian) and spatial correlation length λ = 10 nm. Note that the model parameters are not reflecting the device properties quantitatively, which would require a scattering region several orders of magnitude larger than currently considered in the simulations (in particular, due to a much larger SC finger size and induced SC coherence length). The aim is to investigate the CAR (ξMTI ≈ WSC) and Majorana interference (ξMTI ≫ WSC) regimes qualitatively. Acknowledgments: We thank Y. Tokura, M. Kawasaki, and R. Yoshimi for their advice on the growth of QAHI films. We thank E. Bocquillon for fruitful discussions. This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant Agreement No. 741121) and was also funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy - Cluster of Excellence Mat- ter and Light for Quantum Computing (ML4Q) EXC 2004/1 - 390534769, as well as under CRC 1238 - 277146847 (Subprojects A04 and B01). G.L. acknowledges the support by the KU Leuven BOF and Re- search Foundation–Flanders (FWO, Belgium), file No. 27531 and No. 52751. K.M. acknowledges the support by the Bavarian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Regional Development and Energy within Bavaria’s 16 High-Tech Agenda Project “Bausteine f ̈ur das Quantencomputing auf Basis topologischer Materialien mit experimentellen und theoretischen Ans ̈atzen” (grant allocation no. 07 02/686 58/1/21 1/22 2/23), by the QuantERA grant MAGMA, and by the German Research Foundation under grant 491798118. H.F.L. ac- knowledges support by the Georg H. Endress Foundation. Author contributions: A.A.T. and Y.A. conceived the project. A.U., G.L, A.B., and A.A.T. grew the thin films. G.L and L.M.C.P analyzed the thin films. A.U. and G.L. fabricated the devices. A.U., G.L., and A.A.T. performed the experiments, and with the help from Y.A. analysed the data. K.M. performed the theoretical simulation. A.A.T. and Y.A. interpreted the data with the help of H.F.L. and K.M. A.U., Y.A., H.F.L. and K.M. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence: Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.A.T. (taskin@ph2.uni- koeln.de) and Y.A. (ando@ph2.uni-koeln.de). Data availability: The data that support the findings of this study are available at the online depository figshare with the identifier **** and Supplementary Information.