Machine Learning Predictions of High-Curie-Temperature Materials Joshua F. Belot,1 Valentin Taufour,2 Stefano Sanvito,3 and Gus L. W. Hart4 1)Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, 84602 2)University of California, Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA, USA, 95616 3)School of Physics, AMBER and CRANN Institute, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland 4)Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA, 84602 (*Electronic mail: gus.hart@byu.edu) (Dated: 14 July 2023) Technologies that function at room temperature often require magnets with a high Curie temperature, TC, and can be improved with better materials. Discovering magnetic materials with a substantial TC is challenging because of the large number of candidates and the cost of fabricating and testing them. Using the two largest known data sets of experimental Curie temperatures, we develop machine-learning models to make rapid TC predictions solely based on the chemical composition of a material. We train a random forest model and a k-NN one and predict on an initial dataset of over 2,500 materials and then validate the model on a new dataset containing over 3,000 entries. The accuracy is compared for multiple compounds’ representations (“descriptors”) and regression approaches. A random forest model provides the most accurate predictions and is not improved by dimensionality reduction or by using more complex descriptors based on atomic properties. A random forest model trained on a combination of both datasets shows that cobalt-rich and iron-rich materials have the highest Curie temperatures for all binary and ternary compounds. An analysis of the model reveals systematic error that causes the model to over-predict low-TC materials and under-predict high-TC materials. For exhaustive searches to find new high-TC materials, analysis of the learning rate suggests either that much more data is needed or that more efficient descriptors are necessary. Ferromagnetic materials are essential in modern technolo- gies especially in energy production and data storage. The threshold temperature where magnetism disappears is called the Curie temperature, TC. Searches for high-TC materials typically look for magnets with a TC of at least 550–600 K, which is required for reliably running an application at room temperature.1,2 High-TC magnets are valuable but rare,1,3,4 in particular when other properties are required on their elec- tronic structure.5 Although some empirical rules for the de- sign of new magnets exist6, rapid predictions of Curie temper- atures could assist in identifying candidate high-TC magnets in large-scale screening exercises. Thousands of known fer- romagnetic materials exist7, and while high-throughput com- putation can help in identifying hundreds of thousands of po- tential magnets, experience suggests that only a fraction of them can actually be realized.3,8–10 Measuring the Curie temperature of a compound is a rel- atively standard and accurate procedure, but of course needs the material to be made first. In contrast, in a computational design process, the TC must be predicted ahead of experi- ments, only using physical and chemical information. This is a complex task prone to large errors. In fact, one needs to compute the elementary magnetic excitations of a com- pound, most typically from density functional theory (DFT), map these on a simple model, usually a Heisenberg-type one, and then perform thermodynamic sampling with Monte Carlo methods.11–26 Then, the choice of DFT functional, the qual- ity and appropriateness of the mapping, and subtleties in the Monte Carlo algorithms, all contribute to a large uncertainty on the predictions. Often this uncertainty is so severe that blind predictions of TC for unknown compounds are almost impossible to make. Machine-learning algorithms capture complex relation- ships in data that may be difficult to recognize or understand.27 Even though machine-learning models often have low interpretability, they can provide cheap Curie tem- perature predictions. Rapid predictions can be a first step in screening computer-suggested materials, so that experimental efforts can be more selective. Algorithms such as ridge regression, kernel ridge re- gression, neural networks, and random forest have been trained on experimental data and used to predict Curie temperatures.1,8,28–34. Most of these studies were limited to specific structural or chemical families, and used a relatively small dataset (< 1800) for training which limited the ability to generalize the results to other less known families. In this work, a random-forest model is trained on an initial dataset of the chemical compositions of over 2,500 ferromagnetic mate- rials1. We then used a larger dataset of ∼ 31007 for a “blind test”, which shows our model to have good generalization. Then we built a model using the combined dataset. This is, by far, the largest dataset to be used in this kind of study. In general, the crystal structure affects the Curie tempera- ture and there have been attempts to incorporate structural in- formation into different machine-learning models with vary- ing degrees of success. In some cases, Curie temperature predictions that utilize known structural data are more ac- curate, in particular when the structural diversity present in the dataset is limited.7,8,29,31,36–38 However, the use of struc- tural information in a larger and more diverse set of data, may have an adverse effect on the TC predictions.1 Furthermore, the lack of available structural information excludes a large portion of experimental data which weakens the model’s pre- dictive power. The use of structural data in training a machine learning model also limits predictions to materials with known structure. In this work, we avoid these problems and exploit our large corpus of magnetic data in DS1 and DS2 by using models and data that do not include structural information. arXiv:2307.06879v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 13 Jul 2023 2 from the 85-dimensional feature space to two dimensions in a t-SNE35 plot. Colors were as- signed based on the majority element in each compound. (b) DS1 represented as a two- dimensional t-SNE plot. Colors were assigned based on the Curie temperature. Two com- pounds, Fe1Ni3 and Cr2Pt3, have anomalously high Curie temperatures, relative to others in the same cluster. In reference , a random forest model was used to predict the Curie temperature based solely on chemical composition. In this work, we first use the same data (DS1) and attempt to improve the predictions by trying different machine-learning models and alternate descriptors. Using the random forest model trained on DS1 to make predictions on a new set of experimental data (DS2),7 we find that the model generalizes quite well but the prediction errors are 90 K (MAE) as com- pared to 69 K (MAE). Next, we combine DS1 and DS2 to build a new model and scan over 100s of thousands of po- tential new magnets. In the process, we find that the errors between the experimental and predicted Curie temperatures 3 from the 85-dimensional feature space to two dimensions in a t-SNE35 plot. Colors were as- signed based on the majority element in each compound. (b) DS2 represented as a two- dimensional t-SNE plot. Colors were assigned based on the Curie temperature. reveal a previously unnoticed systematic error. We cleaned both DS1 and DS2 according to the methods outlined in Ref. . Both datasets had many duplicate com- pounds often with different reported experimental Curie tem- peratures. The duplicates were eliminated by selecting only the median Curie temperature in order to retain an actual mea- sured value of the TC. In DS1, we also added entries for each of the non-magnetic elements found in the data and set the Curie temperature to zero. After cleaning the raw data, DS1 contains the Curie temperatures of 2,557 unique compounds and DS2 contains 3,194. There is an overlap of 1,189 com- pounds between DS1 and DS2. Our feature vector has 85 fea- 4 within 50 K of the actual values and 64% were within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 109 K (A 2-NN model with randomly shuffled TC values gives a MAE of 270 K). (Right) Random forest prediction. 62% of the TC predictions were within 50 K of the actual values and 78% were within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 69 K. (A random forest model with randomly shuffled TC values gives a MAE of 240 K). DS2. 54% of the TC predictions for DS2 were within 50 K of the actual values and 70% were within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 90 K. tures, each one describing a distinct element found in the data. Each compound is characterized by placing the percentage that each element occupies in the compound in the appropri- ate feature. For each machine-learning prediction, a randomly selected third of the compounds in DS1 was used as the test data and the other two thirds were used to train the models. It is not possible to visualize the data in 85 dimensions. However, a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding35 (t- SNE) projection reduces the data to two dimensions and may reveal data clustering. Figure 1(a) shows the t-SNE plot for DS1, where each point is colored by the majority element in the compound. The red circles show areas where compounds with the same majority element cluster together. Figure 1(b) shows the same t-SNE plot but with the colors corresponding to the Curie temperatures of each compound. Each point in these plots represents a magnetic compound in the dataset. A comparison of the two plots reveal that most of the high-TC materials have a majority element of either cobalt or iron. It also shows that there are occasional high-TC spikes in clusters where the TC is typically very low (for example, FeNi3 and Cr2Pt3). Figure 2 shows similar plots for DS2. In Ref. , ridge regression, kernel ridge regression, neural networks, and random-forest machine-learning methods were all tested and the random-forest model made the most accurate predictions. We used DS1 in a k-nearest neighbors model and compared its performance to the accuracy of the random forest model. The k-NN algorithm was varied for 1 to 20 neighbors to determine the optimal k. A k-NN model with 2 neighbors provided best prediction accuracy but was not as good as the random forest (see Fig. 3). To see how well the DS1 random forest model generalizes on unseen data, we did a “blind” test on all the data in DS2 (see Fig. 4). 54% of the predicted Curie temperatures were within 50 K and 70% within 100 K. The mean absolute error was 90 K. This is a larger error than the CV score on DS1 data, however, the model still makes relatively accurate predictions 5 position and 20 of the features generated by the MAST-ML39 Python library. 62% of the TC predictions for DS1 were within 50 K of the actual values and 78% were within 100 K The mean absolute error was 69 K. 57% of the TC predictions for the MAST-ML data were within 50 K of the actual values and 77% were within 100 K The mean absolute error was 70 K. on around 2,000 previously unseen magnets. We also used k- fold cross validation to show how the addition of DS2 data affects our predictive accuracy. 50 iterations of 3-fold cross validation shows that DS1 averages an MAE of 73 K and a standard deviation of 3.2. A combination of DS1 and DS2 averages an MAE of 71 K and a standard deviation of 2.3 While the random-forest results are encouraging, a few dif- ferent strategies were tried to improve the random-forest pre- dictions. One of these strategies is to reduce the number of dimensions in the DS1 design matrix. A random forest was made for a range (5–85) of features using principal compo- nent analysis (PCA). PCA is not helpful to our model because, although noisy, the change in mean absolute error for each dataset shows that the accuracy improves up to about 60 fea- tures and stops improving after that as already observed in Ref. . Another improvement strategy is designing better features. The MAST-ML39 Python library can generate descriptors based on about one hundred atomic properties (such as ionic radius, electronegativity, etc.). Using MAST-ML, we gener- ated 428 features for the compounds in DS1 and selected the top 20 most meaningful ones identified through MAST-ML’s EnsembleModelFeatureSelector method which uses a random forest model to rank feature importance. shows these features used in a random forest and the compar- ison between these predictions and our random forest model predictions in Fig 3. The MAST-ML features yield practi- cally the same accuracy as with the original features. This is somewhat surprising because the MAST-ML descriptors in- corporate many atomic properties, not merely the composi- temperatures of the test data above 600 K were predicted with an accuracy of 37% of the data within 50 K and 49% within 100 K. The mean absolute error for those points was 141 K. and DS2. For each iteration the test data was a new random sample of 850 compounds while the training data was randomly sampled from the remaining data. tion. However, reference shows that the domain knowl- edge in the generated features is not expected to improve pre- diction accuracy over simple fractional features when using large amounts of data. Our results suggest that DS1 is large enough to make an accurate model using our original frac- tional features. While the size of ML model using the MAST- ML descriptors is significantly smaller than the size of the model using the composition-only descriptors, both models have the same accuracy and both are efficient enough to be used in the large searches below. Our final models used the 6 composition-only descriptors. Getting more balanced training data may be another way to improve the model. An analysis of DS1 shows a significant imbalance, 38% of the magnetic materials have a TC 0 − 100 K, while only 15% have a TC 600 − 1400 K. This could lead the model to reduce the prediction error at low temperatures at the expense of making larger errors at high temperatures. This is counter to the purpose of the model, which is that to discover candidate high-TC magnets. Thus, we downsampled the low-TC compounds to more evenly distribute DS1. The re- sulting model is shown in Fig. 6. Even though there is a high density of low-TC compounds, apparently they are necessary for accurate predictions of higher-TC compounds. The bal- anced data predictions for high TC materials are not as good as with the origin model, with an accuracy of 10% less within 50 K, 14% less within 100 K, and the mean absolute error 14 K higher. Let us make one final comment before using the ML model to search for new high-TC. With this unprecedented large database of magnetic compounds, a large range of training set sizes are possible so that the learning rate of the model can be estimated. Figure 7 shows the MAE on a test set of 850 compounds (approximately 1/3 the size of DS1, similar to the predictions in Fig. 3) while the training set is increased, us- ing the remaining data. The process was repeated 100 times and averaged. A linear fit reveals a slope of ≈ −0.22. This learning rate is not particularly fast, but a better learning rate is probably not possible with composition-only descriptors. To reduce the MAE to 50 K in the current model class would require a near tripling of the data. The purpose of the ML model is to enable identification of candidate high-TC materials. Our first attempt was to sweep over compositions of binary materials, but this revealed a sys- tematic error. The error persists independent of the training data (DS1 or DS2), the particular ML method (random forest, k-NN), or the descriptors. Figure 8 compares the predictions with the experimental TC of eight different sets of binary sys- tems. The top four red subplots analyze four different high-TC materials and the four lower blue subplots analyze four differ- ent low-TC materials. Each subplot shows the actual TC value (red points) compared to the ML prediction (black line). A clear pattern emerges: between experimental data points, the ML model, instead of interpolating smoothly, drifts towards the average TC of the training data (293 K). In the case of high- TC materials, deep “valleys” occur in the absence of nearby experimental data. And for low-TC materials, the model tends to overestimate between training points. In a pattern reminis- cent of Gaussian processes, the model tends to “regress toward the mean”. This systematic drift toward the mean can be seen across all the test data in Fig. 9(left), which shows the difference be- tween the predicted and the experimental TC for the test data as a function of the experimental TC (the random forest model using DS1). Intuition suggests that this systematic error could be mitigated simply by shifting and re-scaling according to the black line in the figure. However, the Fig. 9(right) demon- strates that this does not work. The errors and the predicted TC’s are not correlated. The reader should remember that cor- relation is not transitive in general. Although the errors are correlated with the experimental TC’s, and the experimental and predicted TC’s are correlated, the errors and the predicted TC’s are not necessarily correlated. Recognizing the systematic error in predictions and being more interested in the accuracy of high-TC predictions, we trained a random forest model on a combined set of DS1 and DS2 but only included the 967 compounds with TC > 600 K thus boosting the mean of the training data from 293 K to 825 K and mitigating the regression to the mean. Obviously this new model cannot be used to predict low-TC materials but as we are primarily concerned with high-TC materials, this new model with a higher average protects the predictions from straying too far in data-deficient areas. This new high-TC-only model was used to search compo- sition space for all binary and ternary candidate compounds with exceptionally high-TC. The high-TC-only model used only 71 features, restricted to elements that appear in com- pounds with TC > 600 K. Figs 1 and 2 show that most of the highest-TC compounds contain either cobalt, iron, or both. Us- ing these elements, we generated every possible ternary com- bination containing iron, cobalt, and one of the other 69 ele- ments (X1) in 1% increments. The random forest model can rapidly predict TC for this entire set. Figure 10 displays the maximum predicted TC of each combination of cobalt, iron, and X1. While cobalt clearly dominates the high-TC com- pounds, materials with a high iron concentration also are pre- dicted to have a high TC and are worth exploring because iron is much cheaper than cobalt42. Figure 11 shows similar pre- dictions but for iron-rich ternary and binary candidates, which are inexpensive. These predictions suggest that, at least in general, for maximizing TC, it is difficult to beat cobalt-rich materials, and that for minimizing materials cost for a rela- tively high TC, iron-rich materials are difficult to beat. Other searches excluding cobalt and iron were also performed but no competitive materials emerged. Unsuspected high-TC materials sometimes appear. For ex- ample, see FeNi3 and Cr2Pt3 in Fig. 1—these turn up in clus- ters with very low Curie temperatures. But atomic structure, not merely composition, evidently plays an essential role in such materials. Devoid of explicit structure in the training data or the model, our predictions cannot be expected to include such candidates. Our models can learn a major portion of the relationship between chemical composition and Curie temper- ature and thus generally predict quite accurately. But it seems that finding exceptional cases will require data that includes structural information and a model that incorporates explicit relationships between magnetism and structure. As discussed at the beginning, the reliability of such models remains chal- lenging, and corresponding data is limited, so computational discovery of new high-TC remains an outstanding challenge. a. Supplementary Material The supplementary material includes two error plots from the 2-NN predictions shown in the left plot of Fig. 3. It also includes a plot of the number of features reduced by PCA vs. the MAE of the predictions made by a random forest model using that number of features. b.