1 Synergistic Niobium Doped Two- Dimensional Zirconium Diselenide: An Efficient Electrocatalyst for O2 Reduction Reaction Ashok Singh1 and Srimanta Pakhira1,2* 1 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India. 2 Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics and Advanced Computational Materials Science Laboratory, Centre for Advanced Electronics (CAE), Indian Institute of Technology Indore (IIT Indore), Simrol, Khandwa Road, Indore-453552, Madhya Pradesh, India. *Corresponding author: spakhira@iiti.ac.in (or) spakhirafsu@gmail.com ABSTRACT The development of high-activity and low-price cathodic catalysts to facilitate the electrochemical sluggish O2 reduction reaction (ORR) is very important to achieve the commercial application of fuel cells. Here, we have investigated the electrocatalytic activity of two- dimensional single-layer Nb-doped zirconium diselenide (2D Nb-ZrSe2) towards ORR by employing the dispersion corrected Density Functional Theory (DFT-D) method. Through our study, we computed structural properties, electronic properties, and energetics of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 and ORR intermediates to analyze the electrocatalytic performance of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2. The electronic properties calculations depict that the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 has a large band gap of 1.48 eV, which is not favorable for the ORR mechanism. After the doping of Nb, the electronic band gap vanishes and 2D Nb-ZrSe2 acts as a conductor. We studied both the dissociative and associative pathways through which the ORR can proceed to reduce the oxygen molecule (O2). Our results show that the more favorable path for O2 reduction on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 2 is the 4e- associative path. The detailed ORR mechanisms (both associated and dissociative) have been explored by computing the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG). All the ORR reaction intermediate’s steps are thermodynamically stable and energetically favorable. The free energy profile for the associative path shows the downhill behavior of the free energy vs. the reaction steps, suggesting that all ORR intermediate structures are catalytically active for the 4e- associative path and a high 4e- reduction pathway selectivity. Therefore, 2D Nb-ZrSe2 is a promising catalyst for the ORR which can be used as an alternative ORR catalyst compared with expensive platinum (Pt). INTRODUCTION The escalating global population and the ongoing advancements in global industrialization and society have led to a significant surge in global energy demand. Nowadays a great part of the energy demand over the world is fulfilled by fossil fuels.1 However, the bitter truth is that the traditional resources of fossil fuels are in danger of being depleted with indefinite extraction and utilization.1 In addition to this, the consumption of fossil fuels results in the emission of pollutants. So, the concern about the energy crisis, environmental pollution, and climate change have put at risk the future of human society.2 The gradual exhaustion of fossil fuels and the detrimental impact on the environment caused by pollution have provoked scientists and researchers over the world to develop renewable, sustainable, eco-friendly, and highly efficient energy resources.3 Renewable energy systems including fuel cells and metal-air batteries are efficient solutions to reduce environmental issues and alleviate the energy demand. These technologies are primarily realized in the water cycle. The fuel cell has gained significant attention among the alternatives to fossil fuels due to its impressive conversion efficiency, reliable performance, fast startup, operation at low temperatures, and minimal emissions. The fuel cell converts chemical energy directly into electricity without the emission of pollutants. In other words, Hydrogen (H2), which is generated by harvesting sustainable solar and wind energies, is used as input and results in power generation with absolutely zero emission.4 So, fuel cells are the ideal choice for energy conversion and power sources for a healthy and sustainable future. The fuel cell relies on some of the electrochemical reactions such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER,) ORR and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) reactions. However, the practical growth of fuel cells has been extensively hindered by the inherent 3 thermodynamic limitation of the ORR.5 To utilize the ideal performance of the fuel cell, it is necessary to hasten the kinetics of ORR. So, today’s demand is to develop an active material that can serve as an efficient catalyst and would assist to accelerate the kinetics of the cathodic reaction. To date, Platinum (Pt) and Pt-based materials serve as a suitable catalyst for the reduction of O2 at the cathode in the fuel cell.6–8 Moreover, a sizable overpotential higher than 0.20 V is observed, even with the state-of-art Pt-based catalyst.9 The utilization of Pt catalysts account for approximately 40-50% of the total cost associated with fuel cell stacks.10 So, the cost of the fuel cell imposes serious limitations on the commercialization of the fuel cell. Moreover, the shortage of noble metals in the earth’s crust and their insufficient stability towards the byproducts hinder their widespread applications in modern science and technology. Thus, mass production of such types of electrocatalysts is not feasible. Mainly the mass production of the ORR catalysts is impeded by the following three limitations: (1) the high cost:10 currently, the Pt has been recognized as an effective catalyst in the fuel cells, which has a limited reserve and has resulted from the high cost of the fuel cells; (2) low performance:11 another factor is the deficiency of the active sites on the catalyst. To actively use the efficiency of the fuel cells, it is necessary to fabricate a catalyst with a large number of active sites and specific selectivity; (3) poor stability:12 another factor, which is the cause of the degradation of fuel cell performance, is the stability of the catalysts towards the byproducts formed during the operation of the fuel cell. The quest for enhanced catalysts for the ORR has sparked advancements in the identification of non-precious metal-based catalysts that exhibit superior catalytic activity compared to Pt. In this pursuit, researchers have explored various metals both in their pure state and through the process of alloying with other metals. Pt, Pd, Au, Ag, and Ni clusters are to be effective to catalyze oxygen reduction in their pure form.13 Wang et al. have extensively documented the efficacy of synergistic Mn-Co catalysts in facilitating high-rate ORR.14 Numerous recent studies have provided substantial evidence to support the exceptional catalytic properties of metal oxides and sulfides in the context of ORR, which gives efficiency as good as the state of art Pt/C catalyst.15,16 Although metal catalysts have demonstrated excellent catalytic activity but considering the low availability of metal in the earth’s crust and huge cost, the expansion of a cheap and efficient catalyst is a paramount need for realizing the practical applications of fuel cells. As a typical earth-abundant material, transition-metal compounds such as transition metal oxide, metal chalcogenides, metal phosphides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, etc. have been 4 widely used as promising catalysts for electrochemical mechanisms in fuel cells and energy conversion applications.17 Among all the transition metal compounds, two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D TMDs) have gained significant interest as a catalyst for electrochemical reactions. The unique properties of 2D TMDs which make them suitable for the catalyst are: (1) large surface area: the 2D TMDs have a high surface-to-volume ratio which provides a large density of active sites; (2) stability and thermal conductivity: as the 2D TMDs have only planar covalent bonding, they show excellent mechanical strength and remarkable resilience, and thermal conductivity enables efficient dispersion of heat generated during exothermic reactions; (3) tunable electronic properties: the electronic properties of the 2D TMDs materials can be tailored by creating defects, doping, stress, etc.18 The electronic properties in turn tailor the catalytic performance of the materials. Owing to the above properties the 2D TMDs are good candidates for the electrocatalyst of electrochemical reactions. In the wide family of 2D TMDs, 2D MoS2 has emerged as a highly investigated material due to its remarkable catalytic capabilities.19 MoS2 has been considered a promising non-noble HER catalyst but only the edge site shows high HER activity.20,21 In other words, experimental and computational studies confirm that the electrocatalyst activity of MX2 (where M is transition metal atoms and X is chalcogens) is closely correlated with the edge side while the basal plane with a large area is generally inactive.22,23 To the best of our knowledge, the optimization of both active site and electronic properties of 2D MX2 electrocatalysis is highly required. As we know the basal plane of 2D TMDs constitutes a large surface area, therefore if the inert basal planes could be activated, high electrocatalytic activity would be expected. To activate the inert basal plane and tailor the electronic properties, various strategies have been developed such as creating defects,24,25 metal doping,26,27 nonmetal substitution, strain engineering,28 phase engineering, etc.29 Among all the strategies, substitutional doping is considered a suitable technique as it provides long-term stability without degrading performance. The dopant atoms change the spin-density distribution around them, which would change the strength of O2 adsorption and other reaction species. So, the ORR process can be performed on the surface of 2D TMDs near the appropriate doping atoms. For instance, Xiao et al. theoretically demonstrated the favorable catalytic activity of Co/Ni-doped 2D MoS2 towards ORR.30 Pumera et al. put forward the idea that introducing Fe and Mn dopants into the 2D MoS2 can promote its catalytic activity in the context ORR.31 Recently, Singh and Pakhira computationally analyzed that 2D monolayer Pt-doped ZrS2 exhibits a superior catalytic activity 5 towards ORR.27 Moreover, the doping of MoS2 by heteroatoms such as P and N exhibits moderate adsorption strength of oxygen molecules and enhances the ORR.32,33 In a recent study by Tain and Tang , it was discovered that the addition of Ni or Co to materials such as 1T-TiS2, 2H-TiS2, 1T- ZrS2, 1T-NbS2, and 2H-TaS2 results in a promising electrocatalytic activity for the ORR. The overpotential required for ORR on these doped materials was found to be within the range of 0.32- 0.55 V, which is comparable to that of the most advanced electrocatalysts currently available (i.e., Pt).34 It has been shown that the 2D monolayer ZrSe2 is a new material of TMDs and has been successfully prepared experimentally and it has 1T phase as a stable structure.35–37 Moreover, earlier predictions show that at low vacancy density, the ZrSe2 and ZrTe2 TMDs have a low value of hydrogen adsorption energy (ΔEH) and the value of ΔG is very close to that of Pt.38 In a recent theoretical study, Som and Jha showed an important observation regarding the catalytic activity of both the 2D single layer ZrS2 and ZrSe2 materials. They found that the edge sites of these materials, rather than the basal planes, play a crucial role in accelerating the HER. To further enhance the HER kinetics, the researchers decided to introduce the Nb, Pt, and W dopants in both the 2D ZrS2 and ZrSe2 materials. Interestingly, they discovered that the 2D Nb- doped systems, namely Nb-ZrS2 and Nb-ZrSe2, exhibited a robust metallic nature, which significantly boosted their catalytic activity towards HER. Furthermore, they observed that, on the basis of ΔG calculations, 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 has the best catalytic activity towards HER.39 In addition, 2D ZrS2 possesses important characteristics that make it a favorable choice. It is non- toxic, affordable, and exhibits strong resistance to corrosion. Furthermore, it has been successfully synthesized on a large scale and experimented with in the form of thin atomic layers.40 In the context of sulfur/selenium-based ZrS2 or ZrSe2 TMDs, the presence of S or Se with a 2− valence (S2− or Se2−) enhances the reduction capacity, thereby promoting the activity of the ORR. Motivated by the extensive research attention and extraordinary catalytic activity of the Nb-doped ZrSe2 toward HER, it is the fundamental interest to explore the more catalytic applications of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In this work, a DFT-D calculation is performed to explore the catalytic activity of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR. In principle, we aimed to answer these questions: how the doping of Nb alters the structural and electronic properties of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2? Do the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 catalyst acts as an efficient ORR catalyst? If yes, which path it will follow to reduce the O2? To answer these questions, we have analyzed the structural and electronic properties of 2D Nb-ZrSe2 and examined the changes of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) for all ORR 6 intermediates at their minimum-energy condition. This study addresses some unique properties of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 and suggests that it can act as an efficient and useful catalyst for the ORR mechanism. Thus, this 2D Nb-ZrSe2 can serve as an efficient cathodic catalyst in fuel cells and metal-air batteries. THEORY, METHODOLOGY, AND COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS The ORR has an essential role in the functioning of fuel cells. These electrochemical devices are designed to convert the chemical energy of the fuel, typically hydrogen (H2), directly into electrical energy. The working principle of the fuel cell can be defined as follows:41,42 hydrogen is produced by the electrocatalytic cell as fuel is brought into the anode side of the fuel cell. At the anode side, H2 undergoes a reaction resulting in the generation of electrons and protons: H2 → 2H+ + 2e− The protons (H+) pass through the membrane, while the accompanying electrons travel through the electric circuit. They combine together at the cathode side of the fuel cell with oxygen. At the cathode, oxygen is reduced to water by reacting with H+ and e- through the electrochemical reaction:43,44 2H+ + 1 2 O2 + 2e− → H2O All these processes rely on some electrochemical reactions. Among them ORR is one of the reactions at the cathode which reduces oxygen molecule to water. ORR reaction involves oxygen diffusion, i.e., the O2 adsorption on the surface of the catalysts followed by the H+ + e- transfer processes to reduce the O2 into water. The oxygen reduction in acidic media mainly occurs through two different pathways:-45,46 either a four-electron reduction pathway from O2 to H2O or two electron pathway from O2 to H2O2. Direct 4e- reduction: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O Eo = 1.23 eV Indirect reduction: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2 Eo = 0.68 eV H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O Eo = 1.77 eV The indirect 2e- pathway produces corrosive peroxide (H2O2) intermediates, which may corrode the catalytic surface, hence there would be concern about the stability of the fuel cell. Moreover, 7 the formation of H2O2 hinders the process and kinetics of ORR reaction but also deteriorates polymer membrane by generating reactive radicals. Thus, four electron pathway is preferred and considered more efficient than that of the two-electron pathway. Based on how the O=O bond breaks, the 4e- pathway can be divided into two different reaction pathways:47 (1) O2 decomposition pathway: in this path the O2 is adsorbed on the surface of catalyst and followed by the cleavage of O2 bond. Then, it involves a series of electron-proton transfer reactions to reduce O2 into water. The detail reaction steps can be described as follows: O2 +∗ → O2 ∗ O2 ∗ → 2O∗ (2) OOH dissociation path: the O2* reacts with H+ and e- coming from anode side to form OOH*. Then, cleavage of the O=O bond occurs into O* and OH*. After that, the hydrogenation of the O* occurs to form the next OH*. Finally, the removal of H2O occurs from the surface of the catalyst. The details can be described as follows: O2 ∗ + H+ + e− → OOH∗ OOH∗ → O∗ + OH∗ O∗ + H+ + e− → OH∗ OH∗ + H+ + e− → H2O Where the asterisk * denotes the adsorption site. In summary, we can say that the ORR reaction basically relies on the cleavage of O=O bond and protonation of the ORR intermediates. The catalytic potential of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 towards ORR is measured combinedly by computing and analyzing the adsorption energy with the values of ΔG of each intermediate species during the subject reaction. We used computational hydrogen electrode (CHE) method to calculate the adsorption energy and the values of ΔG of each intermediate. In this method, the energies are calculated under the standard conditions (pH=0, p=1 bar, T=298.15 K, and U=0 V). We have implemented the approach introduced by Nørskov et al. in our study. Their research showcased a significant finding that the chemical potential of H+ + e- can be correlated with 1/2 H2 in the gaseous state, which was determined using the standard hydrogen electrode.9 Consequently, under 8 the standard conditions, we can calculate the energy change of the reaction A + H → A + H+ + e- by employing the reaction A + H → A + 1/2 H2. The adsorption (or binding) energies (ΔE) presented in this study has been calculated as the energy difference between the energy of the model with adsorbed species [Eslab+adsorbate] and the energy of the catalytic model [Eslab] and the energy of the adsorbate [Eadsorbate] according to the following equation:48 ΔE = Eslab+adsorbate − Eslab − Eadsorbate Negative adsorption energy indicates that the adsorbed oxygen intermediates are attached to the catalytic surface stably. In other words, a negative adsorption energy signifies that the adsorbate is likely to bind energetically to the catalyst's surface, indicating a favorable interaction between them. Therefore, negative adsorption energy is favorable for elementary reactions over the catalytic surface. The value of ΔG in each reaction step was evaluated as:49,50 ΔG = ΔE + ΔEZPE − TΔS Where ΔE denotes the adsorption energy obtained from the DFT-D calculations of the equilibrium structures and ΔEZPE and ΔS represent the change in zero-point energy and entropy correction, respectively. T denotes the room temperature 298.15 K in this calculation. For all the systems studied here (i.e., ZrSe2, Nb-ZrSe2, and ORR intermediates), the equilibrium atomic configuration, structures, electronic properties, and energetics were obtained by using the spin-unrestricted B3LYP DFT framework implemented in CRYSTAL17 suite code.51 To account the weak non-bonding van der Waals (vdW) interactions between the reactants or intermediates and the interface, we incorporated the damped vdW dispersion correction (-D3) within the framework of density functional theory (DFT), specifically known as DFT-D3. This approach was developed by Grimme and co-workers.52 A 2x2 supercell of the 2D monolayer structure of the pristine ZrSe2 was considered and one Zr atom was substituted by one Nb atom to form the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 structure, and all the ORR reaction steps on the surface of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 were investigated in the present study. We have utilized the Gaussian types of atomic basis sets to define the atomic orbitals, which have been found to yield more precise outcomes compared to plane wave basis sets.53,54 In simpler terms, although the computational procedure differs from the plane wave code (i.e., VASP, Quantum Espresso), both approaches are yielding identical results. In the realm of hybrid density functionals, localized Gaussian basis set codes are 9 inherently well-suited for addressing the Hartree-Fock (HF) component of the outcome.51,55 For the Zr, Se, O, H, and Nb atoms, triple-zeta valance polarized (TZVP) Gaussian basis set were used in the present calculations.56,57 We employed full optimization process i.e., all atomic coordinates and lattice parameters were allowed to relax during geometry optimization. The convergence criterion for the self-consistent field (SCF) was established as a total energy difference of 10-7 a.u. between two consecutive iterations. The threshold controlling of the coulomb exchange integral calculation were controlled by the five-threshold set 7, 7, 7, 7 (ITOL1 to ITOL4) and 14(ITOL5) for both the geometry optimization and electronic property calculations. The CRYSTAL17 code utilizes the default threshold for geometry optimization on all atoms, employing specific values for maximum and RMS force (0.000450 a.u. and 0.00300 a.u., respectively) and maximum and RMS displacement (0.001800 a.u. and 0.001200 a.u., respectively). To ensure accurate 2D monolayer i.e., SLAB calculations using the CRYSTAL17 code, we have established a separation of 500 Å in the normal surface direction of the 2D monolayer Nb-ZrSe2 along Z-direction where is no symmetry.27,58 This distance effectively prevents any spurious interactions between the periodic images of the monolayer slab. Our current calculations indicate that this separation is sufficient to mitigate any undesired influences. To perform the integration within the Brillouin zone, we have used 16x16x1 k-mesh in the Monkhorst pack scheme59 for the pristine 2D ZrSe2, Nb -ZrSe2, and all the reaction intermediates for both the geometry optimization and electronic property calculations. The electronic band structure was constructed along high symmetry k-path direction Ґ-M-K-Ґ of the corresponding irreducible Brillouin zone. All the equilibrium structures with the images were plotted by using VESTA software.60 10 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The equilibrium structure of the 2D monolayer ZrSe2, which is the main object of this present work, belongs to 1T phase (i.e., one atom of Zr is octahedrally coordinated by six atoms of Se) as shown in Figure 1-2. By using VESTA software, a 2D monolayer ZrSe2 primitive cell was computationally designed, and a model system has been developed for further studies, and the structure was optimized by using the first principle-based periodic dispersion-correction hybrid DFT (DFT-D3, noted by B3LYP-D3) method as shown in Figure 1. The structure is a trigonal 2D slab system with P3m1 layer group 11 12 symmetry, and the computed unit cell parameters i.e., the lattice constants are about a = b = 3.75 Å of the 2D pristine monolayer ZrSe2 which is well consistent with the previously reported values.39,40 Each unit cell consists of one Zr and one Se atom as shown in Figure 1-2. In Figure 2, the computed equilibrium average bond length Zr-Se between the Zr and Se atoms is about 2.68 Å. The corresponding bond angles ∠ZrSeZr and ∠SeZrSe are estimated to be 88.99 ̊ and 91.00 ̊, respectively. Then, the doped system is constructed by substituting one Zr atom with one transition metal Nb per 2x2 supercell of the 2D monolayer pristine ZrSe2 as illustrated in Figure 1. The doping was defined by the following equations: Ɵ = number of doping atom per 2x2 supercell number of total metal atom in 2x2 supercell So, the Nb dopant atom amounts to 25% (only metal atom doping) atomic substitution in per 2x2 supercell of the 2D ZrSe2. The 2D monolayer structure of Nb-ZrSe2 consists of one Nb, three Zr, and eight Se atoms per one unit cell as represented in Figure 2. The 2D Nb-ZrSe2 system is then fully relaxed with respect to both atomic coordinates and cell parameters by the same level of DFT-D method during optimization. The equilibrium structure of the 2D Nb-ZrSe2 material System Lattice parameters (Å) Interfacial angle in degree Layer group and symmetry Average bond length