Super-tetragonal Sr4Al2O7: a versatile sacrificial layer for high-integrity freestanding oxide membranes Jinfeng Zhang1,9, Ting Lin2,9, Ao Wang1,9, Xiaochao Wang3,9, Qingyu He4, Huan Ye1, Jingdi Lu1, Qing Wang1, Zhengguo Liang1, Feng Jin1, Shengru Chen2, Minghui Fan1, Er-Jia Guo2, Qinghua Zhang2, Lin Gu5, Zhenlin Luo4, Liang Si3,6*, Wenbin Wu1,7,8*, and Lingfei Wang1* 1Hefei National Research Center for Physical Sciences at Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China 2Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 3School of Physics, Northwest University, Xi'an 710127, China 4National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. 5Beijing National Center for Electron Microscopy and Laboratory of Advanced Materials, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 6Institut für Festkörperphysik, TU Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria. 7Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, China. 8Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China 9These authors contributed equally: Jinfeng Zhang, Ting Lin, Ao Wang, and Xiaochao Wang. *Email: liang.si@ifp.tuwien.ac.at; wuwb@ustc.edu.cn; wanglf@ustc.edu.cn Abstract Releasing the epitaxial oxide heterostructures from substrate constraints leads to the emergence of various correlated electronic phases and paves the way for integrations with advanced semiconductor technologies. Identifying a suitable water-soluble sacrificial layer, compatible with the high-quality epitaxial growth of oxide heterostructures, is currently the key to the development of large-scale freestanding oxide membranes. In this study, we unveil the “super-tetragonal” Sr4Al2O7 (SAOT) as a promising water-soluble sacrificial layer. The distinct low-symmetric crystal structure of SAOT enables a superior capability to sustain epitaxial strain, thus allowing for broad tunability in lattice constants. The resultant structural coherency and defect-free interface in perovskite ABO3/SAOT heterostructures effectively restrain crack formations during the water-assisted release of freestanding oxide membranes. For a variety of non-ferroelectric oxide membranes, the crack-free areas can span up to a few millimeters in length scale. These compelling features, combined with the inherent high-water solubility, make SAOT a versatile and feasible sacrificial layer for producing high-quality freestanding oxide membranes, thereby boosting their potential for innovative oxide electronics and flexible device designs. Transition-metal oxide-based heterostructures are characterized by a vast of emergent interfacial phenomena, stimulated by the coupling of spin, charge, orbital, and lattice degrees of freedom at the heterointerfaces1,2. Examples include 2-dimensional electron/hole gas3, interfacial superconductivity4, improper ferroelectricity5, magnetic/polar skyrmions6,7, etc. Although these interfacial phenomena hold rich physics and functionalities8–10, the strong covalent bonds at film/substrate interfaces largely limit their integrations with other low-dimensional material systems, thus hindering the potential device applications11,12. In recent years, freestanding oxide membrane exfoliating and transferring technologies developed rapidly13–17. Among these advancements, the water-assisted exfoliation of freestanding oxide membranes using cubic Sr3Al2O6 (SAOC) epitaxial sacrificial layers has emerged as one of the most prominent and feasible approaches14. Since its discovery in 2016, SAOC has significantly boosted research on integrating ABO3 perovskite oxide heterostructures with Van de Waals materials and advanced semiconductor technologies, signifying a great potential for next-generation electronic/spintronic devices18–20. Moreover, SAOC provides a step forward in exploiting fascinating functionalities that exclusively exist in the freestanding membrane form, including ferroelastic domain transformation-induced superelasticity21,22, ferroelectricity in the monolayer limit23, correlated electronic phase under extreme tensile strain24,25, novel lateral twisting/boundary states26,27, and high-density switchable polar skyrmions28. Despite these exciting advancements, the crystallinity and integrity of the freestanding oxide membranes remain unsatisfactory compared to the typical Van de Waals materials like graphene and transition-metal dichalcogenides29,30. Particularly for the non-ferroelectric (non-FE) oxides, the water-assisted release processes are often accompanied by degraded crystalline coherent length and high-density crack formation31–34. Millimeter-sized crack-free membranes were rarely achieved24,25. Such brittle fractures in released oxide membranes can be attributed to two main factors: 1) the intrinsic structural characteristics, including strong ionic/covalence bonds and lack of slip system; 2) extrinsic defect formation due to unavoidable interfacial lattice mismatch and strain relaxation34–37. Because of the strong electron correlation nature, such unwilling structural changes also lead to considerate degradations of physical properties in freestanding oxide membranes, limiting their potential in next-generation electronic device applications. Facing this challenge, several new sacrificial layer materials have been developed recently, aiming to reduce the interfacial lattice mismatch and crack density. But the improvement is still limited by the discrete lattice constants, poor solubility, or non-generic etchant13,37–39. In this work, we systematically explored the growth phase diagram of SAOC films and discovered a new Sr4Al2O7 phase (denoted as SAOT). The biaxial-strained SAOT film has a tetragonal structural symmetry and Sr-rich stoichiometry, distinct from the well-recognized cubic SAOC phase. Such a low-symmetric crystal structure of SAOT enables superior flexibility under epitaxial strain and thus a wide-range tunability of in-plane lattice constants. The resultant coherent growth of high-quality ABO3/SAOT epitaxial heterostructures considerably improves the crystallinity and integrity of water-released freestanding oxide membranes. For the widely-investigated non-FE nickelates, manganites, titanates, ruthenates, and stannates with a broad lattice constant range (3.85~4.04 Å), the crack-free areas of the membranes released from SAOT can span up to a few millimeters in scale. The corresponding functionalities can be comparable to the epitaxial counterparts. Moreover, the unique atomic structure of SAOT lead to an inherent high water-solubility, thus ensuring an effective water-assisted exfoliation process. These compelling advantages make SAOT film a versatile and viable water-soluble sacrificial layer for fabricating a broad array of high-quality freestanding oxide membranes, which offer fertile grounds for the development of innovative electronic devices. Growth window of SAOT films The strontium aluminate (SAO, including SAOC and SAOT) thin films and ABO3/SAO multilayer heterostructures were epitaxially grown by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). We first grow the SAO films by laser ablation of a polycrystalline stoichiometric SAOC target (the molar ratio Sr:Al:O = 3:2:6) on (001)-oriented epitaxial quality and stoichiometry of the SAO films predominantly depend on two parameters: oxygen partial pressure (PO2) and laser fluence (FL). During the growth of a series of SAO films, we altered the PO2 from 10−4 to 20 Pa and adjusted the FL from 2.5 to 1.0 J/cm2. A full set of x-ray diffraction (XRD) 2θ-ω scans of SAO/LSAT(001) films near the LSAT(002) diffraction are shown in Supplementary Fig. 1, and two representative curves are shown in Fig. 1a. Most curves exhibit a clear film diffraction peak near 45.8°, in line with previously reported SAOC(008) diffractions14. The out-of-plane d-spacing of SAOC(008) and peak intensity are summarized in Supplementary Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. Based on these parameters and the sharpness of Laue fringes, we can evaluate the epitaxial quality of SAO films and construct the growth phase diagram (Fig. 1b). Using the stoichiometric SAOC target, SAOC films can grow well within a dome-like FL-PO2 range, consistent with the large variety of SAOC growth conditions reported in the literature13. Film deposition beyond the FL-PO2 boundaries mostly leads to off-stoichiometry and poor crystallinity. However, within a narrow window near FL = 1.0 J/cm2 and PO2 = 5 Pa, sharp Laue fringes reemerge and the SAO diffraction unexpectedly shifts to a much lower Bragg angle of ~41.8° (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 4), signifying the emergence of a new structural phase, denoted as SAOT. Subsequent structure characterizations further reveal that the epitaxial quality of the SAOT film is comparable to the optimized SAOC films (Supplementary Fig. 5). Using energy-dispersive spectroscopy measurements, we further confirmed that the Sr:Al molar ratio of SAOT films is ~2.05, close to the nominal value of a Sr4Al2O7 compound (Supplementary Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 6). The large deviation in chemical stoichiometry between the SAOT film and SAOC (Sr:Al ~ 1.51) target should relate to the kinetic processes during the laser ablation and deposition in such a narrow LF-PO2 window (see Supplementary Section 1 for detailed discussions). Accordingly, we refined the film deposition using a Sr4Al2O7 target and substantially expanded the growth window of high-quality SAOT film (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Fig. 7). The wide PO2 range (10-4 ~ 20 Pa) and FL range (1.0 ~ 3.0 J/cm2) should align with the capabilities of most research groups using PLD systems. We further characterized the epitaxial strain states of the SAOC and SAOT films through the reciprocal diffractions have unequal in-plane and out-of-plane reciprocal space vectors (Qx and Qz). Both the in-plane and out-of-plane lattice constants in pseudocubic perovskite notation derived from the RSMs are 3.96 Å (a* SAO-C). The a* SAO-C value is the same as that of bulk SAOC, signifying a fully-relaxed epitaxial strain. For the SAOT/LSAT(001) film (Fig. 1e), however, the elongated SAOT(2218) diffraction shares the same Qx with that of the LSAT(103) diffraction, demonstrating a coherent strain state. The in-plane and out-of-plane lattice constants in pseudocubic perovskite notation (a* SAO-T and c* SAO-T) are 3.87 and 4.32 Å, respectively. Such a biaxially- and compressively-strained SAOT/LSAT(001) film is expected to show a tetragonal symmetry (Supplementary Figs. 8-10). The tetragonality (c/a ratio) reaches a significant value up to ~1.12. Drawing an analogy to the compressive-strain-induced isosymmetric phase transition in BiFeO3 films40, we suggest that the SAOT phase could be a “super-tetragonal” structural polymorph, featuring dramatic atomic arrangement changes from the parent SAOC. The ability to sustain epitaxial strain seems to be the most prominent feature of the newly discovered SAOT phase. For the SAOT/LSAT(001) films, the coherent strain state can be maintained up to 100 nm thick (Supplementary Fig. 11). The resultant structural coherency further ensures a sharp and defect-free SAOT/LSAT(001) interface (Supplementary Fig. 12). In addition to the LSAT(001), high-quality SAOT film can be epitaxially grown on and coherently strained to a variety of (001)-oriented ABO3 perovskite substrates (Supplementary Fig. 13). As summarized in Fig. 1f, the in-plane lattice constant a* SAO-T can be continuously adjusted in a wide range from 3.84 Å [grown on SrLaGaO4(001)] to 3.95 Å [grown on DyScO3(001)]. Further, by introducing Ba and Ca doping to the SAOT, we successfully grow coherently-strained Ba2Sr2Al2O7/KTaO3(001) and Ca2Sr2Al2O7/LaAlO3(001) films (Supplementary Fig. 14). Consequently, the strain-tuning range of a* SAO-T is expanded to 3.79~3.99 Å. More interestingly, the structure coherency can be maintained even in the (110)-oriented SAOT films grown on SrLaGaO4(100) substrate, in which an elongated c-axis lying in-plane (Supplementary Fig. 15). Such superior strain adaptability, rarely observed in the SAOC counterparts, should be an inherent property of SAOT, stemming from its distinctive crystal structure. Crystal structure of SAOT After identifying the compelling structural flexibility of SAOT, we turn to probe its structural differences with SAOC at the atomic scale using cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). As shown in Fig. 2a,b, the STEM image of the epitaxial SAOC/LSAT(001) film measured in high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) mode displays a rhombus-like contrast along the LSAT zone axis, stemming from alternating “B-site” cations (Sr and Al) and regularly ordered oxygen/cation vacancies14. As schematically depicted in Fig. 2c, such a cation ordering quadruples the lattice constant of SAOC (aSAO-C) compared to that of cubic ABO3 perovskite. In sharp contrast, the HAADF-STEM images of the SAOT film along LSAT zone-axis (Fig. 2d,e) display a perovskite-like atomic contrast and an intensity modulation along the out-of-plane axis. The “A-site” atomic columns exhibit higher intensity alternatively for every three perovskite-like unit-cells (see Supplementary Fig. 16 for details). More interestingly, the HAADF-STEM image captured along the LSAT zone axis (Fig. 2f) displays a complex cation ordering: “A-sites” are fully occupied and display a similar 3 unit-cell intensity modulations, while the “B-sites” are alternatively occupied and show a blurry in-plane intensity modulation. We now determine the atomic structure of the SAOT phase based on the STEM images and density-functional-theory (DFT) calculations. To the best of our knowledge, none of the reported strontium aluminates can match the STEM and XRD results. We searched numerous possible structure candidates and eventually found that the SAOT could share a similar atomic structure and orthorhombic symmetry as the Ba4Al2O7 compound41. DFT-level structure relaxations further confirm that this orthorhombic Sr4Al2O7 unit-cell is thermodynamically stable, with simulated lattice constants aSAO-T = 10.798 Å, bSAO-T = 11.238 Å, and cSAO-T = 25.732 Å (See Methods and Supplementary Section 2 for details). The atomic arrangements of simulated SAOT (Sr4Al2O7) unit-cell viewed along both SAOT and axes match perfectly with the HAADF-STEM image along LSAT zone-axis (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 17). Hence, the epitaxial relationship of coherently-grown SAOT/LSAT(001) films should be SAOT//LSAT and SAOT//LSAT (Supplementary Fig. 18). Assuming that the SAOT unit-cell is 2√2×2√2×6 times as large as the cubic perovskite unit-cell (Fig. 2g), we can obtain the reduced lattice constants as a* SAO-T = b* SAO-T = 3.896 Å, and c* SAO-T = 4.288 Å. These simulated values are very close to those derived from the XRD results (Supplementary Table 2), further supporting the validity of our proposed structure. For the SAOT films grown on cubic substrates [e.g. LSAT(001) or STO(001)], the biaxial strain could convert the lattice symmetry from orthorhombic to tetragonal. For the films grown on orthorhombic substrates [e.g. NdGaO3(001) or DyScO3(001)], the original orthorhombic symmetry preserves (Supplementary Fig. 10). The unique atomic structure of SAOT also plays a deterministic role in enabling the coherent epitaxial strain at ABO3/SAOT interfaces. To address this point, we first performed DFT calculations on the relative energy changes (ΔE) of SAOC and SAOT unit-cells under manually-imposed bi-axial and anisotropic strain (See Methods Section for details). As shown in Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Fig. 19, for both biaxial and anisotropic strain configurations, the ΔE calculated from SAOT is consistently smaller than that of SAOC. Namely, the low-symmetry SAOT unit-cell is more flexible to accommodate the misfit strain imposed by either cubic or orthorhombic substrates, while the cubic SAOC unit-cell could be more rigid against strain-induced lattice distortion. Moreover, we also constructed SAOC/STO(001) and SAOT/STO(001) heterostructures as model systems (Supplementary Fig. 20) and evaluated their interfacial bonding strength through DFT calculation. As shown in Fig. 3c, the DFT-calculated bonding energy at SAOT/STO(001) interface (1.97 eV) is more than twice higher than that at SAOC/STO(001) interfaces (0.82 eV), and even comparable with that at LaAlO3/STO interface (2.34 eV). Such a strong interfacial bonding strength and the inherent structural flexibility make SAOT a versatile structure template for the coherent growth of various oxide films. From the perspective of water-soluble sacrificial layers, it could be the key to minimizing the interfacial misfit strain and improving the quality of exfoliated freestanding oxide membranes. Freestanding oxide membranes released from SAOT We now examine the potential of SAOT as a water-soluble sacrificial layer. An “optimal” water-soluble sacrificial layer must satisfy three key requirements. Firstly, it must enable the successful growth of target oxide films. The high crystallinity and integrity should be maintained in the freestanding membranes after the lift-off and transfer processes. Secondly, the representative functionalities of the exfoliated freestanding oxide membranes should be comparable to those grown epitaxially on single-crystalline substrates. Lastly, it should dissolve easily in water, allowing efficient membrane exfoliation within reasonable durations. To evaluate these criteria for the SAOT film, we correspondingly grow several typical perovskite oxide films on both SAOT and SAOC epitaxial films, and then conduct comparative studies on the integrity, crystallinity, functionalities, and exfoliation speed of the freestanding membranes. We first performed comparative characterizations on the integrity and crystallinity of various perovskite oxide membranes released from both SAOC and SAOT. As summarized in Supplementary Table 3, these SrSnO3 (SSO), and BaTiO3 (BTO), with a broad range of bulk lattice constants (ap, in pseudocubic notation) from 3.81 to 4.12 Å. To minimize the lattice mismatch between SAO and ABO3 perovskite, we choose to grow the ABO3/SAO bilayers on either LSAT(001) or STO(001) substrates. As depicted in Fig. 4a, we use standard PDMS-assisted release and transfer procedures of freestanding oxide membranes from both SAOC and SAOT (see Methods section for procedural details). For the FE BTO membranes, the inherent superelasticity accommodates stress and deformations generated during the lift-off process. Hence, the choice of water-soluble sacrificial layers (SAOC or SAOT) becomes less critical for the crystallinity and integrity (Supplementary Fig. 21)21,22,42. Nevertheless, for the other non-FE oxides, the membranes released from SAOC and SAOT show dramatic differences. According to the optical microscopic images (Fig. 4b), the freestanding oxide membranes released from 30 nm SAOC exhibit high-density and periodic cracks, which are qualitatively similar to the morphologies shown in the literature24,37. In contrast, the oxide membranes released from 30 nm SAOT (Fig. 4c) show crack-free regions spanning up to several hundred micrometers in scale. For the membranes released from 10 nm SAOT, the crack-free region can be expanded further to a few millimeters in scale (Supplementary Figs. 22-28), which could be attributed to the improved structure coherency and slower release speed (see Supplementary Section 4). Intriguingly, the optical microscopic images reveal micrometer-scale and periodic wrinkling morphologies in the crack-free regions, which were commonly observed in the FE oxide membranes with superelasticity. Accordingly, the freestanding oxide membranes released from SAOT should possess superior integrity and flexibility, even withstanding the large lattice deformation in the wrinkled microstructures. To quantify the SAOT-induced integrity improvements in oxide membranes, we calculated the average equivalent diameters (DE) of the uncracked areas in the freestanding membranes. The DE versus ap curves are summarized in Fig. 4d. Within a broad ap range from 3.81~4.04 Å, the DE values of membranes released 10 nm (30 nm) SAOT reach few millimeters (hundreds of micrometers) in scale, which are orders of magnitude higher than the corresponding DE values in the SAOC case. According to the aforementioned structural differences between SAOC and SAOT, we speculate that the strain coherency at ABO3/SAO interfaces may play a crucial role in determining the crystallinity and integrity of these freestanding membranes. Taking LCMO/SAO/LSAT(001) as model systems, we verified this hypothesis by detailed strain analyses. For LCMO film grown on SAOC/LSAT(001), RSM near LSAT(103) diffraction (Fig. 4e) shows a partial strain relaxation at the LCMO/SAOC interfaces. The weak and broad LCMO(116) diffractions of the exfoliated freestanding LCMO membrane (Supplementary Fig. 22) further signify an unsatisfactory crystallinity. In contrast, RSM characterizations (Fig. 4f) from the LCMO/SAOT/LSAT(001) bilayer demonstrate a coherent strain state and high epitaxial quality. The strong and sharp LCMO(116) Bragg diffraction of the freestanding LCMO membranes confirms a persistent high crystallinity even after water-assisted exfoliation (Supplementary Fig. 22). The strong correlation between the high integrity/crystallinity of oxide membranes and the coherent strain state at the ABO3/SAO interface can be understood by a simple scenario as depicted in Fig. 4g. For the ABO3/SAOC epitaxial heterostructures, the robust cubic lattice of SAOC inhibits the epitaxial strain propagation from the substrate to ABO3 epitaxial films. The unavoidable lattice mismatch between ABO3 and SAOC must be accommodated by the formation of periodic dislocations34,36. During the water-assisted exfoliation process, these defects inevitably rupture the film lattice, leading to the formation of periodic cracks. The correlation between lattice mismatch and membrane integrity is further implied by the steep slope-like line shape of the DE - ap curve. For the ABO3/SAOT heterostructures, on the contrary, the inherent structural flexibility of SAOT and strong interfacial bonding enable a coherent strain state. The resultant sharp and dislocation-free ABO3/SAOT interface should effectively hinder crack formation during exfoliation. And the release of compressive strain could be the main driving force of the wrinkling microstructure. Secondly, we characterized the evolutions of physical properties in various oxide membranes released from SAOC and SAOT. For the ferromagnetic metal LCMO/SAOT/LSAT(001) film and corresponding membrane, the temperature-dependent magnetization and resistivity curves reveal a sharp paramagnetic-insulator (PMI) to ferromagnetic-metal (FMM) transition (Fig. 5a,b). The Curie temperature (TC), saturated magnetization, and residual resistivity are comparable to the LCMO/LSAT(001) epitaxial films, consistent with the observed high crystallinity and integrity. In contrast, for both the LCMO/SAOC/LSAT(001) epitaxial film and the corresponding LCMO membrane, the PMI-to-FMM transition becomes more slanted. These degradations in ferromagnetism and metallicity can be attributed to the residual tensile strain at the LCMO/SAOC interface and the high-density cracks formed during exfoliation (Fig. 4)24,43. The itinerant ferromagnet SRO films also show a similar trend. The M-T and ρ-T curves of the membranes released from SAOT reveal a sharp FMM transition at TC ~150 K. The residual resistance ratio (RRR) value is up to 4.83, comparable with PLD-grown SRO/STO(001) epitaxial films (Fig. 5c-h)6,44,45. The SRO membrane also exhibits a strong perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (MA) dominated by the intrinsic magnetocrystalline anisotropy46, which also signifies a high crystallinity. In contrast, the SRO membrane exfoliated from SAOC shows a demagnetization-dominated in-plane MA and a reduced RRR down to 1.93, which are consistent with the degradation of crystallinity and crack formation. Following the same scenario, we also characterized the electrical transport of LNO and NNO membranes (Supplementary Figs. 29,30). Consistently, their representative transport properties in membranes released from SAOT are well maintained or even improved. Namely, SAOT can universally ensure both the high integrity and epitaxial-film-like functionalities of oxide membranes. Lastly, we examined the exfoliation efficiency of oxide membranes from SAOT. To perform an equitable comparison between SAOC and SAOT, we opted to exfoliate the 50 nm thick BTO membranes. Due to intrinsic superelasticity, the exfoliation speed of BTO membranes should not be influenced by crack formation and associated extrinsic water penetration. According to the in-situ monitoring by optical microscope (Supplementary Movies 1,2), the water-assisted exfoliation speed of BTO membranes released from SAOT is approximately one order of magnitude faster than that released from SAOC. The trend of faster exfoliation speed is universally applicable for all the other oxide membranes we grew (Supplementary Fig. 31), signifying a higher water-solubility of SAOT than SAOC. The dissolution speed of SAOT film also highly depends on the film thickness and Ca/Ba doping (Supplementary Fig. 32), which provides independent parameters for simultaneously optimizing the exfoliation efficiency and quality. The high water-solubility of SAOT also has a structural origin. As depicted in Supplementary Fig. 33, the Al-O networks in SAOT comprise discrete AlO4 5- and Al3O10 11- groups, which hydrolyze in water more readily41,47 than the Al6O18 18- rings in SAOC 14. Despite such a high water-solubility, the SAOT film exhibits remarkable stability against ambient moisture over 40 days when incorporating an ultrathin STO protective layer (Supplementary Fig. 34). Consistently, this long-term stability of SAOT could be attributed to the high epitaxial quality of ABO3/SAOT heterostructure48. Summary and Outlook By exploring the phase diagram of SAO film growth, we identified the super-tetragonal SAOT as a promising water-soluble sacrificial layer with several compelling advantages. Firstly, SAOT showcases remarkable structural flexibility to adapt the epitaxial strain imposed by various perovskite substrates, providing wide-range tunability of in-plane lattice constant. Such inherent structural flexibility further ensures high-quality epitaxy of a broad spectrum of ABO3/SAOT heterostructures with coherent strain states and dislocation-free interfaces, which restrain crack formation during water-assisted exfoliation. For various non-FE oxide membranes with lattice constants ranging from 3.81 to 4.04 Å, the crack-free areas can spans up to few millimeters in scale. Moreover, the strain-tunability of SAOT persists with Ba/Ca doping and (110)-oriented epitaxial growth, broadening its potential in developing novel freestanding oxides beyond traditional perovskites. Next, the SAOT has a wide and stable growth window, accessible for standard PLD techniques and compatible with the growth of most perovskite oxides. Lastly, its high water-solubility streamlines the membrane exfoliation process. With these attributes, SAOT sacrificial layer offers a versatile and feasible experimental approach to producing large-scale, crack-free freestanding oxide membranes, of which crystallinity and functionalities are comparable to the epitaxial films. The discovery of SAOT introduces a pivotal complement to the widely-used SAOC sacrificial layer, which may substantially promote the potential of freestanding oxide membranes for innovative, low-dimensional, and flexible device applications18–20. Reference 1. Hwang, H. Y. et al. Emergent phenomena at oxide interfaces. Nat. Mater. 11, 103–113 (2012). 2. Yu, P., Chu, Y. -H. & Ramesh, R. Oxide interfaces: pathways to novel phenomena. Mater. Today 15, 3. Ohtomo, A. & Hwang, H. Y. A high-mobility electron gas at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 heterointerface. Nature. 4. Caviglia, A. D. et al. Electric field control of the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface ground state. Nature. 456, 624– 5. Bousquet, E. et al. Improper ferroelectricity in perovskite oxide artificial superlattices. Nature. 452, 732– 6. Wang, L. et al. Ferroelectrically tunable magnetic skyrmions in ultrathin oxide heterostructures. Nat. Mater. 17, 1087–1094 (2018). 7. Das, S. et al. Observation of room-temperature polar skyrmions. Nature. 568, 368–372 (2019). 8. J. Mannhart & D. G. Schlom, Oxide interfaces—An opportunity for electronics. Science. 327, 1607–1611 9. Manipatruni, S. et al. Scalable energy-efficient magnetoelectric spin-orbit logic. Nature. 565, 35–42 10. Garcia, V. & Bibes, M. Ferroelectric tunnel junctions for information storage and processing. Nat. Commun. 5, 5289 (2014). 11. Bakaul, S. R. et al. Single crystal functional oxides on silicon. Nat. Commun. 7, 10547 (2016). 12. Lu, H. et al. Ferroelectric tunnel junctions with graphene electrodes. Nat. Commun. 5, 6518 (2014). 13. Chiabrera, F. M. et al. Freestanding Perovskite Oxide Films: Synthesis, Challenges, and Properties. Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 534, 2200084 (2022). 14. Lu, D. et al. Synthesis of freestanding single-crystal perovskite films and heterostructures by etching of sacrificial water-soluble layers. Nat. Mater. 15, 1255–1260 (2016). 15. Chu, Y. H. Van der Waals oxide heteroepitaxy. npj Quantum Mater. 2, 67 (2017). 16. Kum, H. S. et al. Heterogeneous integration of single-crystalline complex-oxide membranes. Nature. 578, 17. Sambri, A. et al. Self-Formed, Conducting LaAlO3/SrTiO3 Micro-Membranes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 30, 18. Yang, A. J. et al. Van der Waals integration of high-κ perovskite oxides and two-dimensional semiconductors. Nat. Electron. 5, 233–240 (2022). 19. Kim, B. S. Y., Hikita, Y., Yajima, T. & Hwang, H. Y. Heteroepitaxial vertical perovskite hot-electron transistors down to the monolayer limit. Nat. Commun. 10, 5312 (2019). 20. Lu, D., Crossley, S., Xu, R., Hikita, Y. & Hwang, H. Y. Freestanding Oxide Ferroelectric Tunnel Junction Memories Transferred onto Silicon. Nano Lett. 19, 3999–4003 (2019). 21. Dong, G. et al. Super-elastic ferroelectric single-crystal membrane with continuous electric dipole rotation. Science. 366, 475–479 (2019). 22. Peng, B. et al. Phase transition enhanced superior elasticity in freestanding single-crystalline multiferroic BiFeO3 membranes. Sci. Adv. 6, eaba5847 (2020). 23. Ji, D. et al. Freestanding crystalline oxide perovskites down to the monolayer limit. Nature. 570, 87–90 24. Hong, S. S. et al. Extreme tensile strain states in La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 membranes. Science. 368, 71–76 (2020). 25. Xu, R. et al. Strain-induced room-temperature ferroelectricity in SrTiO3 membranes. Nat. Commun. 11, 26. Wu, P. C. et al. Twisted oxide lateral homostructures with conjunction tunability. Nat. Commun. 13, 2565 27. Chen, S. et al. Braiding Lateral Morphotropic Grain Boundaries in Homogenetic Oxides. Adv. Mater. 35, 28. Han, L. et al. High-density switchable skyrmion-like polar nanodomains integrated on silicon. Nature. 29. Liu, Y., Huang, Y. & Duan, X. Van der Waals integration before and beyond two-dimensional materials. Nature. 567, 323–333 (2019). 30. Kim, G. et al. New Approaches to Produce Large-Area Single Crystal Thin Films. Adv. Mater. 35, 31. Li, Y. et al. Electrostatically Driven Polarization Flop and Strain-Induced Curvature in Free-Standing Ferroelectric Superlattices. Adv. Mater. 34, 2106826 (2022). 32. Zhang, B., Yun, C. & MacManus-Driscoll, J. L. High Yield Transfer of Clean Large-Area Epitaxial Oxide Thin Films. Nano-Micro Lett. 13, 363–376 (2021). 33. Wang, Q. et al. Towards a large-area freestanding single-crystal ferroelectric BaTiO3 membrane. Crystals. 34. Baek, D. J., Lu, D., Hikita, Y., Hwang, H. Y. & Kourkoutis, L. F. Mapping cation diffusion through lattice defects in epitaxial oxide thin films on the water-soluble buffer layer Sr3Al2O6 using atomic resolution electron microscopy. APL Mater. 5, 096108 (2017). 35. Hong, S. S. et al. Two-dimensional limit of crystalline order in perovskite membrane films. Sci. Adv. 3, eaao5173 (2017). 36. Lu, D. et al. Strain Tuning in Complex Oxide Epitaxial Films Using an Ultrathin Strontium Aluminate Buffer Layer. Phys. Status Solidi - Rapid Res. Lett. 12, 1700339 (2018). 37. Singh, P. et al. Large-Area Crystalline BaSnO3 Membranes with High Electron Mobilities. ACS Appl. Electron. Mater. 1, 1269–1274 (2019). 38. Bourlier, Y. et al. Transfer of Epitaxial SrTiO3 Nanothick Layers Using Water-Soluble Sacrificial Perovskite Oxides. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 12, 8466–8474 (2020). 39. Peng, H. et al. A Generic Sacrificial Layer for Wide-Range Freestanding Oxides with Modulated Magnetic Anisotropy. Adv. Funct. Mater. 32, 2111907 (2022). 40. Hatt, A. J., Spaldin, N. A. & Ederer, C. Strain-induced isosymmetric phase transition in BiFeO3. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 81, 054109 (2010). 41. Kahlenberg, V. Crystal structure of Ba8[Al3O10][AlO4], a novel mixed-anion Ba aluminate related to kilchoanite. Mineral. Mag. 65, 533–541 (2001). 42. Jin, C. et al. Super-Flexible Freestanding BiMnO3 Membranes with Stable Ferroelectricity and Ferromagnetism. Adv. Sci. 8, 2102178 (2021). 43. Gao, G., Jin, S. & Wu, W. Lattice-mismatch-strain induced inhomogeneities in epitaxial La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 012509 (2007). 44. Lee, H. G. et al. Atomic-Scale Metal-Insulator Transition in SrRuO3 Ultrathin Films Triggered by Surface Termination Conversion. Adv. Mater. 32, 1905815 (2020). 45. Lu, J. et al. Defect-Engineered Dzyaloshinskii-Moriya Interaction and Electric-Field-Switchable Topological Spin Texture in SrRuO3. Adv. Mater. 33, 2102525 (2021). 46. Koster, G. et al. Structure, physical properties, and applications of SrRuO3 thin films. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 47. Kahlenberg, V., Lazić, B. & Krivovichev, S. V. Tetrastrontium-digalliumoxide (Sr4Ga2O7)-Synthesis and crystal structure of a mixed anion strontium gallate related to perovskite. J. Solid State Chem. 178, 1429– 48. Li, D. et al. Stabilization of Sr3Al2O6 Growth Templates for Ex Situ Synthesis of Freestanding Crystalline Oxide Membranes. Nano Lett. 21, 4454–4460 (2021). Methods Epitaxial film growth. We prepared the Sr3Al2O6 (SAOC) and Sr4Al2O7 (SAOT) polycrystalline targets by first sintering a mixture of stoichiometric amounts of SrCO3 and Al2O3 at 1350 °C for 24 h, and then immediately grinding and pressing into pellets. We also prepare the NdNiO3 (NNO), LaNiO3 (LNO), La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 Using these oxide targets, we grow the epitaxial thin films on single-crystalline substrates through a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system with a KrF excimer laser (248 nm). During the growth of strontium aluminate (SAO, including SAOC and SAOT) films, we maintained the laser spot size, repetition rate, substrate temperature, and target-substrate distance at 4 mm2, 3 Hz, 750 °C, and 55 mm, respectively. And we varied the laser fluence (FL) from 1.0 to 3.0 J/cm2 by inserting attenuators and altered the oxygen partial pressure (PO2) from 10−4 to 30 Pa. We controlled the film thickness (tSAO-C or tSAO-T) by the laser ablation duration. We explore the growth phase diagram. The thermal stability of LSAT(001) substrates in a reduced environment (e.g. high vacuum) at high temperature (> 650 oC) surpasses that of the widely used STO(001) substrate. The other oxides (NNO, LNO, LCMO, STO, SRO, SSO, and BTO) were subsequently deposited at their optimal conditions according to previous publications. The thickness of all the non-ferroelectric films is kept at 35 nm, and the thickness of the BTO films is 50 nm. Release of freestanding membranes. Before the exfoliation, we attached the surfaces of ABO3/SAO heterostructures onto 0.5 mm-thick polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) films. We then immersed the entire sample in deionized water at room temperature until the sacrificial layer was completely dissolved, thus lifting off the oxide membranes from the substrate. To conduct the characterizations on structure and functionalities, the freestanding oxide membranes were transferred and attached to atomically-flat sapphire glass slides. It is worth noting that PDMS is an elastomer. Compared to other widely used adhesive materials (e.g. epoxy), it can minimize the support and constraint to the freestanding oxide films to the maximum extent. Nevertheless, its elastic nature also easily causes the formation of cracks. Structure characterizations. The crystallographic analysis of the epitaxial films and freestanding membranes were examined by a high-resolution X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical Empyrean X-ray diffractometer, Cu Kα1 radiation) with both the 2θ-ω linear scan and off-specular reciprocal space mapping (RSM) mode. The thicknesses of SAO and other oxide layers were obtained by fitting Laue fringes. The growth rate of each layer was calculated and controlled precisely by counting the number of laser pulses. The atomic structure of as-grown SAOC and SAOT films was characterized at room temperature using an ARM-200CF transmission electron microscope, operated at 200 keV and equipped with double spherical aberration (Cs) correctors. The HAADF images were measured in the scanning mode. Cross-sectional TEM specimens of after the mechanical thinning down to ~20 μm. Magnetism and electrical transport measurements. Temperature-dependent magnetization (M-T) curves were measured via a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, Quantum Design MPMS3). The external H was applied perpendicular or parallel to the film plane. The T-dependent resistivity (ρ-T) curves were characterized by a Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS, Quantum Design). Before measurements, the stripe-like Pt electrodes were patterned onto the membrane/thin film surface by photolithography. Density-functional theory calculations. DFT-level structural relaxations and electronic structure computations for both SAOC and SAOT phases are performed using WIEN2K and VASP codes with the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof version for solids of the generalized gradient approximation (GGA-PBESol) on a dense momentum grid with 200 k-points49–54. The initial structural parameters of SAOC are from and 55, while the parameters of SAOT are adopted from the previously reported Ba4Al2O7 compound41. The structural relaxation calculations for both structures are convergent, providing two stable crystal structures. The DFT-relaxed lattice constants (listed in Supplementary Table 3) are close to the experimental values. To evaluate the structural flexibility of SAOC and SAOT unit-cells, we calculated the energy changes of these unit-cells under both biaxial and anisotropic strains. We first calculate the total energy (Etotal) of SAOC and SAOT unit-cells with fully relaxed lattices. Then we manually altered the in-plane lattice constants aSAO and bSAO to impose biaxial/anisotropic strain, relaxed the lattice along the cSAO axis, and calculated the Etotal of the biaxially or anisotropically strained SAOC and SAOT unit-cells. The differences in Etotal between the strained and strain-free cases are defined as ΔE. To directly compare the SAOC and SAOT unit-cells, the energy changes (ΔE) are normalized by the Etotal in the strain-free case. To impose biaxial strain, we impose a constraint of aSAO = bSAO, and alter the aSAO by ±1~3%. To impose biaxial strain, we impose a constraint of aSAO ×bSAO = constant and alter the orthorhombicity bSAO /aSAO from 0.9 to 1.1. To investigate the bonding strength at SAO/ABO3 interfaces, we construct three (001)-oriented evaluating the interfacial bonding strength at SAO/STO interfaces. The interfacial bonding energies are calculated by the following formula: The ESAO-STO is the total energy of the constructed SAO/STO heterostructure supercell; Eslabs-SAO and Eslabs-STO are the total energy values of SAO (SAOC or SAOT) and 3-unit-cell-thick STO slabs; The obtained value of Ebond reflects the bonding strength between the surface of SAO and STO slabs. The Ebond value should be divided by 2 as there are two interfaces in the computational models; To directly compare the bonding strengths at SAOT/STO and SAOC/STO interfaces, the Ebond should be further normalized by the nSTO, which is the number of STO unit-cells bonded to the interface. Note that we intentionally add a negative sign in front of formula (1). Hence, if Ebond is positive (negative), the SAO and STO tend to form stable (unstable) chemical bonds at the interfaces. For comparison, we also calculated the Ebond at the LAO/STO interface. The corresponding results are included in Supplementary Section 2 and discussed in the main text.