Yu-Shiba-Rusinov tips: imaging spins at the atomic scale with full magnetic sensitivity Felix K ̈uster1, Souvik Das1, Stuart S. P. Parkin1, Paolo Sessi1 1Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, Halle (Saale) 06120, Germany, Measurements of magnetic properties at the atomic scale require probes capable of combining high spatial resolution with spin sensitivity. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy (SP-STM) fulfills these conditions by using atomically sharp magnetic tips. The imaging of spin structures results from the tunneling magneto-conductance that depends on the imbalance in the local density of spin-up and spin-down electrons. Spin-sensitive tips are generally formed from bulk materials or by coating non-magnetic tips with a thin magnetic layer. However, ferromagnetic materials generate stray magnetic fields which can influence the magnetic structure of the probed system, while the magnetization of antiferromagnetic materials is difficult to set tip by externally applied magnetic fields. Here, we use functionalized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) tips prepared by attaching magnetic adatoms at the apex of a superconducting cluster to image magnetic interactions at the atomic scale. We demonstrate that YSR tips are capable of sensing different magnetization directions, conferring them full magnetic sensitivity. We additionally show that the finite size of the tip superconduct- ing cluster makes it robust against relatively strong magnetic fields, making YSR tips capable of visualizing magnetic field driven transitions of the spin texture. Introduction. Spin-polarized electron tunneling ex- ploits the tunneling magnetoresistance between two spin-polarized electrodes to access the respective spin- dependent electronic densities of states . This phe- nomenon has been used to study the spin-dependent properties of various types of materials including mag- netic metals , semiconductors , and superconductors . Using a spin-polarized tip as one of the electrodes in a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) led to the de- velopment of spin-polarized STM (SP-STM) , a tech- nique which allows one to correlate the structural, elec- tronic, and magnetic properties of surfaces with atomic resolution . SP-STM has significantly evolved over time, providing valuable insights into several magnetic phenomena such as the formation of magnetic domains , the emergence of complex non-collinear magnetic tex- tures , the visualization of RKKY-mediated inter- actions , and the detection of elementary spin excita- tions in single atoms as well as their evolution in artificially crafted nanostructures . SP-STM is nowa- days a mature technique, where the spin-dependent sig- nal contributing to the differential conductance dI/dU at the energy eU with respect to the Fermi level EF is generally modeled as: dI/dU ∝ −→ mT −→ mS(EF + eU) where −→ mT ,−→ mS are vectors corresponding to the spin po- larized local density of stats (LDOS) in tip and sample, respectively. SP-STM tip are generally prepared using magnetic bulk tips or by coating electrochemically-etched W tip with thin films of magnetic elements. Besides spin- sensitivity, the ideal SP-STM tip needs to fulfill addi- tional conditions, namely: (i) negligible stray fields to avoid dipolar interactions influencing or even destroying the sample’s intrinsic magnetic structure , (ii) possi- bility to control the tip magnetization direction in-situ to make it sensitive to distinct magnetic orientations, i.e. in-plane and out-of-plane . Conditions (i) and (ii) are generally difficult to be si- multaneously fulfilled. On the one hand, the use of fer- romagnetic materials as tip coating layers allows to con- trollably orient the tip magnetization in applied magnetic fields, but it inevitably results in tip-induced stray fields. On the other hand, the use of antiferromagnetic materi- als allows to avoid stray fields but it impedes to control the tip magnetization direction due to the absence of a net magnetic moment. Since the tunnelling current decays exponentially with increasing distance, a single magnetic atom or molecules localized at the tip very end is expected to generate a sizable spin-dependent tunneling signal. This consider- ation has been used to demonstrate how spin-sensitive measurements can be obtained using a detection scheme which relies on the spin-excitations of single magnetic molecules attached to a conventional STM tip . More recently, it has been reported that high-spin sensi- tivity can by achieved by using superconducting tip func- tionalized with magnetic atoms at its apex. The general idea is to use the spin-polarized Yu-Shiba-Rusinov (YSR) states induced by the magnetic exchange of 3d atoms with a superconducting tip to image spin-structures at the atomic scale . Here, we report on how this methodological approach can be used to create YSR tips capable of (i) sensing in-plane, out-of-plane, and tilted magnetization directions and (ii) imaging magnetic field driven transitions in the spin texture. Experimental set-up. Experiments were performed under ultra-high vacuum conditions (p < 3 · 10−10 mbar) in a STM setup operated at a base temperature of T = 550 mK. As a prototypical system, we focus on Cr adatoms coupled to a clean Nb(110) surface . This choice is motivated by the possibility of creating superconducting tips by indentation of electrochemically etched W tips into the Nb single crystal . Moreover, arXiv:2307.09534v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 18 Jul 2023 2 / 0.66nm / 0.57nm / 0.93nm Z dI/dU high low high low dI/dU (arb. units) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) X (nm) X (nm) X (nm) X (nm) B = + 0.7 T in-plane -0.7T a b c f i h g d e dI/dU (arb. units) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) dI/dU (arb. units) B = - 0.7 T in-plane consisting of seven adatoms, assembled along different crystallographic directions. Top panels report a schematic representation of the chains, showing their orientation as well as the distance between adatoms. Red dots correspond to Cr adatom, grey dots identify the Nb adatom of the underlying Nb(110) substrates.d-f dI/dU maps and relative line profiles acquired in constant height mode in a magnetic field of B = 0.7 T applied parallel to the sample surface. g-i dI/dU maps and relative line profiles by reverting the direction of the magnetic field B = -0.7 T. Stabilization parameters −5 mV, 3 nA. Spin resolved dI/dU maps: scanning bias 0.27 mV, modulation 80 μV. the high anisotropy characterizing the Nb(110) Fermi surface allows, for adatoms indirectly coupled by the Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) inter- action, to create Cr nanostructures crafted atom-by-atom which posses distinct magnetic configurations. Finally, the low magnetic anisotropy characterizing Cr adatoms coupled to Nb(110) makes possible to con- trollably act on the nanostructure’s magnetization direc- tion, i.e. in-plane vs. out-of-plane by means of externally applied magnetic fields. Further details on sample prepa- ration and STM measurements are reported in Supple- mentary Information. Spin-resolved measurements with bulk mag- netic tips. three different Cr chains assembled along three distinct crystallographic directions and characterized by different spacing a between the adatoms, namely: (a = 0.66 nm) , (a = 0.57 nm), and (a = 0.93 nm). All chains consist of seven Cr adatoms. An odd number of adatoms guarantees, also in case of antiferromagnetic coupling, the existence of an uncompensated magnetic moment which interacts with an externally applied mag- netic field. Figure 1d-j report spin-resolved STM images acquired with an antiferromagnetic Cr bulk tip . To stabilize the magnetic configuration against fluctua- tions, measurements are performed under infulence of an in-plane magnetic field of strength B = 0.7 T. To exclude set-point effects, all spin-resolved dI/dU maps have been acquired in the constant height mode with the tunneling junction stabilized on the bare Nb(110) substrate. On the one hand, the dI/dU maps and the corresponding line profiles acquired on chains oriented along the (Fig. 1d) and (Fig. 1f) directions are both charac- terized by an alternating contrast, an observation indi- cating an antiferromagnetic coupling between adjacent adatoms. On the other hand, the wire oriented along the direction (Fig. 1e) shows a constant signal inside the chain, an observation consistent with the existence of ferromagnetic coupling between adatoms (a different signal is observed for the two adatoms localized at the opposite ends of the chain, possibly due to their differ- ent local environment, resulting in a different electronic contribution to the local density of states). To confirm this hypothesis, the same set of measure- ments have been repeated by reverting the direction of magnetic field (B = - 0.7 T). This is expected to revert 3 the contrast across the chains due to the existence on an uncompensated moment which allows them to para- magnetically align with the field, while the antiferromag- netic bulk structure of the tip is left unaffected. As il- lustrated in Fig. 1g-j, the magnetic contrast is reverted for all chains. These observations confirm the existence of antiferromagnetic coupling between adjacent adatoms for the chains oriented along and direction and ferromagnetic coupling for the chain oriented along the . We would like to note that, in all cases, the exper- imental results are in agreement with the magnetic cou- pling along distinct directions as theoretically predicted by ab − initio calculations . Preparation of YSR tips. Starting from the characterization of the spin coupling along different chains obtained using conventional SP- STM tips, we probe similar structures using functional- ized superconducting tips. These tips are produced fol- lowing a two steps procedure, namely: (i) indentation into the Nb(110) substrate to create a tip whose apex consists of a Nb cluster; (ii) attachment of single Cr adatoms at the tip apex by atomic manipulation pick-up techniques. A similar approach using Fe and Mn adatoms has been reported in . sentative spectra acquired after each preparation step. The gray curve corresponds to the spectrum measured without magnetic field. Its lineshape corresponds to the typical convoluted spectrum of superconducting tip and sample density of states . It is characterized by sin- gle particle coherence peaks energetically located at ap- proximately 3 meV, i.e. twice the size of the Nb super- conducting energy gap. The blue curve reports a typi- cal spectrum acquired when an external magnetic field is applied to quench the sample superconducting state. A clear gap is still visible at the Fermi level. This corre- sponds to the residual tip superconducting gap. Its ro- bustness against magnetic fields is a direct consequence of the finite size superconducting cluster attached to the tip apex . Figure 2b reports dI/dU curves ac- quired after step (ii), i.e. when the superconducting tip has been functionalized by pick-up of single Cr adatoms. The gray curve corresponds to the spectrum acquired without magnetic field. Clear peaks are visible inside the superconducting gap. These correspond to the so-called YSR states, which are induced by the magnetic exchange between magnetic impurities coupled to a superconduct- ing host [30–32]. The blue curve corresponds to the spec- trum acquired once a magnetic field is applied to quench the substrate superconducting state. A dip correspond- ing to the tip superconducting gap is still visible, which is superimposed to a step-like function at negative energy (see Supplementary Information for a description of the spectral lineshape). A clear shoulder is visible inside the gap at sample bias = 0.33 mV, corresponding to a YSR state. Being YSR states spin-polarized , tunneling at this energy is expected to grant direct access to the spin coupling between adatoms. [00 [11 [11 [11 [33 [11 a b c d e f dI/dU (arb. units) sample bias (mV) dI/dU (arb. units) sample bias (mV) a b - (Δsample+ Δtip) (Δsample+ Δtip) YSR curves acquired with a Nb superconducting tip on Nb(110). Gray and blue curves correspond to spectra acquired at B = 0 T and B = 2 T, respectively. A clear superconducting gap is still visible at B = 2 T, corresponding to the tip su- perconducting gap. It originates from the small size of the superconducting cluster attached at the tip apex, which re- sults in critical fields significantly higher than in bulk Nb. b dI/dU curves acquired at B = 0 T (grey line) and B = 0.7 T (blue line) after a Cr adatom has been attached to the tip superconducting apex. Clear peaks are visible inside the su- perconducting gap at B = 0 T, corresponding to YSR states. When superconductivity is quenched in the substrate (B = 0.7 T), a YSR state is still visible inside the tip superconduct- ing gap (see shoulder highlighted by a green arrow). YSR tips with in-plane sensitivity. and corresponding line profiles for chains structurally identical to those scrutinized in Figure 1. Measurements have been performed under identical experimental con- ditions, i.e. under the influence of an in-plane magnetic field of strength B = 0.7 T. All dI/dU maps have been acquired in the constant height mode using a YSR tip similar to the one discussed in Figure 2 with the tunneling junction biased at the YSR state, i.e. V = 0.33 mV. For chains oriented along and directions, the ex- perimental data reproduce the same alternating antifer- romagnetic contrast between neighboring atoms revealed in Fig. 1 using a Cr bulk tip. These data demonstrate a strong in-plane magnetic sensitivity of the Yu-Shiba- 4 X (nm) X (nm) X (nm) X (nm) dI/dU dI/dU dI/dU dI/dU / 0.57nm / 0.93nm / 0.81nm / 0.72nm / 0.86nm X (nm) dI/dU B = 0.7 T in-plane b c d e f X (nm) dI/dU / 0.66nm a panels) and respective line profiles (bottom panels) for different spin chains assembled along distinct crystallographic directions and by changing the spacing between the adatoms (side panels). Measurements have been performed under a magnetic field B = 0.7 T applied parallel to the sample surface using a YSR tip similar to the one reported in Figure 2, in constant height mode at the bias of the YSR state. Stabilization parameters −3 mV, 500 pA, scanning bias 0.33 mV, modulation 80 μV Rusinov tip. It is worth noting that the creation of magnetic nanos- tructures crafted atom-by-atom requires working with demanding set points, i.e. small biases and high cur- rents, which frequently result in changes in the tip final apex and consequentely loss of its magnetic sensitivity. In this context, the use of Yu-Shiba-Rusinov tip offers a significant advantage: it allows to first create all desired nanostructures and subsequently functionalize the tip in- situ by adatom pick-up techniques, allowing to scrutinize different nanostructures with the very same tip. This is demonstrated in Figure 3d-f which scrutinized the mag- netic state of chains assembled by progressively increas- ing the distance between adatoms and along distinct crys- tallographic directions. Chains oriented along the and are characterized by antiferromagnetic and fer- romagnetic coupling between adjacent adatoms, respec- tively. The comparison of the two chains assembled along the direction by increasing the spacing, i.e. a = 0.57 nm (Fig. 3b) and a = 0.86 nm (Fig. 3f) evidences a transition from a ferromagnetic to an antiferromagnetic state, an observation in line with the oscillating behavior of RKKY-mediated interactions. YSR tips with out-of-plane sensitivity. YSR tips prepared by single adatoms are characterized by a small magnetic anisotropy . Therefore, they are expected to easily respond to externally applied magnetic fields, an effect which can be used to controllably make them sensitive to either an in-plane or an out-of-plane magnetization while still avoiding stray fields. This is demonstrated in Figure 4 for the three antiferromagnetic chains analyzed in Figure 4, i.e. (spacing a = 0.66 nm) , (a = 0.96 nm), and (a = 0.86 nm). Measurements have been acquired with the very same tip used in Figure 3 and at the same scanning bias (V = 0.33 mV) but under the influence of an out-of-plane mag- netic field of strength B = 2 T. The alternating contrast between adjacent adatoms visible in the dI/dU maps and relative line profiles for chains oriented along (Fig. 4a) and (Fig. 4b) directions confirms their antiferromagnetic state. In sharp contrast, the atomic wire oriented along the direction (spacing a = 0.86 nm) is now characterized by a constant signal across the chain. This observation is indicative of a magnetic-field driven transition from an antiferromagnetic to a ferro- magnetic state, which is expected to occur once the Zee- man energy overcomes the exchange coupling J between adatoms. These results demonstrate that the magnetic interaction between adatoms coupled along the di- rection with spacing a = 0.86 nm is weak while it is stronger for the and chains. We note that this conclusion is further supported by the direct comparison of the zero bias anomaly characterizing adatoms coupled along distinct crystallographic directions. As discussed in Supplementary Information, a clear change of spec- tral lineshape with respect to the single Cr case is visible for adatoms coupled along the and directions. In sharp contrast, the dI/dU curve for adatoms coupled along the direction at spacing a = 0.86 nm perfectly overlaps the single Cr adatom spectrum, signaling a very weak exchange term J which, in line with our magnetic characterization, can be easily overcome by a moderate Zeeman term . 5 / 0.66nm / 0.86nm X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) / 0.93nm X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) B = 2 T out-of-plane a b c sitivity a-c. dI/dU (top panels) and corresponding line pro- files (bottom panels) acquired on the three antiferromagnetic chains scrutinized in Figure 3, i.e. (spacing a = 0.66 nm) , (a = 0.96 nm), and (a = 0.86 nm). The measurements have been acquired under a magnetic field B = 2 T applied perpendicular to the sample surface, using the very same tip and scanning energy as in Figure 3. Chains oriented along and directions pertain their anti- ferromagnetic order while a magnetic field driven transition into a ferromagnetic state is visible for the chain. Stabi- lization parameters −3 mV, 500 pA, scanning bias 0.33 mV, modulation 80 μV. YSR tips with tilted sensitivity. The possibility of performing measurements in rela- tively high magnetic fields while preserving the spin sen- sitivity of the YSR state is further demonstrated in Fig- ure 5, which directly compares two distinct structures assembled atom-by-atom corresponding to a rectangular (Fig. 5a) and a rhombic (Fig. 5b) lattice . The spin- resolved dI/dU maps reported in Fig. 5c,d and acquired under the influence of a tilted magnetic field (B = 0.7 T in-plane, B = 1 T out-of-plane) reveal the existence of an antiferromagnetic state in both structures, addition- ally highlighted by the alternating contrast visible in the respective line profiles. By further increasing the out- of-plane magnetic field to B = 2 T while maintaining an in-plane field of 0.7 T, the rhombic lattice is driven into a ferromagnetic structure while the the rectangular structure retains its antiferromagnetic state. Both ob- servations are in line with the results obtained on 1D X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) X (nm) dI/dU (arb. units) a b c d e f B= 0.7 T in-plane + 2 T out-of-plane B= 0.7 T in-plane + 1 T out-of-plane a,b Topographic images of two distinct 2D lattices assem- bled using Cr aadtoms coupled to the Nb(110) surface. c,d dI/dU maps and corresponding line profiles acquired using a YSR tip spectroscopically similar to the one discussed in of-plane magnetic field of strength B = 1 T. Both lattice are characterized by alternating spin contrast indicative of anti- ferromagnetic coupling between nearest neighbour adatoms. d,e dI/dU maps and corresponding line profiles acquired by increasing the magnetic field strength to B = 2 T. While the rectangular lattice preserve its antiferromagnetic state, a transition to a ferromagnetic state is visible for the rhombic lattice. Stabilization parameters −3 mV, 500 pA, scanning bias 0.33 mV, modulation 80 μV. wires discussed in Fig. 4. We would like to note that all measurements have been performed using the very same YSR tip. This allows to exclude possible tip-related arti- facts such as the loss of magnetic sensitivity which could explain the change of contrast observed in the rhombic structure, directly proving how YSR tips can be used to image magnetic-field driven transitions in the magnetic state at the atomic scale. Conclusions. Overall, our measurements reveal that the robustness of the superconducting cluster at the apex of functional- ized YSR tips allows to perform spin-resolved spectro- 6 scopic imaging in relatively high magnetic fields. We demonstrate that this property confers YSR tips the pos- sibility to sense in-plane, out-of-plane, and tilted mag- netizations as well as to visualize magnetic field-driven transitions of the magnetic texture. We envision that this methodology will be particularly useful to provide a full-magnetic characterization of non-collinear spin struc- tures. R. Meservey and P.M. Tedrow. Spin-polarized electron tunneling. Physics Reports, 238(4):173–243, 1994. J. C. Slonczewski. Conductance and exchange coupling of two ferromagnets separated by a tunneling barrier. Phys. Rev. B, 39:6995–7002, Apr 1989. M. Julliere. Tunneling between ferromagnetic films. Physics Letters A, 54(3):225–226, 1975. M.W.J. Prins, D.L. Abraham, and H. van Kempen. Spin- dependent transmission at ferromagnet/semiconductor interfaces. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Mate- rials, 121(1):152–155, 1993. Proceedings of the Interna- tional Symposium on Magnetic Ultrathin Films, Multi- layers and Surfaces. R. Meservey, P. M. Tedrow, and Peter Fulde. Magnetic field splitting of the quasiparticle states in superconduct- ing aluminum films. Phys. Rev. Lett., 25:1270–1272, Nov R. Wiesendanger, H.-J. G ̈untherodt, G. G ̈untherodt, R. J. Gambino, and R. Ruf. Observation of vacuum tunneling of spin-polarized electrons with the scanning tunneling microscope. Phys. Rev. Lett., 65:247–250, Jul M Bode. Spin-polarized scanning tunnelling microscopy. Reports on Progress in Physics, 66(4):523, mar 2003. Roland Wiesendanger. Spin mapping at the nanoscale and atomic scale. Rev. Mod. Phys., 81:1495–1550, Nov M. Pratzer, H. J. Elmers, M. Bode, O. Pietzsch, A. Ku- betzka, and R. Wiesendanger. Atomic-scale magnetic do- main walls in quasi-one-dimensional fe nanostripes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 87:127201, Aug 2001. M. Bode, M. Heide, K. von Bergmann, P. Ferriani, S. Heinze, G. Bihlmayer, A. Kubetzka, O. Pietzsch, S. Bl ̈ugel, and R. Wiesendanger. Chiral magnetic or- der at surfaces driven by inversion asymmetry. Nature, Stefan Heinze, Kirsten von Bergmann, Matthias Men- zel, Jens Brede, Andr ́e Kubetzka, Roland Wiesendan- ger, Gustav Bihlmayer, and Stefan Bl ̈ugel. Spontaneous atomic-scale magnetic skyrmion lattice in two dimen- sions. Nature Physics, 7(9):713–718, 2011. Lihui Zhou, Jens Wiebe, Samir Lounis, Elena Vedme- denko, Focko Meier, Stefan Bl ̈ugel, Peter H. Dederichs, and Roland Wiesendanger. Strength and directional- ity of surface ruderman–kittel–kasuya–yosida interaction mapped on the atomic scale. Nature Physics, 6(3):187– A. J. Heinrich, J. A. Gupta, C. P. Lutz, and D. M. Eigler. Single-atom spin-flip spectroscopy. Science, A. A. Khajetoorians, S. Lounis, B. Chilian, A. T. Costa, L. Zhou, D. L. Mills, J. Wiebe, and R. Wiesendan- ger. Itinerant nature of atom-magnetization excitation by tunneling electrons. Phys. Rev. Lett., 106:037205, Jan Cyrus F. Hirjibehedin, Christopher P. Lutz, and An- dreas J. Heinrich. Spin coupling in engineered atomic structures. Science, 312(5776):1021–1024, 2006. A. Kubetzka, M. Bode, O. Pietzsch, and R. Wiesen- danger. Spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy with antiferromagnetic probe tips. Phys. Rev. Lett., B. Verlhac, N. Bachellier, L. Garnier, M. Ormaza, P. Ab- ufager, R. Robles, M.-L. Bocquet, M. Ternes, N. Lorente, and L. Limot. Atomic-scale spin sensing with a single molecule at the apex of a scanning tunneling microscope. Gregory Czap, Peter J. Wagner, Feng Xue, Lei Gu, Jie Li, Jiang Yao, Ruqian Wu, and W. Ho. Probing and imaging spin interactions with a magnetic single-molecule sensor. Lucas Schneider, Philip Beck, Jens Wiebe, and Roland Wiesendanger. Atomic-scale spin-polarization maps us- ing functionalized superconducting probes. Science Ad- vances, 7(4):eabd7302, 2021. Felix K ̈uster, Ana M. Montero, Filipe S. M. Guimar ̃aes, Sascha Brinker, Samir Lounis, Stuart S. P. Parkin, and Paolo Sessi. Correlating josephson supercurrents and shiba states in quantum spins unconventionally coupled to superconductors. Nature Communications, Artem B. Odobesko, Soumyajyoti Haldar, Stefan Wil- fert, Jakob Hagen, Johannes Jung, Niclas Schmidt, Paolo Sessi, Matthias Vogt, Stefan Heinze, and Matthias Bode. Preparation and electronic properties of clean supercon- ducting nb(110) surfaces. Phys. Rev. B, 99:115437, Mar Artem Odobesko, Felix Friedrich, Song-Bo Zhang, Soumyajyoti Haldar, Stefan Heinze, Bj ̈orn Trauzettel, and Matthias Bode. Anisotropic vortices on supercon- ducting nb(110). Phys. Rev. B, 102:174502, Nov 2020. Felix K ̈uster, Sascha Brinker, Samir Lounis, Stuart S. P. Parkin, and Paolo Sessi. Long range and highly tun- able interaction between local spins coupled to a su- perconducting condensate. Nature Communications, Felix K ̈uster, Sascha Brinker, Richard Hess, Daniel Loss, Stuart S. P. Parkin, Jelena Klinovaja, Samir Lounis, and Paolo Sessi. Non-majorana modes in diluted spin chains proximitized to a superconductor. Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences, 119(42):e2210589119, 2022. A. Li Bassi, C. S. Casari, D. Cattaneo, F. Donati, S. Foglio, M. Passoni, C. E. Bottani, P. Biagioni, A. Brambilla, M. Finazzi, F. Ciccacci, and L. Du`o. Bulk cr tips for scanning tunneling microscopy and spin- polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. Applied Physics Letters, 91(17):173120, 2007. A. Schlenhoff, S. Krause, G. Herzog, and R. Wiesendan- ger. Bulk cr tips with full spatial magnetic sensitivity for spin-polarized scanning tunneling microscopy. Applied 7 Physics Letters, 97(8):083104, 2010. K. J. Franke, G. Schulze, and J. I. Pascual. Competition of superconducting phenomena and kondo screening at the nanoscale. Science, 332(6032):940–944, 2011. Yajiang Chen, Mauro M. Doria, and F. M. Peeters. Vor- tices in a mesoscopic cone: A superconducting tip in the presence of an applied field. Phys. Rev. B, 77:054511, Feb 2008. Matthias Eltschka, Berthold J ̈ack, Maximilian Assig, Oleg V. Kondrashov, Mikhail A. Skvortsov, Markus Et- zkorn, Christian R. Ast, and Klaus Kern. Probing ab- solute spin polarization at the nanoscale. Nano Letters, L. Yu. Bound state in superconductors with paramag- netic impurities. Acta Physica Sinica, 21(1):75, 1965. Hiroyuki Shiba. Classical Spins in Superconductors. Progress of Theoretical Physics, 40(3):435–451, 09 1968. A. I. Rusinov. On the Theory of Gapless Superconductiv- ity in Alloys Containing Paramagnetic Impurities. JETP, L. Cornils, A. Kamlapure, L. Zhou, S. Pradhan, A. A. Khajetoorians, J. Fransson, J. Wiebe, and R. Wiesendan- ger. Spin-resolved spectroscopy of the yu-shiba-rusinov states of individual atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett., 119:197002, Nov 2017. Sascha Brinker, Felix K ̈uster, Stuart S. P. Parkin, Paolo Sessi, and Samir Lounis. Anomalous excitations of atomically crafted quantum magnets. Science Advances, 8(4):eabi7291, 2022. Martina O. Soldini, Felix K ̈uster, Glenn Wagner, Souvik Das, Amal Aldarawsheh, Ronny Thomale, Samir Lou- nis, Stuart S. P. Parkin, Paolo Sessi, and Titus Neu- pert. Two-dimensional shiba lattices as a possible plat- form for crystalline topological superconductivity. Nature Physics, 2023.