1 Magnetization dynamics due to field interplay in field free spin Hall nano-oscillators Ayush K Gupta1, Sourabh Manna2, Rajdeep Singh Rawat2, Rohit Medwal1* 1Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur 208016, India 2Natural Sciences and Science Education, National Institute of Education, Nanyang Technological University 637616, Singapore *Correspondence should be addressed to Rohit Medwal: rmedwal@iitk.ac.in Abstract: Spin Hall nano oscillators (SHNOs) have shown applications in unconventional computing schemes and broadband frequency generation in the presence of applied external magnetic field. However, under field-free conditions, the oscillation characteristics of SHNOs display a significant dependence on the effective field, which can be tuned by adjusting the constriction width, thereby presenting an intriguing area of study. Here we study the effect of nano constriction width on the magnetization dynamics in anisotropy assisted field free SHNOs. In uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs, either the anisotropy field (Banis) or the demagnetization field (Bdemag) can dominate the magnetization dynamics depending on the constriction width. Our findings reveal distinct auto-oscillation characteristics in narrower constrictions with 20 nm and 30 nm constriction width compared to their wider counterpart with 100 nm width. The observed frequency shift variations with input current (IDC) and constriction widths stem from the inherent nonlinearity of the system. The interplay between the Bdemag and Banis, coupled with changes in constriction width, yields rich dynamics and offers control over frequency tunability, auto oscillation amplitude, and threshold current. Notably, the spatial configuration of spin wave wells within the constriction undergoes transformations in response to changes in both constriction width and anisotropy. The findings highlight the significant influence of competing fields at the constriction on the field-free auto oscillations of SHNOs, with this impact intensifying as the constriction width is varied. Keywords: spintronics, pure spin current, spintronic oscillators, spin Hall nano oscillators 2 I. INTRODUCTION Our dependence on technological devices has been increasing, and we are striving to find faster and more efficient ways to compute and communicate. Current complementary metal-oxide semiconductors (CMOS) technology used in a wide range of devices may not be able to keep up with increase in novel applications of computing devices . Spin-based devices such as Spin torque magnetic random-access memory (STMRAM) , Spin torque nano oscillator (STNO) , Spin Hall nano oscillator (SHNO) can be used to enhance our current computing process and data storage capabilities . Spin Hall nano oscillators have been of particular interest in recent times due to their easy fabrication process, scalability, and CMOS compatibility. In addition, a wide variety of spin-wave modes, such as propagating SW [8– 10], droplet solitons , localized bullet modes etc. can be excited by exploiting the inherent non-linear magnetization dynamics in SHNOs. This nonlinearity of the magnetization dynamics can be well tuned via input dc current as well as gate voltage , that enables novel applications of SHNO in magnonics . In summary, SHNOs offer a plethora of applications as broadband frequency generation , high frequency tunability , mutual synchronization [21–24], and various non- conventional computing schemes [25–27],. SHNO devices utilize the spin Hall effect (SHE) to generate high-frequency oscillations. This phenomenon occurs when a charge current flows through a material with significant spin-orbit coupling (SOC), such as heavy metals. In such a high SOC material, the charge current segregates based on the spin polarization of electrons, leading to the production of a pure spin current transverse to the charge current. SHNOs are typically bilayer heterostructures which consist of a ferromagnet layer (FM) attached to a heavy metal layer (HM). Passing a charge current through the HM layer results in a pure spin current due to SHE and subsequent injection of spin current into the FM layer. The injected spin current exerts a damping like spin orbit torque (SOT) on the magnetization that may counter the damping torque depending on the orientation of magnetization with respect to the spin polarization vector. 3 Therefore, a sufficiently strong damping like SOT acting opposite to the damping torque can fully compensate for the damping and lead to a sustained oscillation of magnetization around the effective field Heff. Typically, a biasing magnetic field is used for the operation of SHNO. However, such a biasing field is not the indispensable factor for the generation of sustained auto-oscillation in SHNO as demonstrated in a few recent studies of field-free SHNO [31–33]. Designing field-free SHNO will provide additional benefits of lower energy consumption, higher scalability, better scope for CMOS integration etc. Awad et al has experimentally demonstrated the importance of constriction width in a nanoconstriction SHNO to determine the oscillation characteristics in presence of a sufficiently high out- of-plane biasing field. In this article we present a systematic study on the effect of constriction width on the field free magnetization oscillations considering the in plane uniaxial anisotropy in the FM layer. Therefore, Heff in this case has contribution from the anisotropy field (Banis) in addition to the demagnetisation field (Bdemag) due to dipolar interactions and the current induced Oersted field. The demagnetisation field is highly dependent on the constriction width; decreasing the width brings the edges of constriction closer which in turn increases the dipolar interaction energy as well as the Bdemag. On the other hand, Banis is invariant of constriction width and instead depends on the magnetocrystalline anisotropy in the system. Consequently, wider (Banis > Bdemag) and narrow constrictions (Banis < Bdemag) have different fields as dominating component in total internal field Bint ,at the constriction. In the later part of this paper, we show that frequency response for the different constriction widths is also a subject of the interplay between the anisotropy field and the demagnetisation field. We further show that the nonlinearity coefficient N, which describes the inherent nonlinearity in frequency of the auto- oscillating modes, is a function of Bint and changes sign with decrease in constriction width. In the final 4 part, we discuss about the substantial difference of the spatial profile of auto oscillation modes at varying constriction width. II. METHODOLOGY The magnetization dynamics of a ferromagnet is governed by two major torques−a precessional torque due to the effective magnetic field and a damping torque that tries to damp the precession about the effective field (Heff) due to the electron-phonon, electron-impurities scattering events in the material. The magnetization dynamics can be expressed by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation given as. ∂M ∂t = (−γM × Beff) + ( α Ms M × ∂M ∂t ) (1) Here the first term on the RHS is the precessional torque τp acting on the magnetization, which is tangential to the precession trajectory and the second term is the damping torque τD pointing towards the Beff. The Beff = Bext + Bdemag + Banis, consists of the external field (Bext), demagnetization field (Bdemag) and anisotropy field (Banis) present in the material. To obtain sustained precession of magnetization around the Beff , a so-called anti-damping torque opposite to the direction of τD must be present in the system to counter the damping. This additional anti- damping torque can be obtained from the injected spin current. The high spin-orbit coupling in the HM layer facilitates the conversion of the applied charge current into a transverse spin current denoted by Js = ( IDC Iref) θSH|Jc| . Here, θSH is the spin Hall angle of HM, |Jc| is the current density at Iref. The injected Js gives rise to the anti-damping torque τAD that acts opposite to the damping torque and tries to orient 5 the M along the spin polarization direction σ. The τAD is typially of Slonczewski form which is given by . (b) Trajectory traced by head of magnetization for 100 nm constriction for Ku1 = 10 kJ m3 at Ith along with projections. (c) Spatial profile of current density for 100 nm constriction width. (d) Spatial profile of y component of Oersted field for 100 nm constriction width. τAD = |Jc|ħθSH 2etFMμoMs (M × (σ × M)) (2) Here tFM is the thickness of the FM layer. Field-like torque τFL due to the Js, which is analogous to the precessional torque, is not considered due to its low magnitude as compared to the τAD . The 6 magnetization dynamics in this case is governed by the Landau Lifshitz Gilbert Slonczewski (LLGS) equation . ∂M ∂t = (−γM × Heff) + ( α Ms M × ∂M ∂t ) + |Jc|ħθSH 2etFMμoMs (M × (σ × M)) (3) The spin polarization efficiency ε = θSHΛ2 (Λ2+1 )+(Λ2−1)(M .σ) describes the transparency of the interface for spin current , where Λ describes the transport properties of the material depending on the angle between M and σ. For pure spin current based on spin orbit torque Λ = 1, thus ε = θSH 2 . To examine the width dependent field free auto-oscillations, we have designed the SHNO as a Py (5 nm)/Pt (5 nm) bilayer stack with nano constriction geometry and varying constriction widths. The stack, measuring 5 μm × 5 μm, incorporates a round nano constriction at the center, characterized by an opening angle of 22° and a radius of curvature of 50 nm. Using COMSOL®, this geometry is simulated in air, with an electric current applied to the yz face (Fig. 1(a)) along x-direction. The current density distribution and the associated Oersted field profile (Fig. 1(b) and (c)) are obtained from COMSOL® simulations, at the reference current Iref = 1 mA. Given the relatively lower conductivity of the FM layer (3.12 × 106 S/m) compared to the HM layer (8.9 × 106 S/m), the majority (74%) of the current flows through the HM layer, rendering the spin filtering effect negligible in the FM layer. The SHE in Pt leads to the generation of pure spin current with −y polarization that diffuses into the Py layer, perpendicular to the xy plane. The Py layer is discretized into a grid of 512 × 512 × 1 rectangular cells, with each cell measuring 2 × 2 × 5 nm3, which is smaller than the Py's exchange length along the lateral directions. The material parameters of Py are defined as follows: gyromagnetic ratio γ = 29.53 GHz/T, damping constant α = 0.02 , saturation magnetization Ms = 8 × 105 A/m , and exchange constant Aex = 12 × 10−12 J/m . The magnetization dynamics is obtained by numerically integrating the LLG 7 equation. Initially, the magnetization is relaxed for 5 ns before applying IDC. The magnetization dynamics is simulated for a total of 45 ns for each IDC value, excluding the initial 15 ns to account for stable precession and eliminate transient effects. To eliminate the requirement for an external biasing field, we exploit the inherent uniaxial anisotropy of the ferromagnetic material. The uniaxial anisotropy generates the anisotropy field, which, combined with the demagnetization field and Oersted field, forms the effective field (Heff ) responsible for the precession of magnetization. In order to investigate the oscillation properties of such a bias-free SHNO under the influence of an anisotropic field, we performed the simulation with varying the DC current, uniaxial anisotropy constant (Ku) and the orientation of easy axis. Easy axis angle is defined such that it maximizes the amplitude of auto-oscillations. This angle approaches the y-axis for narrower constrictions, while increasing the constriction width causes the angle to shift towards the x-axis (see Appendix C (Fig. 8)). This behaviour arises from the dipolar interaction originated from the geometrical confinement at the constriction region which is characterized by the constriction width. (See Table 1). III. RESULTS The width dependent field free auto oscillations are studied for NC width ranging from 100 nm to 20 nm at uniaxial anisotropy values varying from Ku = 5 kJ/m 3 to 15 kJ/m3. The magnetization trajectory during auto oscillations for 100 nm at Ku = 10 kJ/m3 is shown in Fig 1(b). It was observed that the dynamics for 100 nm show a red shift in frequency with an increase in current, regardless of the anisotropy values. Increasing the anisotropy (Ku) led to an amplitude increase due to the closer proximity of spin wave wells which is caused by an elevated Bint. The red shift in frequency was observed till the constriction width of 40 nm (see Appendix E), where all the constriction had a negative δf δI. Conversely, 8 for 30 nm constriction, initially, a blue shift in frequency is observed with almost no frequency tunability at high IDC (Fig. 2). at different Ku values. The spin wave (SW) wells for these narrow widths are mostly restricted to constriction. On the flip side, the frequency response of the 20 nm constriction exhibited a consistent blue shift with current, accompanied by significantly more constrained spin wave wells. These different magnetodynamical behaviour originate from the change in the total internal magnetic field Bint at the constriction. In our case the Bint also has an additional contribution from Banis along with BOe, Bdemag due to the uniaxial anisotropy present in the system. The anisotropy field Banis is represented by. Banis = 2Ku Ms cos θ û (4) The θ is the angle between magnetization M and the easy axis and û is the direction of the easy axis. The Banis decreases as the amplitude of the oscillations is increased. The spin torque τs ∝ Jc , as a consequence the amplitude scales with an increase in current which in turn reduces the Banis. The dependence of Bdemag on auto oscillation amplitude is attributed to the magnitude of Bdemag being 9 proportionate to the component of magnetization along the corresponding direction. Increase in auto oscillation amplitude decreases the component of magnetization along the easy axis, leading to a diminished contribution from Bdemag. Now the Bint , taking Banis and Bdemag into account, can be written as Bint = 2Ku Ms cosθuimi − Bdemag i (5) current for different constriction width at Ku = 10 kJ/m3. Fig. 3 illustrates the current dependence of Banis, Bint and Bdemag at Ku = 10 kJ/m3 for different constriction widths. At all three constrictions, a decrease in Banis and Bdemag is observed with an increase in current. This is due to the increased amplitude of oscillation with the current. It is also interesting to see that for the smallest width of 20 nm, Bdemag is ten times larger than that of the 100 nm, which can be explained by the fact that the dipolar interaction energy at the center of the constriction varies inversely with the constriction width. The major contribution to Bint for 20 nm NC comes from the Bdemag (Fig. 3(c)) while for 100 nm NC width the predominant contribution comes from Banis (Fig. 3(a)). Consequently, the Bint for small NC width follows Bdemag instead of Banis, contrary to the behaviour observed in large constriction widths (see Appendix A Fig. 6). 10 The frequency tunability of the auto oscillations is a crucial aspect of the SHNO. The frequency of auto-oscillations f is extracted by performing FFT over the stable regime of oscillations. Current tunability of f with varying constriction width and Ku is shown in Fig. 2. Notably, the magnetodynamical behaviour of field free SHNOs is strikingly different for all three constriction widths. This can be described by the magnetodynamic nonlinearity of the system. In the case of a thin film with in-plane fields, the complex spin wave amplitude is described by δb δt = −i[ωo − DΔb + N|b|2b] − Γb + f ( r Rc ) σIb − f ( r Rc ) σI|b|2b (6) Here, ωo is the FMR frequency, D = 2Aex Ms δωo δH is spin wave dispersion coefficient, Rc is related to the effective area of spin current injection, Γ = α (ωH + ωM 2 ) is spin wave dissipation rate with ωH = γHint, ωM = 4πγMs. N is the non-linear frequency shift given by. N = − ωHωM(ωH+ωM 4 ) ωo(ωH+ωM 2 ) (7) Considering a standing spin wave bullet solution, b = Boψ ( r l) e−iωt. Where ψ describes the spatial profile of the bullet. The frequency of the oscillations is given as ω = ωo + NP. Where P = |Bo|2 is the power of the oscillations, which directly relates to the amplitude. The value of N depends on the Bint and differs for all three constrictions. For SHNOs with in plane fields the value of N can be approximated with equation (7) (see Appendix D). It can be clearly deduced from the expression of N, that for positive Bint , the non-linear frequency shift will be negative. This is evident in the case of the 100 nm constriction (Fig. 3(a)), where Bint is dominated by Banis and stays positive (see Appendix A (Fig. 6)) for all Ku values throughout the IDC sweep. Consequently, the frequency of the oscillations for this constriction decreases with current, exhibiting a red shift. In contrast, the value of N for 30 nm constriction is positive 11 but stagnates for high IDC because of minuscule change in Bint. The frequency response shows a blue shift for low IDC, for high IDC there is little to no frequency tunability with current (Fig. 2(b)). The frequency response for 20 nm constriction shows a blue shift for about all current values due to the positive value of non-linear frequency shift. (Fig. 2(c)). An increase in frequency with Ku is also observed which is attributed to that the frequency is characterized by the Bint . Increment in Ku increases the Banis ’s contribution to Bint, which increases the frequency. and Ku values. The threshold current density for auto oscillations increases with decrease in Ku and constriction width. The Ith depends on the Bint, from the macrospin model Ith can be written as Ith = γα 2|τDL|(m̂o. σ̂) (μoMs + 2Bint − Bint 2 2Ms ) (8) 12 Here, |τDL| is the magnitude of damping like SOT, (m̂o. σ̂) is the angle between relaxed magnetization and spin polarization. According to the equation above, the threshold current Ith should decrease with increasing Bint. Fig. 2(c) shows a sharp increase in Ith with decreasing Ku for 20 nm constriction as the change in Bint is very steep at low constriction widths. For 20 nm and 30 nm constriction, the auto oscillation could not be excited for Ku = 5 kJ/m3 even at current densities of approximately 7 TA/m2 . This limitation arises from the substantial Bdemag at the centre of the constriction, which hinders oscillation excitation as the SOT fails to overcome τD. A spatial profile of the auto oscillation amplitude is shown in Fig. 4, which is obtained using the FFT of spatiotemporal data of the oscillations in each cell. Notably, the localization of amplitude varies across different constriction widths.The formation of spin wave (SW) wells at the constrictions follows the distribution of Bint. In sufficiently wide constrictions, as the current increases, SW modes emerge at opposite edges of the constriction, gradually approaching each other with increase in Ku. Beyond a critical current, these modes detach from the edges and begin propagating. These SW wells move closer to each other and try to align with the easy axis as the increase in Ku is results in the enhancement in Bint. The alignment of edge modes at the opposite constriction edges in narrow constrictions differs from that of 100 nm constrictions due to the proximity of the constriction edges. This proximity leads to the dominance of the demagnetization field over other fields, resulting in a negative sign for the Bint. The opposite direction of the Bint at different constrictions, results in SW wells having positive and negative slope from x-axis respectively for wider and narrower constrictions. Additionally, in 20 nm and 30 nm constrictions, the spin wave (SW) wells occupy the entire available volume within the constriction. 13 different Ku values. (a) 100 nm (b) 30 nm (c) 20 nm. An increment in amplitude of the auto oscillations with uniaxial anisotropy and current for all the constriction widths is observed (Fig. 5). Higher amplitude at higher current densities is due to the increased SOT at the constriction, which pulls the magnetization far out of its equilibrium. To understand the variation of amplitude with the Ku the Bint distribution at the constriction for all three constrictions is examined. The change in Bint at a similar current density for different Ku is due to the change in the Banis which competes with the Bdemag as both are opposite, thus the high Banis results in a high Bint. The SW wells move closer to each other due to the high Bint resulting in a larger auto-oscillation area at the constriction, which increases the auto-oscillation amplitude. Additionally, a decrease in auto oscillation amplitude with constriction width is observed. This is attributed to very high Bint amplitude due to the dominating Bdemag. High |Bint| gives rise to strong damping torque which reduces the auto oscillation amplitude. 14 The fluctuations in the amplitude are also observed, because at high Ku values the amplitude of the oscillations is shared between multiple harmonics. When the minor harmonics have high amplitude, the amplitude of the major harmonic shrinks. This behaviour is also visible in the linewidth spectra of the auto oscillations (see Appendix B). The low linewidth corresponds to the high amplitude of the major harmonic; on the other hand, high linewidth appears due to the significant amplitude of other minor harmonics. IV. CONCLUSION In summary, we have demonstrated that the uniaxial anisotropy-based field free SHNOs exhibit significant variations in auto oscillation properties with change in constriction width. Wide constrictions are primarily influenced by the anisotropy field, resulting in a consistently negative frequency shift with current. In contrast, narrow constrictions are predominantly governed by dipolar interactions, leading to a primarily positive frequency shift. Decreasing the constriction width results in a lower oscillation frequency due to the increased central magnetic field Bint at the centre of the constriction. Additionally, the oscillation of SW modes forming at the constriction have different behaviour with changes in constriction width. For 100 nm constriction the SW wells are aligned at the opposite edges of the constriction with a positive slope from x-axis, while for the narrow constrictions where Bdemag dominates the SW wells have a negative slope. Furthermore, the SW modes for wide constrictions stick to the edges of the constriction whereas for narrower (20 and 30 nm) constrictions these modes are inherently different and predominantly occupy the entire constriction region from the start. Our results show that the miniaturization of field-free SHNOs essentially leads to lower threshold current of auto oscillation. However, wider constriction provides higher oscillation amplitude and better frequency tunability with input current. These findings 15 illuminate the field-free auto-oscillation dynamics of SHNOs across varying length scales, opening avenues for their application in diverse unconventional computing schemes like neuromorphic computing, reservoir computing, and probabilistic computing. Data availability statement The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.