Origin of correlated isolated flat bands in copper-substituted lead phosphate apatite Sin ́ead M. Griffin1,2 1Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, 94720, USA and 2Molecular Foundry Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, 94720, USA (Dated: August 4, 2023) A recent report of room temperature superconductivity at ambient pressure in Cu-substituted apatite (‘LK99’) has invigorated interest in the understanding of what materials and mechanisms can allow for high-temperature superconductivity. Here I perform density functional theory calcu- lations on Cu-substituted lead phosphate apatite, identifying correlated isolated flat bands at the Fermi level, a common signature of high transition temperatures in already-established families of superconductors. I elucidate the origins of these isolated bands as arising from a structural distor- tion induced by the Cu ions and a chiral charge density wave from the Pb lone pairs. These results suggest that a minimal two-band model can encompass much of the low-energy physics in this sys- tem. Finally, I discuss the implications of my results on possible superconductivity in Cu-doped apatite. INTRODUCTION High-TC superconductors are arguably the holy grail of condensed matter physics with huge potential appli- cations for an energy-efficient future. The first class of superconductors that were considered to be high-TC were the cuprates which were discovered by Bednorz and M ̈uller in 1987 . The cuprates have been subsequently followed by several new classes including the Fe-pnictides in 2008 and the nickelates . While significant strides have been made in the dis- covery and understanding of high-TC superconductors, and we continue to unearth novel examples within estab- lished classes , a definitive roadmap to achieving room- temperature TC under ambient pressures has remained elusive. Common to many of these high-TC supercon- ducting families are strongly correlated bands which can give rise to unconventional mechanisms for Cooper pair formation , and proximity to multiple competing interactions such as antiferromagnetism, charge density waves and spin-density waves. These phases can compete or coexist with superconductivity where fluctuations be- tween these states are believed to play a significant role for achieving high-TC. Searching for these features in new materials systems is therefore a promising route for finding new classes of high-TC superconductors. For in- stance, the nickelate superconductors were originally pre- dicted in theory by Anisimov, Bukhvalov and Rice as an analogy to the cuprate superconductors . Similar ap- proaches have also been proposed to selectively design a material with the sought-after isolated d-manifold that is associated with strong correlations , and have inspired high-throughput searches for good candidate materials, further expanding the horizons of high-Tc superconduc- tivity . The recent report of possible room temperature su- perconductivity at ambient pressures in Cu-substituted apatite (also known as ‘LK99’) motivates the need for a thorough understanding of the structure-property relationships in these compounds to begin to unravel their potential correlated physics. In this Letter, I use ab initio calculations to elucidate the key competing in- teractions in Cu-doped apatite at the mean-field density functional level. METHODS I used the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [12–15] for all density functional theory (DFT) calculations with full calculation details given in the SI. I applied a Hubbard-U correction to account for the un- derlocalization of the Cu-d states. I tested values of U between 2 eV and 6 eV, finding my results were similar for all values calculated. The results in the main text are for U = 4 eV which gives lattice parameters within 1% of experiment . RESULTS Structural Properties Apatites are materials with the general formula A10(TO4)6X2±x, where A = alkaline or rare earth metal; T = Ge, Si, or P; and X = halide, O, or OH. The name ‘apatite’ derives from the Greek apat ̄e meaning ‘deceit’ as a result of the diverse range of forms it can take . Here I consider the lead-phosphate apatite Pb10(PO4)6(OH)2. Taking its structure reported from X-ray diffraction in Ref. as the starting point, its structure following a full optimization is depicted in Fig. 1. It adopts the typical crystal structure of various apatite chemistries, namely it forms a network comprising PbO6 prisms that are corner shared with PO4 tetrahedra. I refer to these Pb as Pb(1), in keeping with the convention in litera- ture . This framework is filled with Pb6(OH)2 where the (OH)2 forms a chain in the center of a hexagonal arXiv:2307.16892v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 3 Aug 2023 2 equivalent Pb sites as described in the main text. Columns of O or OH sit in the center column defined by Pb(2) hexagonal structure. (b) Calculated electronic localization function for Pb10(PO4)6OH2. Oxygens surrounding Pb(2) are repelled by the lone pair. structure defined by these Pb(2) atoms. While here I consider OH−1 filling the hexagonal column, I obtained similar results for O only in the column. Typically ap- atites adopt the hexagonal P63/m space group – here our resulting structure has P63 owing to the breaking of re- flection from the OH molecule ordering. However, small structural deviations from the P63/m commonly occur depending on its constituents. While the Pb(1) forms the overall framework with the PO4 tetrahedra, the Pb(2) play a crucial role in Pb-O connectivity and polyhedra tilts throughout the struc- ture. In fact, while both Pb(1) and Pb(2) possess 6s2 lone pairs, only the latter is stereochemically active. I verify this by calculating the electronic localization func- tion (ELF) as shown in Fig. 1(b), finding that the Pb(2) lone pairs form a chiral arrangement that make an angle of ≈ 105◦ with the a-axis (see SI for more details). The arrangement of the lone pairs sets the resulting oxygen coordination of the Pb(2), namely its six oxygens are ar- ranged asymmetrically as a result of their repulsion from the lone pair forming a chiral charge density wave. Since these oxygen are corner shared with the PO4, the struc- tural distortions associated with the Pb(2) lone pair ac- tivity propagate throughout the structure. Such an effect has been discussed previously in various apatite materi- als, noting that the lone pair ordering differs depending on the specific system . I next consider the substitution of Cu on a Pb(1) site resulting in CuPb9(PO4)6(OH)2, with the fully opti- mized structure shown in Fig. 2(b). I find several changes to the structure with the inclusion of Cu. Firstly, all lat- tice parameters decrease with a going from 9.875 ̊A to 9.738 ̊A and c going from 7.386 ̊A to 7.307 ̊A. While my calculated lattice parameters agree well with those reported in Ref., I find a greater structure collapse than their report of a going from 9.865 ̊A without Cu to 9.843 ̊A with Cu, and c going from 7.431 ̊A without Cu to 7.428 ̊A with Cu. Interestingly, I find Cu substitution results in a global structural distortion that results in a change in coordination from nine to six (with a cutoff coordinated Pb(1) sites. (b) Cu-substituted structure show- ing six-coordinated Cu and Pb(1) sites with distorted trigonal prism coordination with two different bondlengths are a rigid twist of ≈ 24◦ between the upper and lower triangles. A car- toon of the resulting crystal-field diagram for Cu-d9 is given on the right. of 3 ̊A) not only for the Cu on the Pb(1) site, but also for all other Pb(1) sites. This results in a modification of the polyhedral tilts throughout the structure, most notably in the PO4 polyhedra, as seen in Fig. 2(b). I classify the distortion through analysis of the symmetry- adapted phonon modes before and after Cu substitution finding the structural distortion to be caused by Γ1 and Γ2 modes of amplitudes 1.19 ̊A and 1.78 ̊A, respectively. Visualization of these symmetry-adapted modes is given in the SI (Fig. S1); this analysis confirms that the struc- tural distortion caused by the Cu substitution on Pb(1) is primarily driven by polyhedral tilts of the PO4 and their corner-shared oxygen neighbors. Looking closely at the change in coordination of Cu on the Pb(1) site, I see the Cu2+ is now six-coordinated with oxygen forming a distorted Jahn-Teller trigonal prism. In an ideal trigonal prism the anions are arranged at the vertices of a regular triangular prism with the transition metal at the center with D3h symmetry. However, break- ing in-plane mirror symmetry results in Jahn-Teller dis- torted trigonal crystal field with C3v symmetry, such as is found in the Janus compounds . Here I find the mir- ror is already broken by the next-nearest neighbor P ions – the Cu-O distance that has nearby P is 2.06 ̊A, whereas the Cu-O without surround P ions is 2.35 ̊A. Such out-of- plane asymmetry in the Cu environment results in a lo- cal dipole in z which can also influence the resulting elec- tronic structure . In addition to the mirror symmetry breaking, the O triangles are also rotated at a small angle of ∼ 24◦ with respect to each other, referred to as a Bailar twist in molecules, giving the final distorted trigonal prism. Interestingly, the same structural distortion has been observed upon substitution of U on the Ca(1) site in fluorapatite Ca10(PO4)6F2 as measured from X-ray ab- sorption spectroscopy . There the authors found that 3 (left) and corresponding density of states (right). The spin-up bands are depicted in solid orange, and the spin-down bands are dashed blue. The total density of states is shaded grey with projections shown of the Cu-d orbitals (pink) and its neighboring O-p orbitals (green). In both plots the Fermi level is set to 0 eV and is marked by the dashed line. the U substitution on the Ca(1) sites causes an usual 6- coordinated structure – a trigonal prism with six equal bondlengths of 2.06 ̊A with an undetermined Bailar twist angle, however. Electronic Structure I present the calculated spin-polarized electronic struc- ture in Fig. 3. Remarkably, I find an isolated set of flat bands crossing the Fermi level, with a maximum band- width of ∼130 meV (see Fig.4) that is separated from the rest of the valence manifold by 160 meV. Such a narrow bandwidth is particularly indicative of strongly correlated bands. These especially flat bands are con- sistent with the Cu-O coordination where I find Cu-O bondlengths of 2.35 ̊A and 2.06 ̊A in the distorted trigo- nal prism. For comparison, the Cu-O bondlengths in the cuprate superconductors are typically ≤ 2 ̊A (in-plane) and ≤ 2.3 ̊A (apical) , giving further evidence of the unusual coordination and resulting band localization in this isolated Cu-d manifold. The crystal-field splitting for the trigonal prism com- prises a single dz2, doubly degenerate dxy and dx2−y2, and doubly degenerate dyz and dxz. In fact, the relative posi- tioning of the dz2 and the dyz/dxz is set by the anisotropy induced by the mirror-symmetry breaking – large values of asymmetry can cause the dz2 to be destabilized. In our case for Cu2+ with a d9 configuration I expect half filling of the doubly degenerate dyz/dxz bands – this is corroborated with our calculations in Fig. 3 where I find two bands of dyz/dxz character at the Fermi level that are are half filled. My results suggest that low-energy physics of this system can be described by a two-band in smaller energy range around the Fermi level showing the isolated two-band Cu-d manifold. The Fermi level is set to 0 eV and is marked by the dashed line. dyz/dxz model, similar to that originally suggested for Fe-pnictide superconductors . However, unlike other correlated-d band superconductors, in this system the Cu-d bands are particularly flat – there is minimal band broadening from neighboring oxygen ions. If pre- vious assumptions about band flatness driving supercon- ductivity are correct, then this result would suggest a much more robust (higher temperature) superconduct- ing phase exists in this system, even compared to well- established high-TC systems. While the calculations presented here are performed for GGA+U with a U = 4 eV applied to the Cu-d, I find the same qualitative features of the band structures for a wide range of U values, as presented in the SI. This sug- gests that the presence of such an isolated manifold of flat Cu-d bands is a feature of the structural reconstruc- tion and new crystal field environment provided by the apatite network. I further confirm this by calculating the band structure of the Cu-substituted compound without performing a structural relaxation, that is, taking the structure of the ideal Pb10(PO4)6(OH)2 and replacing a Pb(1) with Cu without allowing the structure to relax. In this case, I find slight spin-polarization in the band structure, however all Cu-d states are now in the bulk valence manifold and do not form an isolated manifold (see SI Fig. S3). Finally, the top of the valence band is made up of the Pb(2)-s states, confirming their contribu- tion to the stereochemical activity of the lone pairs (see SI). I next investigate the exchange interactions between Cu ions in different unit cells by constructing doubled unit cells in the in-plane and out-of-plane directions. I find that there is a preference of 2 meV/Cu for ferro- magnetic coupling in the out-of-plane direction (with a Cu-Cu separation of c = 7.307 ̊A), whereas a preference of 7 μeV/Cu for antiferromagnetic coupling in the in- plane direction (with a Cu-Cu separation of a = 9.738 ̊A). However, while this result is indicative of the potential 4 exchange interactions in the system, it relies on the un- realistic assumption that the Cu ions will sit on the same substitution position in each unit cell. A full study of potential exchange interactions for various Cu locations is out of the scope of this work, and will crucially be informed by the Cu locations determined in experiment. So far all calculations have been for Cu on the Pb(1) site, which is the site occupancy reported in Ref. . I also calculated the structural and electronic properties of Cu in the Pb(2) site with the resulting structure and bands given in the SI. In this location, the Cu interrupts the hexagonal network that is characteristic of the ap- atite structure, which causes a structural rearrangement to the lower P1 symmetry, which would have a profound effect on structural measures such as x-ray diffraction. The Cu substituted in this position is now tetrahedrally coordinated by oxygen, and has a significantly different electronic structure with no correlated d bands crossing the Fermi level, as detailed in the SI. In fact, I find that Cu on this Pb(2) is 1.08 eV more energetically favorable than Cu on the Pb(1) site, suggesting possible difficulties in robustly obtaining Cu substituted on the Pb(1) site. DISCUSSION These theoretical results suggest that the apatite struc- ture provides a unique framework for stabilizing highly localized Cu-d9 states that form a strongly correlated flat band at the Fermi level. The central role of stereochem- ically active 6s2 lone pairs of Pb(2) manifests in the for- mation of a chiral charge density wave and the propaga- tion of structural distortions with connected polyhedra. When Cu is substituted on a Pb(1) site, the result is a cascade of structural alterations, including reduced lat- tice parameters, changes in coordination, and modified polyhedral tilts, leading to a local Jahn-Teller distorted trigonal prism around Cu. This results in an unusually flat set of isolated dyz/dxz bands with half-filling. I briefly note that achieving such a crystal field envi- ronment should also be possible in intercalated twisted heterogeneous bilayers where selection of different hetero- bilayers can provide the mirror symmetry breaking, while moir ́e twist can provide an arbitrary rotation of the up- per and lower triangles. In fact such a platform would be ideal for probing the physics found here given its broad range of tunability and the state-of-the-art characteriza- tion probes for their interrogation . I now discuss the potential implications of these fea- tures of Cu-substituted apatite for possible high-TC su- perconductivity, and in particular the role of the flat bands and the presence of competing magnetic interac- tions and phonons. Isolated, flat bands have long been a target for achieving high-TC as predicted from BCS theory[26–28]. The critical temperature TC given by by of the effective attractive interaction and ρ0(EF ) is the density of states at the Fermi surface. In a flat band where the density of states diverges, TC is proportional to |U|. This suggests that, at low interaction strengths, the critical temperature in flat bands could be signifi- cantly enhanced, as is currently being explored in various moir ́e systems. In our case, the correlated bands have a bandwidth of ∼ 130 meV which is less than their sepa- ration from the rest of the valence manifold (160 meV) at the level of density functional theory. While strong cor- relations will need to be taken into account adequately to accurately describe these scenarios, these are promis- ing hints for these proposals that predict that the TC is proportional to the interaction strength. In contrast to conventional superconductors, where phonon-mediated interactions govern Cooper pair forma- tion, there is wide consensus that other bosonic excita- tions are responsible for the attractive pair formation in high-TC superconductors ranging from paramagnons to spin- and charge-density waves . In this system, I have identified several potential sources of fluctuations that could contribute to pairing. Firstly, I identified a charge density wave (CDW) driven by chiral lone pair ordering on the Pb(2) sites – the presence of this CDW is strongly connected to the structural rearrangement that occurs when Cu is incorporated into the Pb(1) lattice sites. In addition to this, I identified two zone-center phonon modes that trigger the global structural deforma- tion that occurs as a result of the Cu substitution, sug- gesting potentially strong electron-phonon coupling for these modes. Finally, I calculated the relative exchange interactions between Cu in neighboring unit cells. Inter- estingly for the out-of-plane coupling, that is, along the Cu-Pb-Cu one-dimensional chains, I find ferromagnetic coupling is favored by 2 meV/Cu over antiferromagnet coupling, even though the Cu are over 7 ̊A apart, sug- gesting that spin fluctuations could also play a key role. Finally, the calculations presented here suggest that Cu substitution on the appropriate (Pb(1)) site displays many key characteristics for high-TC superconductivity, namely a particularly flat isolated d-manifold, and the potential presence of fluctuating magnetism, charge and phonons. However, substitution on the other Pb(2) does not appear to have such sought-after properties, despite being the lower-energy substitution site. This result hints to the synthesis challenge in obtaining Cu substituted on the appropriate site for obtaining a bulk superconducting sample. Nevertheless, I expect the identification of this new material class to spur on further investigations of doped apatite minerals given these tantalizing theoretical signatures and experimental reports of possible high-TC superconductivity.