Microscopic crystallographic analysis of dislocations in molecular crystals Sang T. Pham1, Natalia Koniuch1, Emily Wynne1, Andy Brown1, Sean M. Collins1,2* 1Bragg Centre for Materials Research & School of Chemical and Process Engineering, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK 2School of Chemistry, University of Leeds, Woodhouse Lane, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK *Email: s.m.collins@leeds.ac.uk Organic molecular crystals encompass a vast range of materials from pharmaceuticals to organic optoelectronics and proteins to waxes in biological and industrial settings. Crystal defects from grain boundaries to dislocations are known to play key roles in mechanisms of growth1,2 and also in the functional properties of molecular crystals3–5. In contrast to the precise analysis of individual defects in metals, ceramics, and inorganic semiconductors enabled by electron microscopy, significantly greater ambiguity remains in the experimental determination of individual dislocation character and slip systems in molecular materials3. In large part, nanoscale dislocation analysis in molecular crystals has been hindered by the severely constrained electron exposures required to avoid irreversibly degrading these crystals6. Here, we present a low-dose, single-exposure approach enabling nanometre-resolved analysis of individual extended dislocations in molecular crystals. We demonstrate the approach for a range of crystal types to reveal dislocation character and operative slip systems unambiguously. Across materials classes, dislocations in crystals have a profound effect on functional properties. Mechanical properties of metals are intimately linked with dislocation motion and pinning7,8. While typically seen as deleterious to performance in semiconductors, such as in reduced efficiencies in GaN-based light emitting diodes9, they have been identified as a means for advantageous modulation of ionic charge transport properties in oxides10. These findings have relied heavily on precise imaging and diffraction studies by electron microscopy for analysis of individual dislocations. While scanning probe microscopy,11 X-ray topography12, and modelling3 techniques have supported dislocation characterisation in organic molecular crystals, these techniques lack the spatial resolution to image individual dislocations at high density. Dislocations are in-effect a planar cut through a crystal followed by atomic displacements in a particular direction, the Burgers vector B (Fig. 1a). The singular displacement direction creates a linear defect, and this dislocation line vector u coincides with the location of maximum local lattice distortion in the crystal. Together, these vectors describe the operative slip systems and the character of the dislocation, i.e. edge, screw, or mixed dislocations. For edge dislocations B is perpendicular to u, while for screw dislocations B is parallel to u (Fig. 1a). The classical electron microscopy approach to characterise a dislocation involves the combination of electron diffraction and diffraction contrast imaging to evaluate the behaviour of sets of lattice planes and associated diffraction vectors ghkl in the vicinity of the dislocation. For ghkl∙(B × u) = 0, a unique invisibility criterion is established for ghkl∙B = 0. By exploring a range of diffraction conditions, the Burgers vector direction can be determined unambiguously. distortion of planes due to edge, mixed, and screw dislocations, with no distortion for planes corresponding to diffraction vectors ghkl at the invisibility criterion. b, Schematic of an edge dislocation core in a p-terphenyl crystal with Burgers vector B = . The blue parallelograms represent molecules in a plane below those in orange. A black rectangle or line marks the ab plane of the p- terphenyl lattice in the plane below (blue) the dislocation core (┴). c, A bend contour appears where the sample curvature brings planes to the exact Bragg condition, with displacements in the bend contour due to abrupt changes in the orientation of planes around the dislocation core, marked by the dislocation line u. The electron beam is scanned in (x, y) enabling reconstruction of bend contours from multiple diffraction vectors ghkl in parallel from two-dimensional diffraction patterns (kx, ky) recorded at each probe position to give a four-dimensional dataset (x, y, kx, ky). The sample bending is exaggerated for visual effect. Atomic resolution imaging of dislocations13, including at fluences <200 e- Å-2 in halide perovskites14, as well as three-dimensional imaging modes15,16 have also been demonstrated. However, none of the existing approaches support dislocation analysis at ~10 e- Å-2 as required for electron microscopy of many organic molecular crystals6. Moreover, the complex molecular packing of organic crystals in projection (Fig. 1b) generally precludes lattice imaging of dislocations beyond a few high-symmetry orientations for pure edge dislocations17,18. Early work on real space crystallography supported inference of plausible Burgers vector directions in molecular crystals19–21, but these dislocation analyses have only been reported for organic molecular crystals with relatively high stability under high energy electron beam exposure such as p-terphenyl (Fig. 1b). Scanning electron diffraction (SED), a type of four-dimensional scanning transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM) with a nearly parallel, low convergence angle probe,22 suggests a route to low-dose electron microscopy for dislocation analysis. SED combines real and reciprocal space data-acquisition simultaneously and can be operated at sufficiently low electron fluences to detect mosaicity in peptide crystals23 and to examine the role of molecular packing in energy transport in organic semiconductors24–26. We now establish a methodology for single-exposure SED analysis of extended, in-plane dislocations in thin, electron transparent organic crystals at electron fluences as low as 5 e- Å-2. We apply this approach to aromatic molecules, long-chain hydrocarbons, and hydrogen-bonding crystals as key organic optoelectronic, wax, and pharmaceutical model systems. The methodology enables the determination of the operative slip systems for orientations on and off high symmetry zone axes and the identification of edge, screw, and mixed type dislocation character as well as the handedness of screw components. SED enables the parallel acquisition of many diffraction vector intensities by recording a two-dimensional diffraction pattern at each probe position in a two-dimensional scan (Fig. 1c). By selecting individual ghkl, we construct virtual dark field (VDF) images from the four- dimensional dataset. For electron-transparent crystals deposited onto electron microscopy grids, bending of the crystals results in the appearance of bands marking the positions in the sample that are exactly at the Bragg condition for a specific ghkl, denoted bend contours. For planes that are distorted due to the presence of a dislocation (ghkl∙B ≠ 0) a break in the otherwise continuous bend contour appears at the dislocation line u19,20,27, akin to features observed in convergent beam electron diffraction of dislocations28. Such a break corresponds to a displacement of the bend contour along u (Supplementary Note 1). For ghkl at the invisibility criterion, the bend contours remain continuous. In SED, all recorded ghkl in the diffraction plane of sufficient signal-to-noise ratio can be used to construct VDF images for this bend contour analysis as a function of the azimuthal angle in the diffraction plane φ (Supplementary Figure 1). A geometric model of the tilt of lattice planes hkl across the dislocation core describes the resulting variation in the bend contour displacement f(φ) for in-plane dislocations (Supplementary Figure 2): f(φ) = A arctan(B cos2(φ − C)) (1) where A, B, and C are fitting coefficients related to the local radius of curvature, the Burgers vector, and the azimuthal orientation of the diffraction pattern on the detector, respectively. The displacement f(φ) is zero at the invisibility criterion and maximal along the Burgers vector direction. The crystal orientation ascertained from the electron diffraction data together with the Burgers vector direction (equation 1) provides the necessary information to identify the operative slip system (Supplementary Note 1) as well as the dislocation character by inspection of the relative directions of B and u. the p-terphenyl unit cell. b, An ADF-STEM image, dislocation network (green lines tracing diffraction contrast features), and average diffraction pattern extracted from a single SED (4D-STEM) dataset. The diffraction pattern indexes to the zone axis. c, A polar plot of the bend contour displacements at the solid dislocation line highlighted in b for a series of ghkl as a function of their azimuthal angle φ. The red trace marks a fit to equation 1 with the measured displacements in blue. Two VDF images corresponding to the displacements marked (i, ii) depicting bend contours at the ghkl∙B = 0 and ghkl∙B ≠ 0 conditions. The hkl are marked on the individual VDF images. d, The p-terphenyl unit cell oriented to match the sample orientation. The magenta arrow marks the Burgers vector B = . which crystallises in the P21/a space group with herringbone packing (CCDC 1269381). Among organic crystals, p-terphenyl is relatively stable under electron beam exposure, with a critical fluence (CF) >330 e- Å-2 (Supplementary Figure 3). Figure 2a shows an annular dark field (ADF) STEM image of a p-terphenyl thin film with dense dislocation network. The length of individual dislocation lines that extend across the thin film, e.g. >2 μm for the selected dislocation (solid line), indicates that these dislocations are predominantly in-plane or <3° out-of-plane (estimated film thickness as 10-100 nm). The density of these dislocations in the field of view is in the range 0.32-3.2 х 1010 cm-2 for the estimated thickness of the film (Supplementary Table 1). The area-averaged electron diffraction pattern was indexed to , a typical film orientation for p-terphenyl20. Figure 2c presents the recorded bend contour displacements as a function of azimuthal angle φ in a polar plot (φ is the angle relative to the horizontal axis of the diffraction patterns, see Supplementary Note 1). A fit to equation 1 is overlaid, showing correspondence between the experimental data and the functional form of the geometric model. Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Fig. 4-5 provide technical details of the curve fitting process, and Supplementary Table 2 includes fitting parameters. No displacement is visible for g200 or g2̅00 while significant displacements are visible for other ghkl, e.g. g210 (Fig. 2c). Based on the extended, in-plane character of the dislocation we show that B = (see also Methods) and identify the operative slip system as (001), consistent with previously inferred slip systems in p- terphenyl20. Given B is neither parallel nor perpendicular to u, the dislocation has mixed character. Supplementary Figure 6 shows two further dislocations from the same field of view, likewise assigned as mixed, B = dislocations. The bend contours show the expected node pattern for screw components near ghkl·Bscrew = n (Supplementary Note 3)27. Critically, the fitting approach (equation 1) means SED-based dislocation analysis is not limited to areas or samples with a large number of ghkl. Practically, many samples may have a limited field of view, reducing the number of bend contours that can be used in analysis, or crystals may be tilted away from high symmetry zone axes, likewise reducing the number of ghkl available for analysis. Supplementary Figures 7-9 present further analyses in p-terphenyl with incomplete sampling of equation 1 and for tilts estimated at 3.6° from (Supplementary Figure 8), identifying additional Burgers vectors B = and [12̅0]. These additional Burgers vectors are consistent with all slip systems reported previously by inference from TEM imaging20. We further demonstrate determination of the relative handedness of screw components between multiple dislocations by analysing the ‘twisting’ of the bend contours at the dislocations (Supplementary Figure 10). much more beam sensitive material with CF ~20 e- Å-2 (Supplementary Figure 11). Figure 3a depicts the anthracene unit cell (P21/a, CCDC 1103062), and Figure 3b presents an ADF- STEM image and corresponding dislocation network determined from the diffraction contrast. A large bend contour is visible at the top of Fig. 3b. No single VDF generated from this dataset showed a zero-displacement bend contour (as expected for ghkl∙B = 0), as the magnification used to acquire this dataset meant many bend contours did not cross the dislocation lines within the field of view. Nevertheless, fitting of the polar plot is unambiguous (Fig. 3d) and supports determination of B = for this mixed-type dislocation (Fig. 3e). Depending on the particular ghkl bend contours crossing a dislocation line and the width of these contours, the approach results in a loss of precision in the Burgers vector direction. Supplementary Figure 12 illustrates such a case for a dislocation in anthracene where a low- index Burgers vector assignment is less definitive. In this case, the Burgers vector extracted from the polar function is a minimum 3.6° from a candidate B in the ab plane [uv0] = [1̅5̅0]. Burgers vectors in the ab plane reflect slip between the planes of anthracene molecules where intermolecular interactions are weakest. While this dislocation (Supplementary Figure 12) exhibits predominantly edge-type character, the relative handedness of the screw component is also discernible. In addition to dislocations in solution-grown anthracene films, analysis of dislocations in spin-coated films demonstrate the versatility of the method (Supplementary Figure 13). Photodimerisation and trap states have been linked to dislocations in anthracene29,30, motivating further examination of individual dislocations in anthracene and wider organic optoelectronic materials. molecule and unit cell. b, ADF-STEM image and corresponding extraction of the dislocation network from the diffraction contrast. c, Averaged electron diffraction pattern of the field of view in b, indexed to the zone axis. d, A polar plot of the bend contour displacement as a function of azimuthal angle φ for the solid green dislocation line highlighted in b. The red trace marks a fit to equation 1 with the measured displacements in blue. e, The anthracene unit cell oriented to match the sample orientation. The magenta arrow marks the Burgers vector B = . The versatility of our approach is further demonstrated in plate- crystals, rather than films, of theophylline, a model pharmaceutical compound (and a channel hydrate), and n- hentriacontane (C31H64), a paraffin wax component in leaf waxes and a model for wider long- chain hydrocarbon materials (Figure 4). Identification of crystallographic details of defects offers insights into their role in compaction and tableting31 and in hydration/rehydration pathways on storage of drug powders32 and in diffusion pathways for transpiration33. The CF for the stable theophylline polymorph (Form II) has been reported6 within the range 26-36 e- Å-2, and we have measured the CF for n-hentriacontane as 6 e- Å-2, in line with previous reports of a CF between 5-10 e- Å-2 for paraffin waxes17. Theophylline exhibits a number of polymorphs and hydrates, and we first show an example from theophylline anhydrous Form II (Fig. 4a-e) which crystallises in Pna21. Figure 4b shows a triangular plate crystal, with its electron diffraction pattern indexed to the zone axis (Fig. 4c). In this crystal, the dislocation is short, which may indicate the dislocation line is not parallel to the plate surfaces. Still, VDF analysis of the available ghkl enables fitting to equation 1 (Fig. 4d). The obtained Burgers vector does not align with an in-plane low-index direction, but the vector does align with the projection of B = which was therefore assigned as the Burgers vector with mixed character. Additional screw-type dislocations with B = were identified in the monohydrate crystal structure (Form M, Supplementary Figure 14), as well as in the metastable theophylline anhydrous Form III (Supplementary Figure 15) which may play a role in the dehydration pathway of Form M to Form II34. These assignments indicate out-of- plane dislocations can be evaluated with the SED bend contour approach. the unit cells of other odd long-chain hydrocarbons35. As for theophylline, these crystals were plates, with a section depicted in Fig. 4f, oriented along the zone axis (Fig. 4g). In this case, the constructed VDFs included ghkl exactly at the invisibility criterion as confirmed by fitting to equation 1 (Fig. 4h). Here, the dislocation is unambiguously identified with the Burgers vector direction along B = . The dislocation line illustrates a full range of edge, screw, and mixed character along its curved path, with the length of the dislocation line suggesting the dislocation lies in (001), contrasting with screw dislocations with B along the long molecular axis reported previously in this class of materials3. Additional pure screw dislocations were recorded with the same Burgers vector direction (Supplementary Figure 16). While edge dislocations have been imaged in helium-cooled paraffins17, basal plane mixed and screw dislocations, contrasting with spiral growth step dislocations with B along the long molecular axis in linear hydrocarbons3, can now be readily identified in these highly beam-sensitive materials. of the theophylline molecule and unit cell of theophylline Form II. b, ADF-STEM image with a single dislocation line overlaid in green. c, The corresponding electron diffraction pattern, indexed to the zone axis orientation. d, Burgers vector determination by fitting a polar plot of the bend contour displacement as a function of azimuthal angle φ to equation 1 for the dislocation line highlighted in b. The measured displacements are shown in blue with the fit shown in red. A dashed magenta line marks the experimentally determined Burgers vector direction B = [1 16 ̅̅̅̅ 4] which aligns in projection to within ~3° with the assigned vector B = . The unit cell is depicted at the same orientation as given by the diffraction pattern in c as well as along the direction to better visualise the assigned Burgers vector. e, Representations of a n-hentriacontane (C31H64) molecule and unit cell. f, ADF-STEM image with dislocation lines marked in green. g, The corresponding electron diffraction pattern, indexed to the zone axis orientation. h, Burgers vector determination by fitting a polar plot of the bend contour displacement as a function of azimuthal angle φ to equation 1 for the dislocation line highlighted in f. The measured displacements are shown in blue with the fit shown in red. The unit cell is depicted at the same orientation as given by the diffraction pattern in g. The magenta arrow follows the long axis of the lobes in the polar plot, giving the Burgers vector direction as B = . In developing this approach, we note a few artefacts and limitations. During beam rastering, samples may abruptly change orientation which can produce linear features in diffraction contrast imaging, but these changes are readily distinguished from dislocation contrast (Supplementary Figure 17). Samples containing multiple finely spaced dislocation lines present challenges due to the finite diffraction-limited spatial resolution of ~ 3 nm when working with a low convergence semi-angle electron beam (<1 mrad). Further extensions to the suggested approach may be possible to account for the combined bend contour shift where a quasi-invisibility condition is still observed (Supplementary Figure 18-19), though we note this may require prior knowledge of contributing Burgers vectors, and we cannot rule out deviations from linear, elastic behaviour in the regions between such dislocation lines. In summary, we have demonstrated dislocation analysis in varied organic molecular crystals from low-dose, single-exposure SED measurements. These dislocations exhibit characteristic Burgers vector directions that lie predominantly in planes containing weak intermolecular interactions between layers of molecules. These planes are likely to be those suited to insertion or deletion of nonparallel planes without cutting across the internal molecular structure. Identification of the specific, observed Burgers vector directions in these slip planes now provides input for computational modelling of experimentally constrained structures with known edge, screw, or mixed dislocation character. Moreover, the generalisation of this approach provides a means for routine analysis of extended dislocations in molecular crystals with CFs down to a few e- Å-2, driving forward research into methods for inhibiting or designing dislocation formation during crystal growth and controlling their contributions to the functional properties of organic crystalline materials. Methods Sample preparation Thin films of p-terphenyl and anthracene were prepared by solvent evaporation from xylene solutions20. Briefly, p-terphenyl (99.5%, Merck) or anthracene (99.0%, Merck) powder was dissolved in xylene to obtain a clear solution (~0.45-0.50 mg.mL-1). 0.4 mL of the xylene solution was left to evaporate slowly on the surface of deionized water in a glass dish covered with Al foil to slow the rate of evaporation. Single-crystal films were obtained after two days of evaporation followed by half a day of aging. Interference colours were visible indicators of crystal thickness. Films that appeared blue or gold were sufficiently thin (120-200 nm) for electron microscopy36, and these films were selected for the SED experiments. The single- crystal films were transferred onto lacey carbon film TEM support grids (EM Resolution) by placing the grid under the film and lifting to catch the film on the TEM grid. Prior to the transfer process, the TEM grids were treated with an Oxygen-Argon (25:75) plasma for 10 s using an HPT-100 plasma treatment system (Henniker Plasma). Grids were allowed to dry in ambient air. Spin-coated anthracene films were prepared on SiNx membrane window TEM grids (3x3 SiNx windows, 30 nm thickness, Norcada) exposed to an Ar plasma for a minute. For spin- coating, a 5-6 mg.mL-1 solution of anthracene in chloroform was used. A SiNx membrane window was fixed on a custom chuck using tape and 30 μL of the casting solution was dropped on the membrane window at 200 rpm for 10 s. The spinning was then increased to 3000 rpm and the film was spun for a further minute. Finally, the SiNx grid was annealed at 80 °C on a hot plate for 15 minutes. Single-crystal films of theophylline were prepared by the solvent evaporation approach37,38. Briefly, theophylline powder was dissolved in nitromethane followed by heating to ~60 °C to obtain a saturated solution. The solution was then drop-cast onto a holey carbon film TEM support grid (EM resolutions) and left to evaporate. Highly faulted particles of partially hydrated Form II plates were produced by immersion in water. A sample of theophylline monohydrate (Form M) was prepared by evaporative crystallisation from either an ethanol:water or nitromethane:water solutions at 3:2 molar ratio followed by heating to ~55 °C. The solution was allowed to cool slowly to ∼35 °C under continuous stirring for a period of 3 h. The solution was then drop-cast onto a holey carbon film TEM support grid and left to evaporate. Form III (indexed to Form IIIb structure34) was identified on a TEM grid with theophylline Form M (recrystallized from ethanol:water) and then immersed in liquid nitrogen. Data on form IIIb was likewise acquired under liquid nitrogen cooling (<110 K) using a Fischione cryo-transfer holder. All other reported data were acquired at ambient conditions. Single-crystal films of n- hentriacontane were likewise prepared by solvent evaporation39 by drop-casting a supersaturated hexane solution (2 μL) onto a continuous carbon film TEM support grid (EM resolutions). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) Electron diffraction pattern series as a function of cumulative electron fluence for p- terphenyl and anthracene were recorded using an FEI Titan3 Themis 300 (X-FEG high- brightness electron source, operated at 300 kV) microscope in a standard parallel beam TEM configuration (Supplementary Note 5). For p-terphenyl an electron beam flux of 2.5 e- Å-2 s-1 was used whereas for anthracene an electron beam flux of 0.085 e- Å-2 s-1 was used. These values were determined from the current read out at the viewing screen, calibrated using a Faraday cup. A time-series of the selected area electron diffraction patterns were recorded for each compound across multiple crystals and multiple areas on the TEM grid. Scanning electron diffraction (SED) SED data were acquired on the JEOL ARM300CF instrument (ePSIC, Diamond Light Source, UK) equipped with a high-resolution pole piece, a cold field emission gun, aberration- correctors in both the probe-forming and image-forming optics, and a 4-chip Merlin/Medipix pixelated electron counting STEM detector. The instrument was operated at 300 kV. Selected samples were analysed at 200 kV, identified in the corresponding figure captions. The electron optics were configured for nanobeam diffraction by switching off the aberration corrector in the probe-forming optics and adjusting the condenser lens system to produce a convergence semi-angle of 0.8 mrad using a 10 μm condenser aperture. At 300 kV, this produces a 3-nm diffraction-limited probe diameter ddiff = 1.22λ/α for electron de Broglie wavelength λ and convergence semiangle α. The probe current was measured using a Faraday cup as ~1 pA, and the exposure time at each probe position was set as 1 ms. The electron fluence was approximately 8.8 e- Å-2 at 300 kV or 5.4 e- Å-2 at 200 kV in a single scan, assuming a disk-like probe with a diameter equal to ddiff. All SED measurements were conducted over a scan size of 256×256 probe positions. Image and diffraction calibration data, including reference calibration of residual elliptical distortion in the diffraction plane, were acquired using a gold diffraction cross-grating with a period of 500 nm (Ted Pella). The relative rotation between the diffraction pattern and the raster pattern was calibrated using standard MoO3 crystals (Agar Scientific). Calibration data were acquired under identical conditions to the molecular crystal samples. Data analysis SED data were processed, aligned, and calibrated using Pyxem-0.11.0 and supporting tools from the HyperSpy package (1.6.5)40 according to previously reported procedures41. The direct beam in each diffraction pattern was aligned and moved to the pattern centre using a cross-correlation function in Pyxem followed by application of an affine transformation matrix to correct the elliptical distortion and elimination of the rotation offset between the SED raster pattern and the diffraction data. Annular Dark Field (ADF) images were formed by integrating the diffraction pattern at each probe position between an inner radius 0.12 Å-1 (2θ = 2.7 mrad) and an outer radius 1 Å-1 (2θ = 22.4 mrad) to produce an image dominated by diffraction contrast. Average electron diffraction patterns were obtained by taking the mean intensity from all diffraction patterns contributing to an image. Diffraction patterns are presented as the square-root of recorded intensity (applied in ImageJ software) for improved visualisation of low- and high-intensity features. Diffraction patterns were indexed using CrystalMaker software. Simulated kinematical electron diffraction patterns were generated from the CIF files for p-terphenyl (CCDC 1269381), anthracene (CCDC 1103062), theophylline (CCDC 128707 for Form II, CCDC 183780 for Form M, and for metastable form IIIb). A unit cell for n-hentriacontane (C31H64) was constructed from previously reported odd number, long-chain hydrocarbons35. Diffraction patterns at different major orientations for each material were compared to the calibrated experimental diffraction patterns in overlay. In most cases, the samples were indexed to low-index zone axes such as for p-terphenyl, for anthracene, and for n-hentriacontane. Mis-tilt from high symmetry zone axes, e.g. Supplementary Figure 8, was estimated by inspection of simulated diffraction patterns tilted away from the high symmetry zone axis to match experimental data. For theophylline, auto-indexing in CrystalMaker was used to assist in finding the possible zone axes as these samples could not be indexed to low-index zone axes. All simulated diffraction patterns at candidate zone axes were inspected and compared to the calibrated experimental diffraction patterns. Following this approach, we indexed the theophylline crystals to the zone axes for Form II theophylline, [2̅13] for Form M theophylline, and for Metastable Form III. Automated constructions of multiple virtual dark field (VDF) images was scripted with Python using the functions from Pyxem-0.11.0 and Hyperspy-1.6.5 packages. Diffraction patterns, originally 515×515 pixels, were cropped and then binned by a factor of two to produce diffraction patterns with dimensions 257×257 pixels. Bragg disks were detected using a peak finding function using the difference of Gaussians method. Filter settings were tuned iteratively and assessed by manual inspection to capture all disk-like diffraction features in a randomized sub-sample of diffraction patterns. After peak finding, the position of each Bragg disk in the diffraction pattern was recorded in diffraction vector (kx, ky) coordinates. The peak position was further refined using a local centre of mass search. VDF images were then constructed from the integrated intensity within a circular aperture centred at the peak position for each probe position in the SED scan. The aperture radius was adjusted to minimise Bragg disk overlap, typically set in the range 0.016-0.026 Å-1. The angle of the associated diffraction vector ghkl for each Bragg disk taken as the inverse tangent of ky/kx. Bend contour displacements were measured in ImageJ. The displacement of the bend contours on crossing the dislocation line is determined as the distance, tracing along the dislocation line, between the middle of the two bend contours, as highlighting by the red dashed lines in Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Note 1. The azimuthal angular variation in bend contour displacements was analysed by nonlinear least squares curve fitting, following equation 1. Curve fitting was implemented using the curve_fit function in the SciPy Python package with further evaluation of confidence intervals using the Lmfit-1.2.1 Python package42 (Supplementary Note 4). Acknowledgements STP and SMC acknowledge funding support from the UK’s Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC, EP/V044907/1). EW, AB, and SMC acknowledge funding for a studentship supported by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Molecules to Product (EP/SO22473/1), in collaboration with Syngenta and AstraZeneca. NK and AB acknowledge funding from AstraZeneca Ltd and the EPSRC for an iCASE studentship (No 2182593). We thank the Diamond Light Source, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK, for access to the electron Physical Sciences Imaging Centre (ePSIC, MG28500, MG30057, MG31258, MG30157, and MG31872). We thank Mohsen Danaie, David Hopkinson, and Christopher Allen for support at ePSIC.