1 Giant proton transmembrane transport through sulfophenylated graphene in a direct methanol fuel cell Weizhe Zhang1*, Max Makurat1, Xue Liu1,2, Xiaofang Kang1, Xiaoting Liu3,4, Yanglizhi Li3,4, Thomas J.F. Kock1, Christopher Leist5, Clément Maheu6, Hikmet Sezen6, Lin Jiang1, Dario Calvani1, Andy Jiao1, Ismail Eren7, Francesco Buda1, Agnieszka Kuc7, Thomas Heine8,9, Haoyuan Qi5, Xinliang Feng10,11, Jan P. Hofmann6, Ute Kaiser5, Luzhao Sun3,4, Zhongfan Liu3,4, Grégory F. Schneider1* 1 Leiden Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, 2333CC Leiden, The Netherlands. 2 now: State Key Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, 710049 Xi’an, China. 3 Center for Nanochemistry, Beijing Science and Engineering Center for Nanocarbons, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University, Beijing, China. 4 Beijing Graphene Institute (BGI), Beijing, China. 5 Central Facility of Electron Microscopy, Electron Microscopy Group of Materials Science, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. 6 Surface Science Laboratory, Department of Materials and Earth Sciences, Technical University of Darmstadt, Otto-Berndt-Strasse 3, 64287 Darmstadt, Germany. 7Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Abteilung Ressourcenökologie, Permoserstrasse 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. 8 Theoretical Chemistry, Technical University Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany. 9Yonsei University and ibs-cnm, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea 10 Center for Advancing Electronics Dresden & Faculty of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. 11 Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, 06120 Halle (Saale), Germany. * to whom correspondence should be addressed: w.zhang@lic.leidenuniv.nl, g.f.schneider@chem.leidenuniv.nl 2 Abstract. (128 words) An ideal proton exchange membrane should only permeate protons and be leak tight for fuels. Graphene is impermeable to water and poorly conducting to protons. Here, we chemically functionalized monolayer graphene to install sulfophenylated sp3 dislocations by diazotization. Selective to protons, transmembrane areal conductances are up to ~50 S cm-2, which is ~5000 fold higher than in pristine graphene. Mounted in a direct methanol fuel cell, sulfophenylated graphene resulted in power densities up to 1.6 W mg-1 or 123 mW cm-2 under standard cell operation (60 oC), a value ~two-fold larger than micron-thick films of Nafion 117. The combination of sp3 dislocations and polar groups, therefore, allow the creation of hydrophilic ion paths through graphene and unveils a novel route to rationalize transmembrane hydron transport through 2D materials. One-sentence summary. Opening proton channels in graphene by sulfonation. 3 Main text. Next to long-term stability an ideal and optimized proton exchange membrane needs to fulfil two main criteria: proton permeability and selectivity. Within methanol fuel cells, the first ensures a high power density, while the second prevents fuel cross-over between the electrodes, which deteriorates catalyst performance and, thereby, drastically lowers performance. Pristine graphene(1) already fulfils these two criteria, partly as the graphene basal plane is impermeable to water and other molecules(2), and exhibits a certain degree of proton conductivity(3). In polymer membrane development, however, proton conductivity and selectivity are antagonistic with respect to their performance(4). Long channel length in state-of-the-art membranes such as Nafion 117, is, therefore, a prerequisite to obtaining proton selectivity, at the cost of an additional ionic resistance path through such long channels. With channel diameters of several nanometers(5, 6), being ~10 times larger than the size of hydrated protons and molecular fuels, fuel crossover through the membrane usually hinders optimal membrane performance. Protons(3), as one form of hydrons(7), can translocate through graphene and other 2D materials such as hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN)(8) and 2D mica(9) at room temperature, making two-dimensional (2D) materials promising candidates for proton- exchange membrane applications(10). Beyond monolayer 2D materials, proton transport has also been demonstrated using 2D laminates (i.e., 2D crystals assembled 4 in a layered structure, made from graphene flakes(11, 12), and other 2D nanosheets(13, 14), and covalent organic frameworks(15)), making them suitable for membrane-based applications. Remarkably, functionalizing 2D materials and reducing interlayer distances down to sub-nanometre dimensions yielded membranes with high selectivity, as well as opportunities to observe ion transport under highly confined spaces(16, 17). However, the ion transport distance in these systems is currently, particularly in laminated structures(18), beyond ‘one atom’, thus yielding additional parallel resistances. Protons were also shown not to permeate through defect-free regions of graphene(19), which demonstrates the need for proton-selective pathways. Open questions focus on the role of defects and strain(20), and – we believe with our work – also the role of out-of-plane polar sp3 dislocations installed onto the graphene basal plane. To open pores enabling transmembrane ion transport in graphene(21) and other 2D materials, such as MoS2(22, 23), methods have been established using electron beams, ion bombardment, and plasma exposure(24-31). Ion bombardment allows obtaining a high pore density and small pores (>1014 cm-2)(25), while electron beam sculpting, suffers from a lower control over the resulting pore size distribution, and chemistry. Pore and pore-like defects have also been realized via bottom-up approaches including chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth of amorphous carbon(32, 33), using 2D polymers(34, 35), and graphyne(36). These bottom-up strategies benefit from remarkable scalability in combination with the possibility of controlling the size, shape, 5 and chemistry of the pore, unfortunately yet with pores that are larger than the diameter of a hydrated proton. In fact, localized defects in graphene, such as seven- and higher- member rings together with small lattice disorders, such as sp3 defects, are promising approaches towards increased proton conductivity, while keeping the basal plane impermeable to other substances(37-39). Here, we introduce sp3 lattice dislocations paired with sulfophenyl groups on the basal plane of single-layer graphene via a diazotization strategy(40) using 4- sulfobenzenediazonium (4-SBD) as a reactant (Fig. 1A). The functionalization converts sp2 carbons from graphene into functional sp3 dislocations carrying a hard charge (from the sulfonate; pKa ~ -2.8 in water) and a resulting out-of-plane dipole. A delocalized electron from the graphene lattice reacts with the 4-SBD cation leading to a radical formation as N2 is expelled as a leaving group. The resulting aryl radical reacts with a sp2 carbon atom on the graphene basal plane, which is converted to sp3 upon grafting. Meanwhile, side reactions might also occur: 4-SBD can react with an already grafted aryl group (at the ortho position) either via a radical or azo-coupling mechanism, both of which might result in oligomerization(41) of the aryl species on the graphene basal plane. To eliminate the influence of intrinsic defects and to understand proton transport through the sole sulfophenylated sites on graphene (now abbreviated SO3- graphene), we first used single crystals of mechanically exfoliated graphene. We measured the 6 proton current through free-standing graphene supported over a 1μm diameter circular aperture in a ~30 nm thick custom-made SiN chip (Fig. 1B). Next, we functionalized exfoliated graphene with 4-SBD (1 mg ml-1 in 0.1 M HCl). Upon functionalization the areal ionic conductance in 0.1 M HCl increased up to ~50 S cm-2 after 84 hours of treatment (Fig. 1C). Respectively, up to 7 S cm-2 in 0.1M KCl, showing a significant selectivity for proton compare to potassium ions. For treatments longer than 84 hours, the ionic current decreased in both HCl and KCl electrolytes, which we attribute to 4- SBD oligomerization occurring at anchored aryl groups resulting in an additional resistance (phase II in Fig. 1C). Additionally, and as expected, larger multivalent cations such as Cu2+, Ca2+, and Fe3+, in chloride electrolytes resulted in lower overall conductances compared to protons (see inset of Fig. 1C). For the three measured devices, the maximum areal conductance in 0.1M HCl reached, respectively, 50.0 S cm- 2 (Fig. S14; device 1), 49.2 S cm-2 (Fig. S17, device 2), and 24.2 S cm-2 (Fig. S19, device 3) in 0.1 M HCl. These conductance values are up to ~5000 times higher than those of pristine graphene (i.e., 0.1 S cm-2 for device 1; 0.008 S cm-2 for device 2; 0.1 S cm-2 for device 3) in HCl 0.1M before starting the 4-SBD treatment (i.e., at 0h in Fig 1C). The giant measured areal proton conductance of 50.0 S cm-2 for SO3- graphene corresponds to a Gibbs free energy barrier ΔG ~0.42 eV following the Nernst-Einstein equation (Fig. 1D). This energy is similar to that found for the proton release from the sulfophenylated functionality into the water bulk, which turned out to be the rate- limiting step for the proton permeation through a graphene nanopore. 1 For a 1 See additional review material. Dario Calvani et al, submitted (March 2023) 7 sulfophenylated sp3 dislocation on a pristine graphene monolayer, the process could proceed as follows: first, the proton is captured from the water bulk by the SO3- functionality and then released with a similar activation barrier ΔG ~ 0.47 eV (see Supporting Information, 2.2). Next, via the Grotthuss mechanism, the proton would reach the graphene basal plane and tunnel to the other side of the graphene. The energy barrier of the proton quantum tunneling is estimated to be ~0.4-3 eV(42), which could be comparable to the barrier displayed in the proton release from the sulfophenylated functionality. In practice, the sulfophenylated functionality can play the role of a proton shuttle from the water bulk to the proximity of the sp3 dislocation on the graphene basal plane requesting an activation energy down to ~0.4-0.5 eV (Fig. S20). 1 Such value is in agreement with an efficient proton permeability and selectivity through a graphene- based membrane, giving the measured areal proton conductance of ~50 S cm-2 and extraordinary selectivity for protons (Fig. 1D). Fig. 1 Proton-selective sub-nanometer pathway in exfoliated single-layer monocrystalline graphene by diazotization with 4-sulfobenzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate (4-SBD). (A) Illustration depicting the functionalization of 8 graphene with 4-SBD. Besides the direct coupling of the sulfophenylated radical to the graphene basal plane, which converts sp2 carbon to sp3, 4-SBD could also link to the ortho position of a previously grafted benzene ring via a radical coupling or an azo coupling. (B) Illustration of the ionic current measurements setup. An exfoliated graphene flake is transferred on a Si/SiN chip with a 1 μm in diameter circular aperture in a 30nm thick SiN free-standing membrane (details on the chip fabrication procedure can be found in the supplementary information, section 2). The as-prepared chip was then mounted in a flow cell containing two reservoirs containing electrolyte solutions (HCl, KCl, CuCl2, CaCl2, and FeCl3). The transmembrane ionic current was measured by applying a 100 mV bias between two Ag/AgCl immersed on both sides of the graphene layer. From current-voltage curves (I-V, Fig. S14-S17) the areal conductance was determined. (C) Areal conductance (at 100 mV) measured in 0.1M HCl and 0.1M KCl as a function of 4-SBD reaction times ranging from 0 to 96 h. Inset: Normalized areal conductance measured in 0.1M electrolytes for HCl, KCl, CuCl2, CaCl2, and FeCl3. For the discussion of selectivity, conductance of specific chloride salt were normalized to HCl by dividing the measured conductivity by bulk conductivities for each salt (details in section 2 of the supplementary information). The error bar is the standard deviation between devices 1 and 2. (D) Linear correlation plot between the estimated proton conductance (S cm-2) in logarithmic scale and Gibbs free energy barrier, ΔG (in eV) for the proton diffusion using the Nernst-Einstein equation(43). The grey and orange bars highlight the areal proton conductance of graphene and hexagonal boron- nitride (hBN) reported in ref. (3). The blue bar represents the calculated areal proton 9 conductance of Nafion assuming a thickness of 20 μm with the upper conductance limit reported in ref. (44). The red bar represents the measured areal proton conductance for SO3- graphene in our setup (i.e., from 24.4 to 50.0 S cm-2). The red star represents the proton conductance of device 1 after 84h 4-SBD treatment and corresponds to the DOE 2025 target (45). The blue circle is the average estimated Gibbs free energy barrier and the diagonal grey bar is the corresponding range of proton conductance obtained by ReaxFF-MD simulations of a graphene nanopore (1 nm diameter) functionalized with a single sulfophenylated group.1 Next, we prepared SO3--graphene as a proton-selective membrane in a direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC). To apply SO3--graphene in a DMFC (Fig. 2A), mechanically exfoliated graphene could not be used as it is limited to micron-sized samples. We, therefore, replaced exfoliated graphene with centimeter-size single-crystal graphene films, which were seamlessly stitched into well-aligned domains(46). Fig. 2B shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of >200 μm wide CVD graphene single- crystals with minimized grain boundaries and intrinsic defects grown on a copper foil. Multilayer patches were negligibly observed in the samples. We then transferred CVD graphene to a quantifoil TEM grid and incubated graphene with 4-SBD for up to 6 days (1 mg ml-1 4-SBD in 0.1 M HCl) and characterized SO3--graphene by atomic force microscopy (AFM, Fig. 2C) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Fig. 2D). From the AFM images, the arithmetic average (Ra) and root mean square roughness (RMS) increased by 0.5nm within the first 24 h of incubation (Fig. 10 2C). After 24 h, only a minimal change in surface roughness occurred (Fig. 2C and Fig. S28). However, from the error image channels (for a spatially better-resolved image) a clear change in morphology occurred for longer treatment times: graphene surface features such as folds resulting from the transfer became decreasingly visible while denser agglomerates appeared upon longer 4-SBD treatments. Pristine graphene is therefore covered by 4-SBD already after 24 h after which the 4-SBD layer becomes thicker and more homogenous. Oligomerization, which is commonly observed during diazonium treatment(40) and here on AFM images, likely leads to the observed additional resistance that protons encounter resulting in the significant decrease in proton conductance after 84h of treatment as shown in Fig. 1C. Importantly, at the nanometer scale, HRTEM images of graphene after 4-day and 6-day of SBD treatment did not show the apparition of large >1 nm pores (Fig. 1D). Instead, the large defect-free graphene area suggests that individual grafting sites could not be observed on the monolayer regions (Fig. 1D). The spontaneous oligomerization of SBD, giving rise to agglomerates visible in AFM, were therefore not distinguishable by HRTEM from common hydrocarbon contaminations resulting from the growth of CVD graphene (supplementary material, Fig. S29-S31). 11 Fig. 2 SO3--graphene in a direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC), growth of single- crystalline chemical vapor deposition (CVD) graphene, and characterization by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and high- resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). (A) Illustration of a DMFC, redox reactions involved in the conversion of methanol to carbon dioxide, and photograph of CVD graphene transferred on a polycarbonate support. (B) SEM images of hexagonal graphene single crystals after 30 mins of growth on a copper foil (left) to a fully-covered and confluent monolayer after one hour of growth (right). Scale bar: 200 μm. (C) AFM images of pristine free-standing single-crystalline CVD graphene transferred over a holey quantifoil TEM grid and after 4 and 6 days of 4-SBD treatment. The graphene was transferred to a TEM grid using a polymer-free transfer method by 12 depositing the TEM grid on the graphene side of the copper foil and floating the TEM grid and graphene/copper stack on a 0.5M ammonium persulfate aqueous copper- etching solution. Scale bar: 500 nm. (D) Arithmetic roughness average (Ra) and root means square average (RMS) of graphene and 4-SBD treated SO3- treated graphene derived from AFM image analysis. (E) HRTEM image of graphene after 4-day and 6- day 4-SBD treatment. Scale bar: 5 nm. Next, we studied 4-SBD reactivity with graphene covered with a spin-coated Nafion layer (Fig. 3Ai). The choice of Nafion (instead of PMMA) as a support polymer is because Nafion will be used as a support film for graphene in the DMFC setup compromising both the mechanical stability of graphene and being freestanding in water. For both graphene carried by Nafion (Fig. 3Aiii) and bare graphene on SiO2/Si (Fig. S25), Raman spectroscopy showed an increasing D peak for increasing 4-SBD treatment times and ID/IG reached a plateau indicating a maximum reactivity after 4 days of treatment. The increasing value of the D peak intensity ratio (~1350 cm-1) over the G peak (~1580 cm-1) (ID/IG) indicates the formation of defects upon 4-SBD treatment, primarily the introduction of sp3 dislocations(47). Moreover, the intensity ratio of the 2D peak (~2700 cm-1) over the G peak (0.6<I2D/IG<0.8) indicates no major changes in the quality and number of layers of graphene, although the value is not 2.0 in the case of polymer (Nafion) coated graphene(48)(see supplementary information Fig. S25, I2D/IG > 2.0 for untreated graphene, on SiO2/Si, and after 5 days treatment I2D/IG = 0.6). 13 Additionally to Raman, we used X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to study the sulphur content and hybridization of the carbon atoms on the lattice upon 4-SBD functionalization. Fig. 3B shows XPS core level spectra (C1s, N1s, and S2p) of pristine graphene and after 2 days, 4 days, and 6 days of treatment. The fitting of the C1s spectra leads to four distinct species including the characteristic C sp2 (BE≈284.5 eV) and C sp3 (BE≈285.3 eV) of graphene. Moreover, semi-quantitative analyses were also conducted to determine the chemical composition of the grafted sites (Table S1). The sp3C/sp2C ratio reveals the state of sp3/sp2 conversion of graphene upon 4-SBD treatment. Relative ratios of -SO3- and -N=N- indicate the number of sulfophenyl groups on the graphene surface. For ease of comparison, we plotted sp2C/sp3C and - SO3-, -N=N- in Fig. 3C. The sp3C/sp2C ratio increases from 0.2 for pristine graphene up to 1.0 after 2-day treatment. After 6-day treatment, the sp3C/sp2C ratio dropped to 0.3. Considering that a benzene ring contains six sp2C, we assume that the drop of sp3/sp2 ratio after 4-day and 6-day treatment is due to the addition of 4-SBD groups via an oligomerization mechanism instead of grafting to graphene directly. Accordingly, the relative ratio of -SO3- increases from 0 for pristine graphene to 5.2 after 4 days of treatment and further increases to 6.4 after 6-day of treatment. The relative ratio of - N=N- shows a similar trend to SO3-, which also supports simultaneous azo coupling of sulfophenyl groups, in agreement with AFM. According to the Raman results, however, the intensity of the D peak plateaued after 4 days of treatment, suggesting that only oligomerization (coupling between 4-SBD and grafted sulfonatophenyl groups) occurred for treatment times longer than 4 days. 14 Fig. 3 Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis of SO3--graphene. (A) i) Illustration of graphene coated with Nafion floating on and reacting with a solution of 4-SBD (1 mg/ml SBD in aqueous 0.1 M HCl). ii) Raw Raman spectra for graphene on Nafion transferred on a SiO2/Si substrate after 0-6 days of floating incubation with 4-SBD. Raman spectra were recorded over a 10×10 μm area using a 457 nm laser set to 1.5 mW power to avoid any laser-induced damage to the SO3--graphene. We normalized the spectra by the intensity of the G peak to facilitate a comparison of the D and 2D peaks. iii) Plot of ID/IG and I2D/IG versus 4-SBD treatment time derived from panel Aii). (B) C1s, N1s, and S2p XPS core level spectra of pristine graphene and graphene after 2-day, 4-day, and 6-day of 4-SBD treatment on SiO2/Si substrate with fitted components. (C) Composition relative ratios as a function of 4- SBD reaction time. The ratios are derived for the specific component from the overall chemical bonds characterized by XPS. sp3C/sp2C ratio, N=N and SO3- were plotted 15 together for comparison with sp3C/sp2C ratio linked to the left and N=N/SO3- linked to the right y-axis. Next, we tested SO3--graphene as a membrane in a DMFC. We measured three independent batches of SO3--graphene after each day of treatment (i.e., after 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 days; 21 samples in total) and determined maximum power densities, membrane conductance, and methanol crossover. Fig. 4A shows the power-current (P- V) and voltage-current (V-I) plots for pristine CVD graphene, Nafion, and SO3-- graphene at 60 oC. Pristine graphene showed a maximum power density of 25.8 ±15.4 mW cm-2, at 212 mV, which is about half (~ 45%) compared to Nafion 117 and a proton conductance of 2.4 S cm-2. These results can be attributed to defects resulting from the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) including CVD graphene(20). It is notable that, however, for SO3--graphene after 4 days of reaction time with 4-SBD, the maximum power density increased to 109.8 ±14.8 mW cm-2 (i.e., ~2 times higher than Nafion). The power output did not increase further with a prolonged 4-SBD reaction time. Instead, it decreased to 44.9 ±17.3 mW cm-2 after a 6-day treatment, again in line with our hypothesis of the oligomerization of the sulfophenyls after 4 days of treatment. Subsequently, we monitored the power density for a range of operating temperatures ranging from room temperature (rt) to 70 oC (Fig. 4B). In general, an increase in temperature leads to an elevated catalytic activity as well as an increased diffusion rate of both protons and methanol across the membrane. As expected, the power density for 4-day treated SO3--graphene increased linearly with the temperature rising from 20 oC 16 to 70 oC (Fig. 4B). In contrast, for pristine graphene and 6-day treated graphene, the maximum power densities did not show a linear increase with temperature, and even decreased for operation temperatures above 50 oC. We attribute this observation to a higher methanol crossover rate at higher temperatures suggesting the importance of an optimal 4-SBD treatment time of 4 days. In fact, in the pristine sample, proton transport occurs primarily through inherent defects, which have poor proton selectivity and we presume therefore more methanol crossover. Similarly, for the oligomerized samples, the proton selectivity sites are proven to be blocked, resulting in relatively low proton conductance. As a result, inherent defects also facilitate the methanol crossover. To establish a correlation between areal proton conductance and DMFC performance (i.e., power density; and in the next section also fuel crossover rates), we first investigated how the membrane resistance of SO3--graphene correlates with the operating temperature of the fuel cell. Fig. 4C shows the Nyquist plots obtained by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), in which the intercept of the x-axis indicates the overall resistance of the membrane. Remarkably, the lowest resistance was also achieved after 4 days of treatment with 4-SBD (i.e., R = 0.59 Ω, which is ~ 30% lower than 6-day treated graphene and 2.5-fold lower than Nafion 117). The higher resistance after 6 days of reaction with 4-SBD also suggests a hinder of the proton transport pathway due to oligomerization. In ionic measurements (Fig. 1), however, the maximum areal conductance was reached earlier in time (i.e., 84h, 3.5-day). This bias in the time to reach a maximum conductance (respectively, 84h for exfoliated graphene, 17 and 4 days, i.e. ~96h for CVD graphene) is likely due to a difference in reactivity of the graphene in both ion transport and DMFC setups. Importantly, pristine CVD graphene shows relatively larger proton conductance, normalized to the exposed CVD graphene area, compared to the exfoliated graphene (6.9 ±1.1 S cm-2 vs. 0.008-0.1 S cm-2 respectively), which originates from defects in the form of pinholes or cracks in CVD graphene (20, 49). For SO3--graphene, similarly, the areal conductance observed after 4 days of reaction time is 4.9 ±0.4 S cm-2 per electrode area. As opposed to ionic measurements, in the DMFC, electrodes cover the entire SO3--graphene membrane while graphene is only free-standing over 16% compared to the electrode area (i.e. only ~ 16% of the polycarbonate membrane area is open with free-standing graphene). Therefore, the equivalent conductance per graphene area in the DMFC is 30.9 ±2.3 S cm-2, a value ~19.1 S cm-2 lower than exfoliated graphene (Fig. 1). The conductance values are, therefore, in good agreement since only one side of the graphene could be functionalized with SBD in the DMFC setup2. Additionally, the observed high proton selectivity among hydrated cations (Fig. 1) is also reflected by a low methanol crossover rate, particularly when comparing power densities in P-I curves for 1 M and 5 M methanol (Fig. 4E). After a switch from 1 M to 5 M methanol, the maximum power density with Nafion 117 dropped by ~53%. The drop in maximum power density, switching methanol from 1 M to 5 M, was reduced to ~10% after 4-days of reaction time with 4-SBD (Fig. 4F). The sulfonation of graphene 2 After 4 days 4-SBD treatment for single side, the increase in conductance of CVD graphene is 30.9 - 6.9 = 24.0 S cm-2. After 84h 4-SBD treatment for both sides, the increase in conductance of exfoliated graphene is 50.0 - 0.1 = 49.9 S cm-2. 18 using 4-SBD, therefore, not only allows an efficient selectivity towards proton transport but also prevents fuels (here methanol) from crossing the membrane in a DMFC. Fig. 4. DMFC performance with CVD graphene and SO3--graphene membranes. pristine graphene, 4-day, and 6-day 4-SBD treated SO3--graphene. The cell voltage (V) and the power density (P) as a function of current density (I) were measured in a 1 M methanol/water solution at 60 oC. (B) Maximum power density as a function of temperature. (C) Nyquist plots of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measured at the open circuit voltage. (D) Equivalent circuit of the DMFC with graphene and SO3--graphene membranes. The proton conductive pathway is constituted by 19 Nafion-filled pores (~16% of PC) in the PC membrane, graphene, and a spin-coated Nafion ionomer layer. (E) P-I curves of fuel cell with 1 and 5 M methanol fuel for Nafion 117 and SO3--graphene (4-day treatment) under 60 oC. (F) Variation of maximum power density upon operating the DMFC in 1 and 5 M methanol respectively. The blue dashed line corresponds to the variation of the power density of a DMFC with only Nafion 117 when switching from 1 M methanol to 5 M methanol. To conclude, the functionalization of graphene (exfoliated and CVD) with an out-of- plane polar group and an sp3 dislocation by diazotization with a sulfophenyl radical opened an atomically thin transmembrane proton selective path which yielded highly selective proton conductivity (~50 S cm-2, room temperature) and also enabled application in a direct methanol fuel cell delivering a power density more than twice higher than its Nafion counterpart according to the electrode area (127 mW cm-2 at 60 oC). This finding calls for more extensive views and understandings of the crucial reactions and mechanisms at the origin of such giant conductance value, among the highest reported now for 2D materials (50) and importantly within the 2025 DOE target for the proton conductance of a fuel cell under operation conditions of 90 oC and 25 kPa water partial pressure (45). Particular attention is required to understand the proton transport through sp3 distorted graphene, including theoretical insights on how the proton tunneling barrier could be further tuned, and the importance of the geometry and polarity of the functional distortions. Practically, improving the sp3 density might further increase the proton conductance through functionalized graphene. On a 20 fundamental aspect, polarizing a 2D membrane may become increasingly important in controlling with precision the translocation-transport of ions, also for example in more complex two-dimensional polymer architectures(51, 52). 21