1 Thickness-dependent catalytic activity of hydrogen evolution based on single atomic catalyst of Pt above MXene Zheng Shu1 and Yongqing Cai1,* 1Joint Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, Institute of Applied Physics and Materials Engineering, University of Macau, Taipa, Macau, China *Corresponding author: yongqingcai@um.edu.mo Abstract Hydrogen as the cleanest energy carrier is a promising alternative renewable resource to fossil fuels. There is an ever-increasing interest in exploring efficient and cost- effective approaches of hydrogen production. Recent experiments have shown that single platinum atom immobilized on the metal vacancies of MXenes allows a high- efficient hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Here using ab initio calculations, we design a series of substitutional Pt-doped Tin+1CnTx (Tin+1CnTx-PtSA) with different thicknesses and terminations (n = 1, 2 and 3, Tx = O, F and OH), and investigate the quantum-confinement effect on the HER catalytic performance. Surprisingly, we reveal a strong thickness effect of the MXene layer on the HER performance. Amongst the various surface-terminated derivatives, Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA are found to be the best HER catalysts with the change of Gibbs free energy ΔG*H ~ 0 2 eV, complying with the thermoneutral condition. The ab initio molecular dynamics simulations reveal that Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA possess a good thermodynamic stability. The present work shows that the HER catalytic activity of the MXene is not solely governed by the local environment of the surface such as Pt single atom. We point out the critical role of thickness control and surface decoration of substrate in achieving a high-performance HER catalytical activity. 1. Introduction As a carbon-free fuel, hydrogen is a clean energy source and a promising alternative to fossil fuel . The hydrogen production from water splitting via electrocatalysts allows the utilization of solar-driven electricity for an indirect solar-chemical energy conversion with zero carbon emission . The cathodic hydrogen reduction reaction (HER) as one of the half-reactions in electrochemical water splitting is a critical process governing the hydrogen production. Until now, the high-cost catalyst like bulk platinum is the most efficient catalysts for HER . The search for high- performance and low-cost electrocatalysts is vital to the scalable application of HER . Developing high-active and cost-effective electrocatalysts with a promoted HER activity has roused the great interest. With the high surface volume ratio, two-dimensional (2D) materials came into the spotlight as a component of various co-catalysts for HER . Since the discovery of graphene, other layered materials analogue of graphene have been successively 3 fabricated and investigated with respect to their great potential in mechanical, optoelectronic, electrocatalytic, piezoelectric and thermoelectric applications . Shaikh et al experimentally synthesized various non-stoichiometric 2D MoS2 nanosheets by hydrothermal route and revealed that sulphur enriched nanosheets show the lower overpotential than equivalent stoichiometric MoS2. Chen et al explored the structure-property-activity relationship based on 2D COFs for a photocatalytic HER, and found out that the photocatalytic and electronic properties of 2D COFs can be adjusted by incorporating transition metals into the porphyrin rings. Liang et al designed a monolayer Ni-MoS2 to enhance the HER performance over the pristine MoS2 by DFT calculations. Cai et al revealed that atomic vacancies and edges in phosphorene play a dominant role in activating the HER. Yu et al proved that the HER activity of a metallic 2D TaS2 can be tuned based on different substrates. MXenes, as the graphene-like 2D transition metal carbides, nitrides or carbonitrides, have a superior metallicity with a chemical composition of Mn+1XnTx (n can be 1-4, and Tx is the surface termination) . This good metallic conductivity allows a fast flow of conducting carriers (~24000 S cm-1 for Ti3C2Tx), thus rendering them as efficient electrochemical catalysts. Moreover, the properties of MXenes can be significantly modulated by altering surface termination or adopting ordered double transition metals and alloying , which in turn affects the electrocatalytic performance. Furthermore, the lamellar structure endows MXenes and MXene-based heterostructures an outstanding activity in a variety of 4 electrocatalytic processes, such as HER, oxygen evolution/reduction, nitrogen reduction, carbon dioxide reduction and nitrate reduction to ammonia . For instance, Pt-VO-Ti2CO2 can act as an efficient bifunctional catalyst for oxygen evolution/reduction by tensile strain . Moreover, the HER performance can be strongly enhanced by platinum substitutional doping of cation in the outer layer of MXenes. Zhang et al reported that the as-formed Mo vacancies can immobilize Pt atoms for enhancing the MXene’s HER activity and reducing the cost of the noble Pt in the catalysts. Jing et al figured out that the O vacancies on the surface of Mo2TiC2 act as the trapping centers of Pt atoms. However, the mechanism of the promoted HER activity of the Pt-doped MXenes is still unclear. The mystery remains about the compositional variance of the performance and the effect of the thickness of the MXene substrate for hosting the single Pt atom. In this work, 12 kinds of substitutional Pt-doped Tin+1CnTx (Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, n = 1, 2 and 3, Tx = O, F and OH) are systematically examined toward the potential HER electrocatalysts by using first-principles calculations. We find that the factor of the thickness of Tin+1CnTx, which has normally been overlooked before, plays a key role in affecting the HER performance. Through a delicate screening, Pt decorated Ti2CF2 and Ti2CH2O2 are predicted to be the promising HER electrocatalysts with an appropriate free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔG*H) of nearly zero. In addition, ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) was performed to prove that the single Pt atom can be stabilized on Ti vacancy. Our work provides a new perspective to design high- performance HER electrocatalysts for guiding experimental synthesis. 5 2. Computational details We perform spin-polarized ab initio calculations to optimize the structure and obtain total energies by the VASP package. The exchange-correlation interaction between electrons is treated by generalized-gradient approximation with Perdew– Burke–Ernzerhof functional (GGA-PBE) . The interaction between the core and the valence shell is described by the projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials. The van der Waals interaction is also considered by the semiempirical DFT-D3 approach . A cut-off energy of 500 eV in a basis set of plane-wave is adopted for electron wave function extension. The 3 × 3 × 1 supercell of Tin+1CnTx is used for the creation of the defect and the immobilized Pt single atom. In addition, a vacuum layer of ~20 Å is adopted to avoid the interaction between two periodic images along the Z direction. The structures are fully relaxed until the forces acting on each atoms are smaller than 0.02 eV Å-1. 15 × 15 × 1 k-points in 2D Brillouin zone sampling are adopted for the relaxation of primitive cell, then the single gamma point is used to optimize 3 × 3 × 1 supercell. 3 × 3 × 1 and 6 × 6 × 1 k-points within the Monkhorst- Pack scheme are used for the calculation of total energies and electronic properties of the supercell. The differential charge density is calculated by Δρ (r) = ρcat+H (r) - ρcat adsorbed Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, Tin+1CnTx-PtSA and H atom, respectively. Atomic charge transfer is analyzed by Bader charge method . The defect formation energies (Ef) can be calculated by the following expression : 6 Ef = Edefect − Epure − ∑ niμi i , where Edefect and Epure are the total energies of defect-contained and pure Tin+1CnTx supercells, respectively. ni is the number of removed (with a sign of -) or added (with a sign of +) atoms for the i type element, and μi is the chemical potential of i type element of its elemental phase. Besides, the binding energies (Eb) of Pt atoms on defect-contained Tin+1CnTx are calculated using the following equation: Eb = Edefect+Pt − EPt − Edefect, where Edefect+Pt, EPt, Edefect are the total energies of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA monolayer, Pt single atom and Tin+1CnTx with one Ti atomic vacancy. A negative value of Eb indicates a stable adsorption of Pt. The HER activities can be evaluated via the Gibbs free energy change of H adsorption ∆GH∗ using the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) model proposed by Nørskov et al. , which is defined as: ∆GH∗ = ∆EH∗ + ∆EZPE − T∆S, where ∆EH∗ can be obtained from the calculations of the total energies of H-adsorbed Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, and isolated H2 molecule. ∆EZPE is the correction of zero point energy, and ∆S is the entropy difference between the gas H2 and adsorbed H. Both ∆EZPE and ∆S can be calculated by the vibrational frequency of *H. For example, the vibrational frequency of *H has three eigenvalues: 1429.79, 861.28 and 854.86 cm-1 in the case of Ti4C3H2O2-PtSA. Thus the EZPE and TS of *H can be calculated by EZPE = 1 2 ∑ h i νi, 7 −TS = kBT ∑ ln (1 − e − hνi kBT) − i ∑ hνi ( 1 e hνi kBT−1 ) i . In addition, AIMD simulations are carried out under canonical ensemble (NVT) using the Nosé-Hoover heat bath to validate the thermodynamic stability of the systems. 3. Results and discussions 3.1. Formation of Ti-vacancy and immobilization of Pt single-atom A 3 × 3 × 1 supercell of Tin+1CnTx (Figure 1) is constructed to create the Ti vacancy and thereafter host a Pt single atom for catalyzing HER. Both Ti2CTx and Ti4C3Tx have P-3m1 space group, whereas Ti3C2Tx has P-6m2 space group. The optimized lattice parameters and layer thickness of this series are presented in Table 1, which agrees well with C2DB database . Noted that the generation of such Ti vacancy in experiments can be realized by etching . Here the generation of the substitutional Pt atom on the surface could occur though anchoring the Pt atom above the Ti vacancy and the process is schematically shown in Figure 2(a). Therefore, to expose the defect sites to immobilize Pt atoms, the formation of a certain amount of Ti vacancy at surface is necessary. The formation of defects not only creates specific sites for Pt immobilization for the HER, but also modulates the charge distribution and electronic properties which also affect the catalytic performance . Here the Ef of Ti vacancy is firstly investigated. The calculated chemical potential μTi at Ti- rich environment is -8.39 eV. As shown in Figure 2(b), the Ef of the out-surface Ti vacancy of Tin+1CnO2 is obviously larger than other MXenes considered regardless of 8 the thickness. Next we calculate the binding energies (Eb) of Pt above the Ti vacancy to assess the stability of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA systems. The surfaces of MXenes are usually terminated with functional groups including O, F, OH, which dramatically change the adsorption, electronic and electrocatalytic properties of MXenes . Table 2 and Figure 2(c) compile the Eb of Pt atom at the Ti vacancy site of the MXene surface which is negative ranging from -9.31 to -4.92 eV, suggesting the presence of the Ti vacancy can stabilize the Pt single atom. 3.2. Gibbs free energies of H+ adsorbed on Tin+1CnTx-PtSA Nørskov et al have revealed that ΔG*H is an effective descriptor for the HER by theoretical and experimental studies . To evaluate the HER activity, we calculated the vibrational frequencies, zero-point energies (EZPE), entropy corrections (TS) for adsorbed H on Tin+1CnTx-PtSA, and the corresponding ΔG*H for these catalytic systems, which are compiled in Table 3. The optimized H adsorption configurations of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA are presented in Figure 3. As we can see, H tends to preferably adsorb on O atoms of Tin+1CnO2-PtSA surface while bonding with Pt atom on other Tin+1CnTx- PtSA (T = F and OH) surfaces. As shown in Figure 4(a), the ΔG*H on Tin+1Cn-PtSA without terminal groups is up to ~ -0.60 eV, indicative of the suppression of HER activity due to a strong adsorption of H. The value of ΔG*H varies slightly between - 0.64 and -0.57 eV with n changing from 1 to 3. This indicates that for the naked MXene the catalytic activity is only slightly dependent on the thickness and the 9 Tin+1Cn-PtSA cocatalysts tend to have a strong affinity of hydrogen. In contrast, with the introduction of surface decoration (-O, -F, and OH groups) on the prototype Tin+1Cn, the Tin+1CnTx-PtSA has a strongly weakened adsorption of H which leads to a higher ΔG*H (Figure 4(b-c)). For instance, the ΔG*H for Ti4C3O2- PtSA, Ti4C3F2-PtSA and Ti4C3(OH)2-PtSA are -0.53, +0.59 and +0.32 eV. Interestingly, different from the naked MXene Tin+1Cn-PtSA, there is a strong dependence of the value of ΔG*H on the thickness for Tin+1CnTx-PtSA. For instance, when the thickness of these MXenes with O, F and OH terminations is reduced from n = 3 to 1, the value of ΔG*H increases and approaches the thermoneutral condition, i.e., especially for Ti2CH2O2-PtSA (ΔG*H = +0.01 eV). These calculated results suggest a strong effect of quantum confinement on the adsorbing energetics of hydroge, likely due to the more tightly confined states and alter the electron affinity of MXene. The stronger uptake of hydrogen with reduced thickness of F- and OH- terminated MXene, while an insensitive change is found for O-terminated MXene. For O and F terminated surfaces, the HER process even becomes thermodynamically uphill, implying a reduced affinity to hydrogen. Our work suggests that the HER catalytic activity of the MXene is not solely governed by the local environment of the surface, the thickness of cationic framework plays an important role. Our result suggests that the surface activity of MXene based derivatives can be promoted by adjusting the thickness of MXene to take advantage of the quantum confinement effect. 3.3. Interfacial charge transfer and electronic properties 10 To identify the trend of the adsorption of H on Tin+1CnTx-PtSA (n = 1, 2 and 3, T = F and OH), the scaling relation between charge transfer of Pt atoms and ΔG*H is plotted in Figure 4(e). The compounds of Tin+1CnO2-PtSA are not considered in this diagram. As shown in Figure 3, H is more energetically favorable to be adsorbed on the O atoms near Pt on Tin+1CnO2-PtSA. For the others there is a nearly linear relationship between charge transfer and the ΔG*H with a good correlation coefficient R2 = 0.86. The affinity of H toward Pt increases with the amount of negative charge at Pt. The optimal charge of Pt for a thermoneutral adsorption is around -0.3 e and a larger charge transfer from the host sheet to Pt atoms leads to a stronger adsorption of H, deteriorating the HER performance. The above correlation is generally found in other types of substitutionally Pt-doped MXenes with different terminations (see Table 2), which provides a clue into the analysis of HER activity via judging the charged states of catalytic site. In addition, we also calculate the work functions (W) of all Tin+1CnTx-PtSA by W = Evac - EF, where Evac is the energy of vacuum level and EF is the Fermi level. The work function is the minimum energy needed to remove an electron from the surface toward a vacuum level. Figure 5 shows the scatter plot between the work function and ΔG*H, and there is no direct correlation of these two variables with a correlation coefficient R2 = 0.083. The results indicate that catalytic activity of HER is highly correlated with the local chemical environment of the active site, rather than the global electrostatic properties of the surface of monolayers. Furthermore, we analyze the spatial distribution of charge transfer of the active 11 site through calculating the differential charge density (Figure 6). The electrons are transferred from active site to the adsorbed H. It is known that the d-orbitals of the active site play a critical role in the catalytic performance . The projected DOS as shown in Figure 7 indicates that the d orbitals of Pt are coupling with the s orbital of H, especially true for Ti2CH2F2-PtSA. This scenario is absent in the Ti2CH2O2-PtSA because the catalytic site of it is O rather than Pt with the absence of the d states (Figure 7(a)). This could enhance the hydrogen-platinum interaction via the hybridization of d-orbitals of Pt and s-orbital of H. 3.4. Strain and solvent effects Strain engineering is an effective approach to modulate the electronic properties for promoting the catalytic performance . Hence, we explored the effect of strain on the activity of three promising catalysts, which is shown in Figure 8(a-c). The calculated ΔG*H increases from -0.05 eV at -2% compressive strain to 0.60 eV at 6% tensile strain on Ti2CF2-PtSA. This indicates that applying strain, though residual strain existing around the edge, can be a viable means for modulating the activity. Solvent effect also plays a non-negligible role on chemical reactions at the water/solid interface . Water can affect the catalytic process as a competitive adsorbate. Therefore, the explicit solvent method is carried out to explore the effect for HER on three promising catalysts. As shown in Figure 8(d), the explicit solvent model is proved to play a minor role in HER for Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA within 0.1 eV. But for Ti2CO2-PtSA, H tends to escape from the surface to form H3O+ 12 with a H2O molecule, then form H5O2+ with another H2O molecule by hydrogen bonding (Figure 8(d)). This suggests that the performance of Ti2CO2-PtSA may be compromised in the presence of water molecule. 3.5. Multistep HER mechanism and thermal stability Although experimental and theoretical studies have proved that ΔG*H is the best descriptor for the HER, the actual process is more complex than this situation. The HER is a multistep electrochemical reaction as shown in Figure 9(a). The first step is the H adsorption on the surface of catalyst, namely Volmer reaction (H+ + e- → *H). Then the release of H2 can be achieved through two mechanisms, namely Heyrovsky and Tafel reactions. For Heyrovsky mechanism, *H combines with H+ and an electron to form a H2 molecule (*H + H+ + e− → H2). Alternatively, H2 could be formed by the combination of two *H on the surface of catalyst (Tafel step, 2*H → H2). To reveal the reaction barrier of HER, the climbed nudged elastic band (CI-NEB) method is used to calculate the transition state of three catalysts. The initial state (IS), transition state (TS) and final state (FS) with the corresponding energy barriers of two mechanisms are shown in Figure 9(b-d). On the Ti2CF2-PtSA, it can be found that the energy barrier of Heyrovsky reaction is 2.05 eV, which is lower than that of the Tafel reaction (4.01 eV). Similarly, the energy barrier on Ti2CH2O2-PtSA by Heyrovsky mechanism is 0.76 eV lower than that of Tafel mechanism (2.19 eV). This result indicates that both Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA tend to generate H2 by Volmer-Heyrovsky mechanism. 13 Since Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA are proved to be promising for HER catalysts, we next further examine the stability of the adsorbed Pt single atom which is critical for application. Besides, Ti2CO2-PtSA is also examined for comparison. It is important that the Ti vacancies in these MXenes can dynamically stabilize Pt single atom at finite temperature. In our previous study , the thermal stability may deteriorate even though the binding of the atomic species is strong. Therefore, AIMD simulations should be carried out to validate the thermal stability of these co-catalysts despite a strong binding energies (Figure 2(c) and Table 2). The AIMD simulations are carried for the three systems at 350 K. At first, the velocities of ions are randomly initialized according to the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution. Then, the systems are simulated under NVT ensemble at a constant temperature in the Nosé-Hoover thermostat . The NVT process is simulated for 10 ps with a timestep of 1 fs. As shown in Figure 10, there is no obvious distortion for the three structures after AIMD simulations. The temperature and energy are oscillating near the equilibrium values, indicative of a high thermal stability of these systems. The comparison of HER activity for Ti2CF2-PtSA, Ti2CH2O2-PtSA and other reported MXene catalysts is illustrated in Table 4. As we can see, the ΔG*H of Ti2CH2O2-PtSA is the smallest among these reported MXene-based HER catalysts, implying that the substitutional Pt-doped strategy is an effective approach to improve the HER activity of MXenes. 4. Conclusions In this work, the catalytic activity of a series of Tin+1CnTx-PtSA co-catalysts is 14 systematically investigated by means of ab initio calculations. By taking three possible terminations (-O, -F and -OH) of MXenes into account, our results reveal that the terminations and thickness of MXenes can strongly affect the local HER activity of the anchoring Pt single atom. Interestingly, the HER performance is significantly promoted with the thickness of Tin+1CnTx reducing from n = 3 to 1. Through adopting this strategy, Ti2CO2-PtSA, Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA are proved to exhibit high efficient HER performance with the ΔG*H of nearly zero. However, Ti2CF2 and Ti2CH2O2 are easier to form Ti vacancies to anchor Pt atoms with much smaller formation energy of 3.60 and 3.49 eV than Ti2CO2 (9.33 eV), indicative of the possibility of experimental realization. Although Ti2CO2-PtSA, Ti2CF2-PtSA and Ti2CH2O2-PtSA remain thermodynamically stable at 350 K, the H adsorbed on Ti2CO2-PtSA will form H5O2+ with H2O molecule, which hinders the HER process above Ti2CO2-PtSA. Our work suggests that the HER catalytic activity of the MXene derivatives is not solely governed by the local environment of the surface, and the thickness of cationic framework plays an important role as well. Our findings are useful for guiding experiments for enhancing the HER activity of Pt-doped MXenes via tailoring surface terminations and thickness engineering. Data availability statement All data that support the findings of this study are included within the article (and any supplementary files). 15 Acknowledgments This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 22022309) and Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province, China (2021A1515010024), the University of Macau (SRG2019-00179-IAPME, MYRG2020-00075-IAPME) and the Science and Technology Development Fund from Macau SAR (FDCT- 0163/2019/A3). This work was performed in part at the High-Performance Computing Cluster (HPCC) which is supported by Information and Communication Technology Office (ICTO) of the University of Macau. Author contributions Zheng Shu: Design, calculation and writing the original draft. Yongqing Cai: Supervision, funding acquisition and editing the manuscript. Conflict of interest There are no conflicts of interest to declare. ORCID iDs 16 Zheng Shu https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7361-4084 Yongqing Cai https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3565-574X