Polarized and narrow excitonic emission from graphene-capped monolayer WS2 through resonant phonon relaxation Garima Gupta and Kausik Majumdar* Department of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India *Corresponding author, E-mail: kausikm@iisc.ac.in Abstract: The broadening and polarization of excitonic luminescence in monolayer TMDs largely suffer from inhomogeneity and temperature – an unresolved problem to date. In this work, through few-layer-graphene encapsulation of monolayer WS2, we reduce the inter- excitonic energy separation, which then can have a narrow resonance with a specific phonon mode of our choice. The resulting single-step exciton relaxation with the resonating phonon mode significantly suppresses the inhomogeneous broadening, allowing us to achieve the narrowest exciton linewidth of 1.06 meV (which translates to 0.19 meV after deconvolution with the excitation laser linewidth). The single-phonon resonance helps to achieve a high quantum efficiency despite graphene encapsulation. The technique is powerful in tuning the exciton polarization during relaxation by choosing a specific resonating phonon mode. For example, the valley coherence (polarization) improves from ~68% (~40%) to ~90% (~75%) on resonance with 2A1 ′ and A1 ′ modes respectively. We further demonstrate a strong polarization reversal on resonance with a chiral phonon mode. Strikingly, the above features remain robust against temperature (up to 200 K) and sample age (few months in ambient condition). The findings will lead to clean excitonic measurements without requiring cryogenic cooling. Introduction: Despite being ultrathin, the monolayers of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs) are highly luminescent because of the strongly bound 2D excitons [1–4]. However, it is practically impossible to avoid the influence of the surrounding environment on the monolayers , obscuring the innate excitonic features . The presence of potential fluctuations from external (adsorbed or substrate charge impurities) and internal (defects) [8–11] factors leads to a large inhomogeneous broadening of the photoluminescence (PL) peaks . Several methods, such as chemical treatment of the substrate , and encapsulation with hBN [14–17] or graphene flakes have been explored to reduce the inhomogeneous broadening. Encapsulation with graphene not just screens the substrate induced inhomogeneity, but also suppresses emission from other excitonic species such as defect bound excitons, trions, charged biexcitons . Additionally, it also helps in retaining a high valley coherence and valley polarization of the excitons due to suppression of the electron- hole exchange interaction . However, one drawback of this technique is reduced quantum efficiency and hence weak peak intensity due to fast carrier transfer to graphene during the relaxation process. In addition, the applicability of all these techniques is largely limited to cryogenic temperatures only. The room temperature PL inevitably suffers from broad linewidth and negligible valley polarization. No definite solution is reported to date which can provide narrow-linewidth, highly polarized exciton peaks at room temperature. In this work, we overcome these issues by using a simple technique: (a) We sandwich a monolayer WS2 between two few-layer-graphene (FLG) flakes such that the resulting screening makes the inter-excitonic energy separation (Δns−1s; n > 1) approximately equal to an optical phonon energy in the system. (b) Using a tunable laser, we resonantly generate the higher energy excitons (ns), which undergo ultrafast relaxation to the lowest energy 1s state in a single step, by scattering with the resonating phonon mode. As an outcome of this technique, we achieve, (1) high intensity, (2) ultra-narrow linewidth (1.06 meV) exciton peak which also shows (3) a high valley coherence measured by the degree of linear polarization (DOLP ~ 90 %) and valley polarization measured by the degree of circular polarization (DOCP ~ 75 %). These features remain robust till 200 K, making this technique appealing for several experiments and applications. Various mechanisms of relaxation: To understand the working principle of this technique, let us revisit the process of exciton generation, relaxation, and light emission from radiative recombination. Initially, the higher energy excitons inside the light cone of the ns band, that resonate with the incoming photon energy (hc λex ⁄ ) are generated (Fig. 1). These excitons can relax to the 1s band through a combination of the following mechanisms: M1 - losing energy through multiple scatterings with various phonon modes in the system (Fig. 1a), M2 - through direct optical transition by photon emission between the dipole coupled Rydberg states (Fig. 1b), and M3 - as explored in this paper as a special case of M1 - by scattering with a single resonating zone-center optical phonon mode and relaxing to the 1s state in one step (Fig. 1c). Finally, the excitons inside the light cone of the 1s band recombines radiatively to emit light of energy hc λem ⁄ . Due to both incoming and outgoing resonance, we expect this single-step scattering to dominate the ns → 1s transition. The implications of this single-step relaxation on emission are discussed in the upcoming sections. Experimental Observations: The emission spectrum of the FLG-WS2-FLG (GWG) stack (Fig. 2a) (see Methods for sample preparation) taken with 532 nm laser excitation at 5 K shows conspicuous 1s and 2s exciton peaks (Fig. 2b), with the 1s peak exhibiting an average linewidth of ~9.5 meV (inset). Due to the FLG induced screening, we obtain Δ2s−1s ~ 31.5 meV, which matches well with the previously reported value and implies a significant reduction in the exciton binding energy. The large red shift of the higher energy exciton states brings the inter-excitonic separation in the regime of optical phonon energies. We carry out the excitation (PLE) spectroscopy of this GWG stack and monitor emission from the 1s state. The excitation wavelength is tuned from 570 to 600 nm using a supercontinuum laser source and a monochromator setup (see Methods for measurement details). Fig. 2c (left panel) shows the color plot of the 1s intensity (in log scale) as a function of λex and λem. The corresponding intensity color plot (in linear scale), normalized at each λex, is shown in the right panel. At specific values of λex, where the resonance condition Δns→1s ≈ ћωph is satisfied, we observe highly luminescent and narrow linewidth exciton peaks through mechanism M3 (see Supplemental Material for individual spectrum). The resonating phonon modes are labelled in Fig. 2c . The line cuts show the individual spectrum in Fig. 2d-2f. The broad pink backgrounds represent emission from excitons formed through multi-phonon relaxation process (M1). The sharp green peaks in Fig. 2d and 2e correspond to excitons formed through single-phonon (M3) and two-phonon resonance, respectively. The exciton peak at single- (two- ) phonon resonance is remarkably narrow and about 124-fold (3.4-fold) enhanced (Fig. 2d-e), as compared to the broad and weakly luminescent exciton peak in Fig. 2f, when such resonance is absent. Reduction in the inhomogeneous linewidth: External and internal inhomogeneities cause potential fluctuations in the monolayer. The resulting random doping and stark effect lead to a spatial perturbation in the exciton peak position (Fig. 3a). This leads to a real space to energy mapping of the excitons. The intersections of the solid lines with the spatial exciton energy distribution in the top panel of Fig. 3a are the equi-energy spots corresponding to a specific exciton energy in the real space. The bottom inset of Fig. 3b schematically shows such equi- energy locations under the laser spot at different 1s exciton energies. The inhomogeneous broadening is a result of collecting photons from all such spatially distributed 1s states under the laser spot (Fig. 3b and left panel of Fig. 3c). The proposed technique relies on exploiting the narrow spectral resonance between the incoming excitation and a specific 1s exciton energy state via scattering with the resonating phonon mode (Fig. 3b and right panel of Fig. 3c). To explain this, let us look closely into the case when A1 ′ (418 cm-1) is the resonating phonon mode in the relaxation process for 589 ≤ λex ≤ 600 nm. As estimated from the Bethe-Salpeter equation, λex in this range generates excitons in the bands ranging from 6s ≤ ns ≤ 3s (see Note S1 in Supplemental Material ). On the excitation side, only the energy states in the inhomogeneously broadened ns exciton band, that resonate in energy with hc λex ⁄ are excited (green laser spikes, Fig. 3b). Thus, the incoming laser performs a preliminary spectral (and hence spatial) filtering by generating excitons at the ns state at specific locations in the real space. Further, as Δns−1s (≈ 52 meV) is around the energy of the A1 ′ phonon mode in WS2, relaxation to the 1s state is dominated by scattering with the A1 ′ phonons in a single step through mechanism M3 (dashed arrows, Fig. 3b). As this relaxation process is ultrafast, only those 1s energy states in the inhomogeneously broadened peak, that lie at an energy ћωA1g below hc λex ⁄ , are populated (solid red spikes, Fig. 3b). This leaves little chance for populating the other states in the distribution through slow, multi-phonon relaxation mechanisms (such as M1), truncating the inhomogeneous broadening significantly. This implies that we are essentially collecting light only from the equi-energy spots in the real space that correspond to those resonating 1s states. The experimental demonstration of the above mechanism showing light emission from the specifically populated resonant 1s states is shown in Fig. 3d. As we tune λex, different regions of the inhomogeneously distributed 1s states satisfying Δns−1s ≈ ћωA1 ′ are populated and emit light (shaded orange peaks). For comparison, we also plot the inhomogeneously broadened envelope obtained at λex = 532 nm (in grey), which is a collective outcome of emission from all these individual peaks in the distribution (through M1). This shows the supremacy of our technique, which makes excitonic emission much less sensitive to the surrounding inhomogeneity. This is also evident from the invariance of the emission linewidth of individual peaks (see Fig. S4 in Supplemental Material ). The data from another GWG sample is shown in Fig. S5 of Supplemental Material . To support the argument, we perform the emission imaging with 591, 593 and 595 nm excitation wavelengths in Fig. 3e. We observe a significant modulation in the spatial distribution of the luminescence peaks (marked by arrows in Fig. 3d), suggesting varying spatial profiles of the different equi-energy spots. We obtain an average total linewidth of 1.21 ± 0.04 meV (Fig. 3f for a representative plot), with the lowest linewidth being 1.06 meV (see Fig. S6 in Supplemental Material ). These numbers are lower than the narrowest linewidth reported to date from free excitons in TMDC monolayers . Please note that the difference between the laser linewidth (~ 0.8 meV) and the narrowest obtained exciton linewidth is well above our system resolution of ~ 40 − 60 μeV. On deconvoluting with the excitation laser having nonzero broadening, we extract an exciton linewidth of ~ 0.19 ± 0.07 meV, which denotes an upper bound on the homogeneous broadening of the 1s exciton states in GWG stack. This implies a net exciton lifetime ≥ 1.65 ps in the system. This timescale is in good agreement with the reported lifetime values obtained from time-resolved PL measurements . This is the first report of achieving an excitonic emission linewidth down to the true homogeneous limit. Due to suppressed inhomogeneity, we also observe a tighter distribution of the linewidth with the standard deviation to mean ratio reducing from 8% under off-resonant excitation to 3% with this technique. Enhanced Quantum efficiency in spite FLG encapsulation: The internal quantum efficiency of emission in the proposed mechanism can be written as a product of relaxation (ηrel) and emission (ηem) quantum efficiency: ηint = γres γres + γoff−res + γgr ⏟ ηrel × γr γr + γnr + γgr ⏟ ηem (1) As a result of the ultrafast relaxation rate (γres) in M3: (1) The generated oscillator strength is primarily transferred to the resonating final 1s states. This avoids the distribution of the oscillator strength among other inhomogeneously distributed states, like in the case of other relaxation processes such as M1 (γoff−res). (2) The loss due to exciton transfer to the top and bottom FLG (γgr) during such fast relaxation is also minimized. Therefore, as γres ≫ γoff−res and γgr, the generated oscillator strength efficiently relaxes from the ns band to 1s band due to dual resonance, thus making ηrel large. This is evident in Fig. 2d by the large ratio of the intensity of the green curve (M3) to the pink background (M1). γr and γnr represent the exciton radiative and non-radiative (other than exciton transfer to FLG) decay rates once it relaxes to the 1s band. For simplicity, we assumed that γgr is energy independent in equation 1. High exciton valley polarization and valley coherence: Excitons inherit the angular momentum of the electronic bands in the K, K′ valley. Therefore, an incoming circularly (linearly) polarized light generates exciton in a specific valley (superposition state of both the valleys) [28–30]. During (1) the relaxation process, and (2) inside the light cone, the degradation in the exciton valley polarization/coherence occurs due to a coupled effect of exciton scattering and pseudospin presession due to exchange interaction (Fig. 4a). In addition, during the relaxation process M1, the scattering with multiple phonons with different polarizations may also lead to a random phase accumulation. We observe these effects by the gradual improvement in the exciton DOLP, for the broad background peak (in pink) in Fig. 2d- f, as the incoming excitation is tuned closer to the 1s resonance (open red circles in Fig. 4b). The FLG encapsulation in the GWG sample helps to suppress both these effects. First, in mechanism M3, as we selectively choose the phonon mode that dominates the single-step relaxation, the uncontrolled pseudospin randomization during the relaxation process is avoided. For example, the polarization of the incoming light does not change by scattering with the A1 ′ phonon mode due to the diagonal form of its Raman tensor (schematically depicted in the inset of Fig. 4d-e). This is depicted by the fully polarized A1 ′ Raman peak in Fig. 4c [top (bottom) panel for linear (circular) polarization] as obtained using 532 nm excitation. Hence, when we achieve a resonance with the A1 ′ mode in the exciton relaxation process, in Fig. 4b, we observe a negligible change in the exciton DOLP (red solid symbols) and DOCP (blue solid symbols) on varying λex. Second, once the exciton relaxes down to the 1s light cone, the FLG encapsulation helps to preserve the polarization inside the light cone by (a) reducing pseudospin precession frequency due to screening induced suppression of the exchange interaction, and (b) reducing the exciton lifetime due to fast charge transfer to FLG . As a combined effect, we observe a DOLP of ~90 % and a DOCP of ~75 % of 1s excitons in the GWG stack (Fig. 4d-e). On the other hand, when the 2A1 ′ phonon mode dominates the relaxation process, we obtain a degraded DOLP (DOCP) of ~68.3 % (~40%) (Fig. 4f-g). This suggests that the additional exchange interaction in the intermediate state between the two consecutive scattering events during the relaxation results in the observed polarization degradation, as schematically shown in the inset of Fig. 4f-g. This technique can also tune the exciton polarization strategically during the relaxation process if we choose the appropriate phonon mode. For example, during the exciton-phonon scattering, complete reversal of the incoming polarization is possible on resonating with a chiral phonon mode, to ensure angular momentum conservation in C3h symmetric system (schematically depicted in the inset of Fig. 4h). We observe such reversal using the chiral ‘b’ phonon mode [34–37] at 420 cm-1 in a FLG-MoS2-FLG sample, upon resonating with which, the outgoing photon is reverse circularly polarized with respect to the incoming circular polarization (Fig. 4h). Temperature robust exciton linewidth and polarization: When sample temperature increases, upon relaxation through mechanism M1, the states outside the light cone get populated and start contributing to light emission mediated by phonons (Fig. 5a). These momentum-dark states are long-lived, which give sufficient time to the exciton population to achieve thermal equilibrium before radiative recombination. This enhances the homogeneous linewidth with kBT . In the current technique, direct light cone to light cone transition happens from the higher energy band to the 1s band. Therefore, the excitons directly relax to the lowest energy states in the 1s band at all temperatures. As γr and γgr (≫ γnr) are independent of temperature, the overall exciton lifetime (τ~ 1 γr+γgr) inside the light cone remains temperature independent in this process. Since phonon absorption process (γph,Abs) is much slower than the net exciton decay rate (i.e., γph,Abs ≪ γr + γgr), the excitons can hardly move outside the light cone. Consequently, the excitons do not have enough time to attain thermal equilibrium before radiative recombination (Fig. 5b). Therefore, because of this non-equilibrium exciton population inside the light cone, we observe a relatively weak influence of temperature on the linewidth through this technique (Fig. 5c-d) – a key aspect of this work. Exciton polarization degrades with temperature when it relaxes by mechanism M1, because of two primary reasons: (1) Enhancement in the overall phonon scattering rate - As more phonon modes start participating in the exciton relaxation process, the random phase accumulation during relaxation increases with temperature; and (2) Enhanced contribution of excitons outside the light cone – As explained previously, the fractional contribution of excitons outside light cone increases with temperature due to relaxation mechanism M1 (Fig. 5a). This in turn has two effects on polarization degradation. First, the net exchange interaction (J) increases hole Coulomb interaction . This leads to a faster pseudospin dephasing for excitons with larger |Q|. Second, the excitons outside the light cone being momentum dark, are long-lived, and hence suffer from more accumulation of random phase in the pseudospin vector. In the proposed technique, by minimizing all these processes through relaxation process M3, we observe a dramatically negligible influence of temperature on the exciton valley coherence (Fig. 5c-d). Discussion: Apart from 1s emission, the resonant Raman scattered photons also energetically coincide with the emitted light, and often it becomes challenging to segregate these two mechanisms . While the emission process is a result of a cascade of photon absorption, relaxation through exciton-phonon scattering, and photon emission through recombination of the 1s exciton, the resonant Raman process is an instantaneous process maintaining coherence. We argue that the 1s excitonic emission has the dominant contribution over resonant Raman scattering in the current scenario of dual resonance based on the following observations: (a) We note a significantly lower than 100% DOCP and DOLP in the light output (Fig. 4d-g), while the pure Raman process should yield 100% degree of polarization (see, for example, Fig. 4c) for A1 ′ and 2A1 ′ modes possessing diagonal Raman tensor. (b) The light output has DOCP < DOLP in Fig. 4d-g, which is a characteristic of 2D exciton emission due to the in-plane nature of the pseudo-magnetic field generated by the exchange interaction. (c) The strong correlation between the spectral feature of the non-resonant 1s exciton emission and the envelope of the output under dual resonance when the excitation wavelength is tuned (Fig. 3d) suggests the key role played by the 1s state in the process, which should not happen for Raman scattering. (d) Strikingly, when the emission quantum efficiency is suppressed by increasing the number of layers of WS2, the output photon count becomes independent of the spectral feature of the 1s state, indicating a Raman scattering dominated process for few-layers (details in Note S2 in Supplemental Material ). (e) We also observe a dramatic reduction in the peak intensity in the few-layer WS2 samples. Being an instantaneous process, if resonant Raman scattering would have dominated the peak in the monolayer, we would expect similar intensity in few- layer samples as well, suggesting the peak intensity is dominated by excitonic emission in monolayer. (f) The noticeable linewidth difference between the excitation laser and the emission peak (Fig. 3f) is not observed for the A1 ′ Raman peak obtained with off-resonant excitation in the GWG stack, in which case the Raman linewidth closely matches the linewidth of the excitation laser (see Note S2 in Supplemental Material ). Due to protective encapsulation by FLG and the intrinsic nature of narrow resonance, we find the emission features from the sample to remain robust for a long time (see representative data taken on the same stack after two months in Fig. S7 in Supplemental Material ). The strength of the proposed technique lies in obtaining the narrowest excitonic peak reported to date even in the presence of sample inhomogeneity – allowing us to achieve close to the true homogeneous linewidth in the sample. This can help experiments (including Stark effect, Zeeman splitting, Rabi splitting) where the observation of small excitonic peak shift is usually obscured due to large linewidth. The sharpness of the peak along with the observed high degree of exciton polarization is robust even at higher temperatures – making the technique promising for several experiments which earlier required cryogenic temperature to achieve these features. The combination of enhanced quantum efficiency, narrow linewidth, high degree of valley polarization and coherence, and the robustness of these features against sample age and temperature makes the proposed technique powerful to obtain a near-ideal atomically thin light emitter. Methods Sample preparation: To prepare the GWG stack, the material is first exfoliated on a Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sheet. After locating an appropriate flake, it is transferred on a Si substrate covered with 285 nm thick thermally grown SiO2, one by one. The thickness of the bottom and the top graphene is 2-3 nm. The sample is annealed at 2000C for 5 hours (pressure ~10-6 torr) to ensure good adhesion between successive layers. Measurement details: All the measurements are taken in a closed-cycle optical cryostat (Montana Instruments) at 5 K using a × 50 long-working-distance objective having a numerical aperture of 0.5. The photoluminescence excitation measurement is carried out using a supercontinuum laser source (NKT Photonics). The output of the laser is passed through an acousto-optic tunable filter (AOTF) followed by one or two monochromators (Edmund Optics) to ensure spectrally narrow excitation pulses. In all the wavelength dependent measurements, the excitation wavelength is tuned by a step of 1 nm. All measurements except the narrowest emission linewidth measurements were taken with one monochromator. The laser linewidth with one monochromator is ~1.2 meV. The narrowest exciton linewidth measurements (in Fig. 3f and Figs. S6 and S7 in Supplemental Material ) were obtained using two monochromators in cascade. The laser linewidth with two monochromators is ~0.8 meV. A 610 nm bandpass filter is kept in the detection side to monitor 1s exciton emission. The average power used for the measurements in this work is < 5 μW. Linear polarization resolved measurements are carried out by using a half-wave plate (analyzer) in the emission (detection) ⁄ ] is obtained by keeping the incoming polarization in parallel (IH/H) and perpendicular (IH/V) direction with respect to the analyzer. For the circular polarization resolved measurements, an additional quarter-wave plate is ⁄ ] is obtained by changing the incoming linear polarization direction from +450 to −450 with the fast-axis of the quarter-wave plate. For temperature dependent measurements, the excitation wavelength is tuned to ensure single-step resonance with the A1 ′ phonon mode at each temperature. Acknowledgement This work was supported in part by a Core Research Grant from the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) under Department of Science and Technology (DST), a grant from SERB under TETRA, grants from Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO), a grant from MHRD under STARS, a grant from QuRP, IISc, and a grant from MHRD, MeitY and DST Nano Mission through NNetRA. Notes The authors declare no competing financial or non-financial interest. Data Availability Data available on reasonable request from the corresponding author.