1 Resonant transport in a highly conducting single molecular junction via metal-metal covalent bond Biswajit Pabi1, Štepán Marek2, Adwitiya Pal3, Puja Kumari4, Soumya Jyoti Ray4, Arunabha Thakur3, Richard Korytár2, and Atindra Nath Pal1* 1Department of Condensed Matter and Materials Physics, S. N. Bose National Centre for Basic Sciences, Sector III, Block JD, Salt Lake, Kolkata 700106, India. 2Department of Condensed Matter Physics, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, Charles University, 121 16, Prague 2, Czech Republic 3Department of Chemistry, Jadavpur University, Kolkata-700032, India. 4Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Patna, Bihar- 801106, India. Abstract: Achieving highly transmitting molecular junctions through resonant transport at low bias is key to the next-generation low-power molecular devices. Although, resonant transport in molecular junctions was observed by connecting a molecule between the metal electrodes via chemical anchors by applying a high source-drain bias (> 1V), the conductance was limited to < 0.1 G0, G0 being the quantum of conductance. Here, we report electronic transport measurements by directly connecting a Ferrocene molecule between Au electrodes at the ambient condition in a mechanically controllable break junction setup (MCBJ), revealing a conductance peak at ~ 0.2 G0 in the conductance histogram. A similar experiment was repeated for Ferrocene terminated with amine (-NH2) and cyano (-CN) anchors, where conductance histograms exhibit an extended low conductance feature including the sharp high conductance peak, similar to pristine ferrocene. Statistical analysis of the data along with density functional theory-based transport calculation suggests the possible molecular conformation with a strong hybridization between the Au electrodes and Fe atom of Ferrocene molecule is responsible for a near-perfect transmission in the vicinity of the Fermi energy, leading to the resonant transport at a small applied bias (< 0.5V). Moreover, calculations including Van der Waals/dispersion corrections reveal a covalent like organometallic bonding between Au and the central Fe atom of Ferrocene, having bond energies of ~ 660 meV. Overall, our study not only demonstrates the realization of an air-stable highly transmitting molecular junction, but also provides an important insight about the nature of chemical bonding at the metal/organo-metallic interface. 1. Introduction: The central motivation of molecular electronics is to reduce the size of the conventional electronic components by taking advantage of the quantum mechanical phenomena at the atomic scale, along with the structural versatility of molecules. By adopting the revolutionary idea proposed by Aviram and Ratner1, various experimental techniques2–19 were developed to create single-molecule junctions, allowing access to electrical20–24, chemical25–29, mechanical30–32, magnetic33, thermal34– 38 and optical39,40 properties. Typically, various anchoring groups such as thiol (-SH)11,41,42, amine (-NO2)49, trimethyltin (-SnMe3)50, fullerene(C60)51,52 are used to connect organic molecules to the metal electrodes to achieve physically stable structure with reliable electronic coupling at the 2 interface. Since the conductance of a single molecule junction is primarily sensitive to the degree of orbital hybridization and energy-offset between the frontier molecular orbitals and the Fermi level of the metal electrodes53,54, the presence of these anchoring group adversely affects the conductance in most of the cases55. With the goal of achieving high conductance, molecular junctions were realized either via direct metal-carbon coupling through molecules like oligocene56, benzene57–60 , fullerene54 or through direct Au-C covalent bonding in trimethyl tin (SnMe3)- terminated polymethylene chains50. However, at ambient condition, the conductance remains far from the quantum of conductance (G0 = 2e2/h ≈ 77.6 μS) mostly due to the off-resonant transport mechanism50,58,61 either through coherent tunneling or via hopping as a result of large energy off- set. Recently, there are efforts to access the resonant transport regime in biphenyl-porphyrin oligomers (bp-ppo)62, donor-acceptor oligomers based on DPP23 and amine or thiomethyl terminated oligophenyls63. Notably, the resonance could be achieved only by applying a high source drain bias (> 1V) or through a gate voltage in a three-terminal configuration64 at cryogenic temperature. At such a high bias the molecular junction could become unstable due to the Joule heating, or, the characteristics of the junction can be modified by the chemical reaction occurring due to the higher current density65,66. Also, considering the realistic difficulties in fabricating three terminal single molecular devices, it is indeed desirable to reduce the energy off-set by exploring other possibilities of chemical functionalization. Here, we focus on ferrocene, a chemically stable molecule at ambient condition, as the primary component of a single molecular device67–73. The unique structure of metallocene having a central transition metal at the center was shown to provide near-ballistic spin transport while incorporated between silver electrodes at cryogenic environment74. Despite recent reports on ferrocene or its derivative in molecular junctions69–71,75–77, the detailed transport mechanism of ferrocene based junction is still elusive. In this study, we demonstrate the charge transport characteristics of a single Au/ferrocene/Au junction via direct metal-molecule coupling, exhibiting a significantly high conductance (~ one quarter of the quantum of conductance) at ambient condition. Density functional theory-based transport calculations suggest that the frontier molecular orbitals (LUMO) lies in close proximity to the metallic Fermi level of the electrodes for a certain orientation of the molecule, providing resonant transport at small applied bias (<0.5V). Further experiment along with the theoretical calculation, considering ferrocene terminated with two anchoring groups (- NH2) and (-CN), display the similar high conductance conformation in addition to the features at the low conductance value, arising due to bonding with the chemical anchors. In general, our study reveals a way to obtain the resonant transport at the low bias regime along with a deeper understanding on the role of the spatial orientation of organometallic molecules on the charge transport mechanism. 2. Results & Discussions: 2.1. Conductance characterization of ferrocene single molecular junction Typical conductance-distance breaking traces of ferrocene (FC) single molecular junction, connected to Au electrodes, is displayed in the left panel of figure 1b. Conductance plateau at 1 G0 (G0 = 2e2/h being the quantum of conductance) demonstrates the formation of single atomic contact, i.e., only one Au atom in the narrowest cross section. However, upon further stretching, the conductance has a sudden fall due to the breaking of atomic contact followed by an opening a nanogap due to the snapback effect78,79, leading to additional features below 1.0 G0 when placed 3 in a molecular environment. In this case, almost flat conductance plateaus can be observed in the region ~ 0.1-0.4 G0 (figure 1b, left panel) following the post-rupture quantum tunneling features which confirm the successful formation of molecular junctions. Due to the pronounced thermal noise at room temperature, molecular plateaus are not always identical and vary from trace to trace. Thus, to get meaningful conductance value from statistically independent junction configurations, several thousands of traces are analyzed and represented as conductance histogram (1D histogram) 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene and 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene) used here. (b) Left Panel: Typical breaking conductance-distance traces of Au/ferrocene/Au molecular junctions in semi-logarithmic scale, with traces shifted horizontally for clarity. Middle Panel: One dimensional conductance histogram, constructed from 1800 molecular traces using 35 bins per decade. Black dash-dotted line represents the Gaussian fitting of the corresponding molecular peak with the most probable value (2.20 ± 0.03) × 10-1 G0. Inset: conductance of the junction as a function of applied bias voltage. Right Panel: Conductance-distance density plot of ferrocene molecular junctions based on the same 1800 molecular traces, constructed using logarithmic binning (50 bins per decade), where black circle shows the molecular plateaus. Inset: chemical structure of ferrocene. in the middle panel of figure 1b (for bias voltage, Vbias = 400 mV). Histogram is constructed using 35 bins per decade from 1800 molecular traces. Large counts at or around 1.0 G0 appears due to repetitive formation of Au-atomic junction80. However, a well-defined conductance peak with maximum at (2.20 ± 0.03) × 10-1 G0 is also evident from the histogram, and it corroborates the most probable conductance value of the Au/ferrocene/Au single molecular junction at room temperature. Since it is technically unachievable to obtain any vibrational fingerprint of the molecule in a notched-wire break junction set up using the conventional techniques like surface 4 enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS), atomic force microscopy (AFM) or inelastic electronic spectroscopy (IETS) at room temperature, we performed controlled experiment with DCM and found the peak to be completely absent, as shown in Supplementary Information, figure S581. The bias dependent measurement shows an enhancement of the conductance peak by almost a factor of 1.5 when the bias is increased from 20 mV to 400 mV (inset of figure 1b, middle panel; also see Supplementary Information, figure S6 for the histograms at 20 mV and 50 mV bias).To get more insight about the evolution of the molecular junction during stretching, we constructed a 2D conductance-distance density plot in a semi logarithmic scale. The distance or electrode separation was calibrated following the procedure using tunneling experiments82. Right panel of the figure 1b shows the typical 2D histogram of FC, which is generated by compiling the same traces used in the 1D histogram with 80 bins per decade. High density data clouds at or above 1G0, represents the Au atomic junction. A second horizontal data cloud (marked with a black dashed circle) is noticed from 3.00 × 10-1 G0 to 8.00 × 10-2 G0 and interestingly, conductance of the molecular plateaus does not change significantly with the increase of electrode separation, similar to the silver-vanadocene junction reported by Pal et al74. 2.2. Formation mechanism and correlation analysis The conductance histogram is now considered using traces with and without the molecular features (shown in the Supplementary Information, figure S7). Histogram of the molecular traces reveals a shallow peak at ~1.2 G0 in addition to the atomic peak at ~ 1.0 G0 , arising possibly due to the formation of precursor configuration prior to the atomic junction in line with the previous reports 83,84. To get a clearer picture about the evolution of the junction, we divide the molecular traces into three different sub-categories based on the presence of plateaus at Gp, GAu and Gm (Case-I), at Gp and Gm (Case-II), at GAu and Gm (Case-III) (conductance values of Gp~1.2 G0, GAu~1.0 G0 and Gm~0.2 G0). Characteristic traces of three different subcategories are shown in figures 2a-c with the inset revealing the possible junction geometries, where L and R denote the left and right electrodes with M as molecule. Figure 2d shows the conditional conductance histogram of the three categories and the pie chart (inset) showing the probability to find the different cases: Case- I [20%], Case-II [13%] and case-III [67%]. From the above analysis, it is obvious that precursor configuration is not a necessary condition to have the molecular junction. In fact, the most possible scenario [Case-III] does not even involve the precursor configuration. Similar precursor configuration was observed for diatomic83,85 and organometallic84 molecule-based junction which primarily occurs when the atomic contact lies in parallel to the molecular junction (shown schematically in the insets of figures 2a and 2b). As a next step, we explore the statistical relationship of these configurations with the help of two dimensional cross-correlation histogram (2DCH) technique, introduced in reference (also see Supplementary Information, section 2d). Using this technique, a map is generated for arbitrary conductance pairs Gi & Gj where the color- scale indicates the sign of the correlation among the conductance pairs (orange and blue represents the positive and negative correlation respectively). Figure 2e shows the 2D cross correlation map of ferrocene (FC) molecular junctions where horizontal and vertical axes correspond to the two conductance, Gi & Gj. Now we consider three different conductance regions: (a) R1- molecular precursor conductance (1.05 - 1.40 G0). In line with the conditional analysis, a positive correlation between the precursor peak (R3) and the molecular peak (R1) is noticed, marked with the black rectangle in figure 2e. However, the correlation between R1 and R2 is negative, marked by the 5 white rectangle, similar to the observation of Ag-CO-Ag junction83. This observed negative correlation is not an anti-correlation in the presence of these two configurations. Rather, the presence of one plateau restricts the occurrence of other in longer length, as evident from the conditional analysis shown in the Supplementary Information, figure S886. Overall, this combined analysis reestablishes the eventual formation of the precursor configuration in which molecule binds alongside to the atomic contact and opens additional channel which results in an increase of the conductance up to ~ 1.3 G0. breaking process: 1. Case-I: Precursor, Gp ~1.2 G0, Atomic, GAu ~1.0 G0 and Molecular, Gm ~0.2 G0 (Black), 2. Case-II: Precursor and Molecular (Red), 3. Case-III: Atomic and Molecular (Green). Inset: schematic representation of the possible junction geometries where L, R and M denote the left electrode, right electrode, and molecule in between, respectively. (d) Conditional conductance histogram in linear scale, considering traces of case-I (Black), II (Red) and III (Green) using 200 bins. Inset: Pie chart of percentage of traces contributing different cases. (e) 2D correlation map of ferrocene molecular junctions for breaking conductance traces, where negative correlation (white rectangle) between the molecular region and atomic peak at 1G0 is clearly visible. Conductance of single-molecule configuration and precursor configuration is positively correlated (black rectangle). 2.3. Effect of anchoring groups Now we focus on the influence of anchoring group on the conductance behavior of ferrocene molecular junction. Left panels of figures 3a and 3b, respectively, show the conductance-distance 6 breaking traces of amine-terminated ferrocene (1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene, abbreviated as FC-NH2) and cyano-terminated ferrocene (1,1′-dicyanoferrocene, abbreviated as FC-CN) single molecular junctions connected to Au electrodes. In contrast to FC, molecular plateaus of FC-NH2 Left Panel: Representative breaking conductance traces of Au/1,1′- bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene/Au molecular junction in a semi logarithmic scale, with traces shifted horizontally for clarity. Middle panel: 1D logarithmic conductance histogram, constructed by analyzing 5000 individual molecular traces using 35 bins per decade. Black dash-dotted line depicts the Gaussian fitting to the corresponding conductance peak and the inset shows the molecular structure. Right Panel: 2D conductance- distance density plot, generated from the same 5000 conductance traces using 80 bins per decade. The zero distance point is assigned here at 2G0. (b) Similar characterization of Au/1,1′-dicyanoferrocene/Au molecular junction. and FC-CN have a broad range of conductance values and subsequent plateaus can also appear in a single trace71. Transitions among these plateaus are not always sequential, their order completely arbitrary. Thus, introduction of anchoring group provides more conductance plateaus which signifies the multiple junction geometries. One-dimensional conductance histograms of FC- NH2 and FC-CN molecular junctions are shown in the middle panels of figures 3a and 3b. Histograms are constructed from 5000 molecular traces using 35 bins per decade. Closely looking into the histogram, well defined conductance peaks at (3.57 ± 0.09) × 10-1 G0 and (2.47 ± 0.03) × 10-1 G0 are observed for FC-NH2 and FC-CN junctions. These conductance values agree well within a factor of two of the conductance peak of pristine FC and from now on, we address the high 7 conductance peak as H. Additionally, FC-NH2 and FC-CN reveal a rather broad conductance feature beneath the high conductance peak (H) which can be convoluted into two individual conductance peaks with maxima at (1.21 ± 0.11) × 10-2 G0 and (2.99 ± 0.35) × 10-3 G0 for FC- NH2 and at (1.57 ± 0.09) × 10-2 G0 and (5.19 ± 0.22) × 10-3 G0 for FC-CN. We refer to these conductance regions as M and L in descending values of conductance. M and L configurations show a trend: FC-CN > FC-NH2 and their conductance values are distributed over two orders of magnitude between ~ 10-2 to 10-4 G0 which hint at the structural variety of geometries due to the easy rotation of FC’s cyclopentadiene rings87. All the conductance values are summarized in Table 1. Representative density plots of FC-NH2 and FC-CN (right panel of figures 3a and 3b respectively) are constructed from the same 5000 traces using 80 bins per decade. A distribution of molecular plateaus over a broad range (as evident from the traces in the left panels of figures 3a and 3b ), along with the slanted data cloud (see right panels of figures 3a and 3b) establishes multiple stable configurations appearing due to the chemical anchors81. 2.4. Stretching length histogram and average traces To compare the evolution of the junction during stretching for the three different types of molecules, characteristic stretching length histograms for each conductance regime (H, M or L) are constructed by considering length from the relative zero position at 0.5 G0 to one order of magnitude below the most probable conductance peak (adopting the procedure mentioned in the references ). Figures 4a-c display the typical stretching length histogram of FC, FC-NH2 and FC-CN for H (blue), M (red) and L (yellow) conductance regimes. The most probable plateau length is determined by the Gaussian fitting of the distribution (shown by the black dashed line), also summarized in Table 1. Notably, a positive shift in the distribution of M and L configurations compared to the H configuration, suggests that they correspond to a relatively longer conformation. While the larger width of the distribution for M and L configurations (figures 4a-c) illustrates the widespread variation in geometry upon stretching the junction6,88, larger stretching length indicates higher formation stability. Furthermore, to probe the conductance decay during the elongation of the junction, average conductance-distance traces are shown in figures 4d-f for three different molecular junctions in the conductance regimes H, M or L. Almost flat plateau of the high conductance (H) region resembles to the atom-like contact80, compared to the low conductance plateaus which are possibly originating due to the chemical anchors. Parameter Molecule Configuration High G (H) Mid G (M) Low G (L) Conductance (G0) FC (2.20 ± 0.03) × 10-1 FC-NH2 (3.57 ± 0.09) × 10-1 (1.21 ± 0.11) × 10-2 (2.99 ± 0.35) × 10-3 FC-CN (2.47 ± 0.03) × 10-1 (1.57 ± 0.09) × 10-2 (5.19 ± 0.22) × 10-3 Most probable stretching length (Å) FC FC-NH2 FC-CN Slope, (Å-1) FC -(2.87 ± 0 .75) × 10-2 FC-NH2 -(5.05 ± 0.60) × 10-2 -(4.13 ± 0.30) × 10-2 -(5.87 ± 0.21) ×10-2 FC-CN -(4.58 ± 0.57) × 10-2 -(5.03 ± 0.54) × 10-2 -(8.78 ±0.40) × 10-2 8 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene for three different conductance regime (blue-H, red- M and yellow-L). Histogram of a particular conductance region is constructed by considering length from the relative zero position at 0.5 G0 to one order of magnitude beneath the most probable conductance value of corresponding regime. Black dash line depicts the Gaussian fitting of the histogram which yields the most probable stretching length. (d - f) Statistically averaged conductance- distance traces of ferrocene, 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene and 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene . Here blue (red, yellow) color represents average traces of the high conductance regime, H (M, L). Black 9 dash line represents the linear fitting of the corresponding average traces to calculate the slope, ∂(log G G0 ⁄ ) ∂(∆x) 2.5. Theoretical calculations and interpretation of experimental results 2.5.1. High conductance feature To gain insight into the origin of measured conductance, we now compare experimental results with detailed DFT - based calculations. First, we consider two possible geometries (parallel and perpendicular orientation of FC with respect to the electrodes) and for each geometry, energies at different distances of the electrodes from the central Fe atom are evaluated. Example coordinate files are provided in the Supplementary Information, Section (j). The scale of the energies for different distances is large compared to the thermal energy accessible to the system (see Supplementary Information, figure S9) and hence, each geometry can be considered stable with respect to the thermal fluctuations. Furthermore, we have also investigated the nature of bonding between the Au-Fe and Au-C for perpendicular and parallel geometries, respectively. Note that the incorporation of van der Waals correction seems to have significant impact on the binding energies for both the geometries. The bond energy was found to be significantly higher, ~ -660 meV for perpendicular and ~ -1610 meV for the parallel geometries, suggesting formation of Top panels depict perpendicular (a) and parallel (b) geometries and scattering states at equal isosurface levels (yellow is positive, cyan is negative). Bottom panels show transmission functions 10 of the corresponding geometries (c-d). The transport windows for perpendicular (c) and parallel (d) geometries are given as filled curves for bias of 1 V (gray) and infinitesimal bias (green), both at 300 K. Transmission functions at different electrode distances d from center of the junction are shown, as well as transmission due to the displayed scattering state (see Supplementary Information for details). covalent bonding (see Supplementary Information, section 4f for details). Now, the transmissions for these two geometries are calculated and conductance (G) can be written as,90 G = I V = 2e2 h ׬ T(E) fLቀE;kBT,EF+eV 2 ቁ−fRቀE;kBT,EF−eV 2 ቁ eV dE ∞ −∞ , where e is the elementary charge, V is the bias of the junction and fL/R is the Fermi distribution of the left/right reservoir, at temperature T = 300 K. The distribution of the left and right reservoir is shifted symmetrically by the bias of the junction. The difference between the Fermi distributions is called the transport window. For conductance to be significant, the overlap of the transmission function and the transport window must be non-negligible. The transmission functions for both geometries are displayed in figures 5c-d. In perpendicular geometry, the transport window overlaps with a resonance for bias of about 1 V but does not overlap significantly for infinitesimal bias. The wavefunction responsible for this resonance (see figure 5a) resembles the LUMO orbital of gas-phase FC, shown in the Supplementary Information, figure S10. In the parallel geometry (figures 5b,d), the resonance of LUMO orbital is shifted further away from the Fermi energy and the transmission peak does not overlap with transport window even for bias of 1V. The resonance also corresponds to a peak in the local density of states on the iron atom, as described in the Supplementary Information, Section (g). The resonant transport in the perpendicular geometry yields relatively high conductance 0.1-0.3 G0 and a stronger bias dependence in contrast to the off- resonant parallel geometry having conductance values in the range of 0.02-0.09 G0. See Supplementary Information (Figure S11) for values of conductance at different bias for both the geometries. Comparing the measured conductance along with its strong bias dependence, we suggest that the perpendicular geometry dominates in the ensemble of junctions over the parallel geometry. The observation of high conductance peak in all three molecules along with similar stretching length (figures 4a-c) suggest that it originates primarily from the perpendicular geometry via Au-Fe bond. Additionally, we also explored the effect of ring rotation at a fixed geometry, but the calculated transmission function remains nearly unchanged, as shown in Supplementary Information, figure S12. 2.5.2. Low conductance feature In this subsection, we explore the conductance behavior of ferrocene molecule coupled to Au electrode via -NH2 and -CN anchoring groups. Possibility of binding through the chemical anchors of FC-NH2 and FC-CN is clearly evident from the calculated negative binding energies for these two configurations (see Supplementary Information, Table S2) and corresponding coordinate files are provided in the Supplementary Information, Section (j). Figures 6c and 6f demonstrate the transmission curves for both the geometries when connected with the chemical anchors (termed as anchoring geometry), exhibiting transmission in the range of 10-2 – 10-3 in the vicinity of metallic Fermi level. Thus, coupling with the anchoring groups may provide multiple conformations of the molecule inside the junction, leading to the broad conductance features with larger stretching 11 length and tilted plateaus. The scattering wave functions indicate that primarily HOMO – 1 orbital is responsible for electron transport of both FC-NH2 (Figures 6a-b) and FC-CN junctions (Figures 6d-e). : HOMO (a) and HOMO – 1 (b). Yellow isosurfaces have positive values. (c) Transmission curve of the same geometry as a function of energy under zero – bias. (d-f) similar characterization of Au/1,1′-dicyanoferrocene/Au junction. Isosurface levels of orbitals are chosen same for both geometries. 3. Conclusions: In conclusion, we have demonstrated the resonant transport at room temperature by connecting an organometallic molecule between Au electrodes. By measuring conductance-distance traces for thousands of statistically independent junctions using a mechanically controllable break junction set-up, we observe that pristine Ferrocene binds strongly with the Au electrodes and provides a significant high conductance (~ 0.1-0.3 G0 in the bias range of 20 - 400 mV) in the conductance histogram. The density functional calculations suggest that both perpendicular and parallel orientations of the molecule with respect to electrodes are energetically favorable configurations via covalent-like bonding. Transmission curve for the perpendicular geometry reveals a sharp peak near metallic Fermi level which leads to a conductance value closed to the experimentally observed conductance as well as a stronger bias dependence. Whereas similar calculations in parallel geometry shows a conductance in the range of 0.01 – 0.09 G0 and having a rather weak bias 12 dependence. We also observed that the inherent rotation of cyclopentadienyl rings of Ferrocene has negligible impact on the transmission curves. Furthermore, to understand the effect of chemical anchors, we performed similar experiment on ferrocene terminated with two different anchoring groups (-NH2) and (-CN). Both molecules display the high conductance peaks like pristine ferrocene in the conductance histogram, along with additional low conductance features. While the perpendicular geometry with Au facing the Fe atom might be responsible for the high conductance peak, the low conductance feature originate mainly due to the multiple binding geometries with the anchoring groups. Through this study we have not only explored the charge transport mechanism through a single organometallic molecule directly coupled to the metal electrodes via metal-metal chemical bond, but also provide a mechanism to exhibit long-range intramolecular transport which is important for next generation molecular devices working at ambient condition. 4. Methods: 4.1. Instrumentation for molecular characterization 1H and 13C NMR spectra were obtained with BRUKER 300 MHz FT-NMR spectrometer and the chemical shifts are reported in ppm, using tetramethylsilane as an internal standard and were referenced to the residual solvent as follows: CDCl3 = 7.26 (1H), 77.16 (13C) ppm at 22 ̊C. For 1H NMR, coupling constants J are given in Hz and the resonance multiplicity is described as s 4.2. Preparation of ferrocene for conductivity studies Commercially available ferrocene, purchased from LOBA Chemie, was recrystallized from dichloromethane (DCM) by the slow evaporation method at room temperature. These pure orange crystals were used directly for the conductance measurements. 4.3. Synthesis of 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene was synthesized from 1,1′-ferrocenedimethanol according to literature reported procedure91. A solution of 1,1′-ferrocenedimethanol (932 mg, 3.78 mmol) in glacial acetic acid (10 ml) was charged with NaN3 (2.95 g, 45.46 mmol) and stirred at 50 ̊C for 4h. The acid was neutralized with saturated NaHCO3 solution and the reaction mixture was extracted with CH2Cl2 (3×20 ml). The organic layer was washed with brine, dried over Na2SO4, and taken to dryness. The crude residue of 1, 1′-bis(azidomethyl)ferrocene was purified by column chromatography in silica gel with hexane as the eluant to obtain pure 1,1′- bis(azidomethyl)ferrocene (984 mg, 3.32 mmol) as orange liquid. The 1,1′- bis(azidomethyl)ferrocene (984 mg, 3.32 mmol) was dissolved in EtOH (10 ml) and water (3 ml) and to this solution, NH4Cl (810 mg, 15.1 mmol) and freshly activated Zn powder (594 mg, 9.08 mmol) were added. The suspension was stirred at room temperature for 24 h, after which the suspension was filtered and filtrate was taken to dryness. The residue was partitioned between EtOAc (3×20 ml) and 1 N aqueous ammonia (10 ml) and the organic layer separated, washed with brine, and dried over Na2SO4. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and the residue was purified by column chromatography in basic alumina with methanol as the eluant. The resulting pure 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene (795 mg, 3.26 mmol) was obtained as dark yellow (s, 4H, CH2), 1.76 (br s, 4H, NH2). 13C NMR (CDCl3, 75 MHz) δ = 90.9, 68.1, 67.5, 41.2. 13 4.4. Synthesis of 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene was synthesized from ferrocene according to literature reported procedure92. 1,1′-diformylferrocene (709 mg, 2.92 mmol), NH2OH.HCl (529 mg, 7.61 mmol), KI (962 mg, 5.8 mmol) and ZnO (472 mg, 5.8 mmol) were suspended in 15 ml of CH3CN and stirred for 48 h at 95 ̊C. The reaction mixture was cooled to room temperature and 10 ml aqueous solution of 5% Na2S2O3 was added in a single portion and the reaction mixture was stirred for another 15 min. Then the reaction mixture was filtered through a filter paper and the filtrate extracted with CH2Cl2 (2×15 ml). The combined organic layers were dried over Na2SO4 and the solvent was removed under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by column chromatography in neutral alumina with EtOAc/n-hexane (1/4, v/v) as the eluant to obtain pure 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene (613 mg, 2.6 mmol) as orange powder. 1H NMR (CDCl3, 300 MHz) δ = 4.82 (t, 4H, HFc, J = 3 Hz), 4.60 (t, 4H, HFc, J = 3 Hz). 13C NMR (CDCl3, 75 MHz) δ = 118.3, 73.9, 73.5, 54.7. 4.5. Conductance measurements We choose MCBJ technique to measure the electrical conductance of three organometallic molecular junction, illustrated in figure 1a (abbreviated as: FC – ferrocene, FC-NH2 – 1,1′- bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene, FC-CN – 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene), at room temperature and ambient condition93,94. A notch is first created on an Au wire (0.1 mm diameter, 99.998%, Alfa aesar) and placed on top of a flexible substrate (Phosphor Bronze) using two component epoxy glue (Stycast 2850 FT with catalyst 9), schematically shown in figure 1a. Upon bending the substrate, the wire is broken from its weak spot creating a sub-nanometer gap which can be controlled using a piezo electric actuator with sub-angstrom precision. Molecules can then be easily trapped between the leads and this process is repeated several times to address many independent configurations. Throughout this breaking/making process, electrical current through the junction is recorded and one complete measurement cycle is called a breaking/making trace. In the conductance-distance measurements, typical moving rate of piezo is 3.2 μm/s, which translates into an opening and corresponding closing rate for two leads of about 2-4 nm/s (attenuation factor ~ 0.001)95. The set up is capable of measuring a current ~ 1 nA at an applied bias of 1 V. Prior to the experiments, ~ 0.1 mM dichloromethane (DCM ) solution of target molecules is deposited over the suspended part of the unbroken electrodes by means of self-assembly from the solution81. 4.6. Theoretical calculation details 4.6.1. Ferrocene Transport calculations are based on the DFT electronic structure of the ferrocene bound to a pair of Au clusters and NEGF formalism. These are implemented in TURBOMOLE96 package and FHI-AIMS97 package, with NEGF method in aitranss module of FHI-AIMS90. In both cases, we employed a PBE functional98 with dispersion corrections (disp499 in TURBOMOLE or Van der Waals100 and many body dispersion101 in FHI-AIMS). Two different molecular geometries are considered – perpendicular and parallel geometries, as shown in figure 5. For each geometry, the optimal molecular position for several distances of Au electrodes is considered (see figure S9 in Supplementary Information). Furthermore, dependence on random ad-atoms that break the pyramidal symmetry is investigated and shown to be negligible, see Supplementary Information, Section (h) for details. The basis used is TZVP in TURBOMOLE and tight basis in FHI-AIMS. 14 The transmission function is also calculated for smaller basis set size, showing that the basis set size is converged – details are given in the Supplementary Information. 4.6.2. 1,1′-bis(aminomethyl)ferrocene and 1,1′-dicyanoferrocene First-principles based density functional theory (DFT) calculations have been used for electronic structure calculations using Quantum ATK102. This study uses the spin-polarized generalized gradient approximation (SGGA) of the Perdew - Burke - Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange-correlation functional with double-zeta polarized basis set and a 120 Hartree density mesh cut-off. Geometry optimization for each structure has been performed for forces smaller than 10 meV/Å. The transmission probabilities T(E) of the 2-probe geometry was investigated using the Non- equilibrium Green's Function (NEGF) formalism in conjunction with DFT theory. For the transport calculation, a k-point grid of 3 × 3 × 134 was used with 134 along the transport direction, as no changes in the transmission was detected beyond that limit. Acknowledgements: B. Pabi acknowledges the support from DST-Inspire fellowship, Government of India (Inspire code IF170934) and A. N. Pal acknowledges the funding from the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India (Grant No. CRG/2020/004208). The authors acknowledge clean room fabrication facilities of SNBNCBS, and Priya Mahadevan and Debayan Mondal for fruitful discussions. S. Marek acknowledges the support from the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic though the e-INFRA CZ (ID:90140), which provided the computational resources. S. Marek also acknowledges financial support provided by the Charles University through GAUK (ID366222). Conflicts of interest: There are no conflicts of interest.