Superconductivity in electron doped PbBi2Te4 Xianghan Xu1,*, Danrui Ni1, Weiwei Xie2, and R.J. Cava1,* 1. Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08648 2. Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, Lansing, MI 48824 Abstract Single crystals of In-doped PbBi2Te4 are synthesized via a conventional solid-state method. Chemical analysis and hall measurements indicate that In replaces Pb, introducing n-type carriers, creating Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. A superconducting transition is observed with a maximum transition temperature around 2.06 K for Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Field dependent transport measurements reveal type- II superconductivity and yield a maximum upper critical field around 1.55 T. Thermodynamic data indicates bulk superconductivity in the BCS weak coupling limit. Our findings establish an ambient- pressure superconducting system in the AM2X4 family, and doped PbBi2Te4 as a promising platform for the study of topological superconductivity. Introduction The emergence of superconductivity in topological materials is predicted to open an energy gap in the surface states and lead to the exotic Majorana zero modes, with accompanying potential applications in topological quantum computing. Although p-wave superconductivity is believed to be ideally compatible with a topological surface state, it has also been demonstrated that the proximity effect enables the appropriate interactions between superconductivity and topological states for an s-wave superconductor at the interfaces of heterojunctions, as well as at the geometrical surfaces of single-phase materials. Therefore, the exploration of new superconductors with topological features in their energy bands is prominent in condensed matter physics research. Tuning the Fermi level by pressure or chemical doping is a feasible way to induce superconductivity in topological materials. For example, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 are well studied topological insulators, and bulk superconductivity can be induced in them via applying high pressure, or introducing intercalated dopants such as Cu, Pd, Nb, and Sr. The related AM2X4 (A=Mn, Ge, Sn, Pb; M=As, Sb, Bi; and X=Se, Te) family has a centrosymmetric space group R-3m and a crystal structure derived by an alternate stacking of AX and M2X3 blocks, adding an additional structural degree of freedom on top of the topology. For example, MnBi2Te4 and related materials successfully combine intrinsic magnetism and topology in single-phase bulk materials . Recently, researchers reported bulk superconductivity in a series of In-doped SnBi2Te4 crystals (maximum Tc ~ 1.85 K) , which sheds light on a new family of topological superconductor candidates. Thus, synthesis and characterizations of more superconductors in the AM2X4 family is urgently desired. As another member in this family, PbBi2Te4 has been proved experimentally to be a 3D topological insulator and pressure-induced superconductivity has been observed in PbBi2Te4. Indium is known as a good aliovalent dopant when partially replacing Pb. For example, high-pressure-synthesized Pb0.2In0.8Te cubic phase is reported to be superconducting below Tc ~ 4.8 K. Therefore, the potential emergence of superconductivity in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 is a promising possibility. Here, we report the synthesis of Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 (x = 0, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7) crystals using a conventional solid-state reaction method. Superconducting transitions are observed from x = 0.4 to x = 0.7. The superconducting Tc increases monotonically with increasing In doping concentration, and reaches maximum Tc ~ 2.06 K for x = 0.7. Thermodynamic measurements suggest bulk superconductivity as well as weak coupling BCS nature for the superconducting state. Hall measurements suggest that the parent compound PbBi2Te4 is n-type, and that the In replacement of Pb introduces more electrons into the system, which is opposite to the case reported for In-doped SnBi2Te4. Our results establish a new topological superconductor candidate in the AM2X4 family. The Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 single crystals also provide excellent opportunities for future spectroscopic studies to investigate the interplay between superconductivity and topology. Experimental Crystal growth: Stoichiometric amounts of Pb, In, Bi, and Te were weighed and placed in an alumina crucible. The crucible was sealed in a vacuum quartz tube, heated to 600oC, held for 100 hours, and then furnace-cooled to room temperature. The obtained ingot was then ground, poured into an alumina crucible, and sealed in a vacuum quartz tube. The tube was heated to 590oC, kept for 50 hours, then cooled to 300oC at 2oC/h. The crystal ingot was mechanically separated from the crucible. Al and Si were not found to be present in the crystals in the EDS characterization, suggesting negligible contamination from the crucible materials. Electric, magnetic, and thermodynamic measurements: The data were collected in a Dynacool PPMS-9. Electrode contacts were made by silver epoxy. Measurements below 1.8 K used a He-3 refrigerator. Structural and chemical characterizations: Powder x-ray diffraction was carried out at room temperature using a Bruker D8 Advance Eco diffractometer with a Cu anode. Single-crystal x-ray diffraction was carried out using a Bruker D8 Quest Eco diffractometer equipped with a Photon III CPAD detector and monochromated Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.71073 Å). The frames were integrated using the SAINT program within the APEX III 2017.3-0 operating system. The structure was determined using direct methods and difference Fourier synthesis (SHELXTL version 6.14) . The reciprocal lattice planes from single-crystal x-ray diffractions are displayed in Fig. S4, and the |Fcal|2 vs. |Fobs|2 plots from the refinement results are shown in Fig. S5. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were collected using a Quanta 200 FEG Environmental-SEM on the cleaved surfaces of the Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals. Results and discussion i. crystal structure xInxBi2Te4 crystals with cleaved ab planes. (c) X-ray diffraction of (0 0 L) peaks on cleaved ab planes. The inset shows the systematic shift of the (0 0 21) peak position to a higher 2θ angle with increasing In doping concentration. As shown in Table 1, the Pb: In: Bi: Te ratios determined from the EDS experiments are within experimental error of the nominal compositions, suggesting that the nominal stoichiometry of the crystals studied in the present work is correct. The SEM images and EDS spectra are shown in Fig. S1. Fig. 1a displays the crystal structure of the parent phase PbBi2Te4 (x = 0) solved by single crystal X-ray diffraction (SC-XRD). The structure can be regarded as an alternate stacking of a [PbTe] layer and a [Bi2Te3] layer, in where the Pb and Bi atoms are located in Te octahedra. It is impossible to distinguish Pb and Bi unambiguously by X-ray diffraction due to their similar electron counts, and the refinement assumed a fully ordered Pb/Bi distribution, which has been suggested in previous studies. Fig. 1b displays photographs of several of the Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals. They are easy to cleave due to the layered structure. As shown in Fig. 1c, the position of the (0 0 L) diffraction peaks monotonically shift to a higher angle as the In doping concentration increases, which supports the EDS results and indicates that the In atoms are incorporated into the lattice and cause the lattice to shrink. Although Pb and Bi are indistinguishable by X-ray diffraction, the crystallographic sites for the In (having smaller atomic number) are detectable. The SC-XRD refinement results on In occupancies are shown in Table S1, which indicate that the In atoms go to both Pb sites (Wyckoff position 3a) and Bi sites (Wyckoff position 6c) with occupancies in the same order of magnitude. The In concentrations derived from the SC-XRD refinements are also close to the nominal compositions, which confirm the reliability of the refined In occupancies. Based on this fact, even if the Pb and Bi fully order in the parent phase PbBi2Te4, introducing In will inevitably cause Pb-Bi mixing, and that type of disorder does not change the stoichiometry. Note that the x = 0.7 crystal starts to show tiny impurity peaks in the XRD pattern (Fig. S2). The heights of those impurity peaks are less than 1% of the real peaks, which implies that the impurities are present in tiny amounts and should not influence the quality of x = 0.7 crystal studied here. But it does mean that 70% is close to the upper limit of In solubility in PbBi2Te4 when the material is prepared by conventional solid-state synthesis. The attempt to synthesize InBi2Te4 using a similar conventional solid-state reaction method resulted in a mixture with Bi2Te3 and In2Te3 as major phases. Nominal composition EDS composition a (Å) c (Å) n (cm-3) (all n-type) Tc (K) Hc2(0) (T) PbBi2Te4 PbBi1.97Te3.81 -- -- Pb0.6In0.4Bi2Te4 Pb0.61In0.39Bi2.26Te4.32 Pb0.5In0.5Bi2Te4 Pb0.50In0.50Bi2.15Te4.15 Pb0.4In0.6Bi2Te4 Pb0.41In0.59Bi1.99Te3.72 Pb0.3In0.7Bi2Te4 Pb0.33In0.67Bi1.80Te3.73 (c) The resistivity and its derivative of Pb0.5In0.5Bi2Te4. (d) Hall resistivity as a function of magnetic field measured at 5 K (normal state). ii. electrical properties and superconductivity The resistivity vs. temperature (ρ-T) curves down to around 0.4 K of Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals are displayed in Fig. 2a. The metallic behavior and resistivity value of the x = 0 crystal studied here are consistent with the previous report. In the In-doped crystals, the ρ-T data show weakly semiconducting behavior. As shown in Fig. 2b, a sharp superconducting transition is detected in the x = 0.4 to 0.7 crystals. The transition temperature (Tc, defined by the temperature where the resistivity drops 50%) monotonically increases with increasing In concentration, reaching a maximum of ~ 2.06 K for the x = 0.7 crystal. The DC magnetic susceptibility data for x = 0.7 (Fig. S3) shows a drop below Tc, and the divergence between zero-field-cool and field-cool curves suggests Type-II superconductivity. Note that the susceptibility does not saturate down to around 1.7 K, which is the lowest temperature that our VSM can reach. As shown in Fig. 2c, the ρ-T of x = 0.5 crystal has an anomaly at around 20 K, which we tentatively attribute to a change density wave (CDW) transition. Interestingly, this feature was only observed in the Pb: In = 1: 1 sample, but was not found in samples with other In concentrations. Fig. 2d shows the result of Hall measurements at 5 K. The negative Hall coefficients suggest all Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 crystals are n-type, and that a larger fraction of In doping introduces more electrons, indicated by the decreasing absolute value of the Hall coefficient. The carrier densities calculated from Hall coefficients are displayed in Table 1. Undoped PbBi2Te4 has been reported to be n-type, which is consistent with the present work. Commonly, the valence of In can be either +1 or +3. Previous studies suggest that In is mainly +1 in In-doped SnTe and introduces p-type carriers, but the In is mainly 3+ in In-doped PbTe and introduces n-type carriers. Similarly, In-doped SnBi2Te4 is reported to be p-type, an In- doped PbBi2Te4 in the present work is found to be n-type. One difference is that In-doped SnTe is superconducting, but In-doped PbTe is not superconducting in the Pb-rich regime, whereas In-doped SnBi2Te4 and PbBi2Te4 all show superconducting transitions at similar temperatures. Note that, although the Hall results confirm dominant n-type conduction in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4, the non- linearity of the carrier density versus doping concentration suggests the presence of degenerate In valence states (mixture of +1 and +3) or additional impurities which act in a self-compensating manner . Fig. 3 shows the ρ-T curves measured in various magnetic fields parallel to the c axis. The superconducting transitions are getting less sharp with increasing field in all samples, as is typical for type-II superconductivity. Fig. 4 summarizes the field dependence of the superconducting transition temperatures obtained from the ρ-T curves The upper critical field Hc2 (0) is determined by fitting the data points using the following equation based on generalized Ginzburg-Landau model: 2 2 2 2 ( ) )] c c H T H t t = − + , where / c t = T T . The fitting results are displayed in Table 1. The obtained Hc2 (0) is 1.55(2) T in the highest Tc (x = 0.7) sample, which is close to the reported Hc2 (0) of Sn0.39In0.61Bi2Te4. Then, the Ginzburg−Landau coherence length, ξGL, is calculated to be 193 Å, 182 Å, 150 Å, and 145 Å for x = 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively, based on Ginzburg- Landau relation: 0 2 2 (0) 2 c GL H πξ Φ = , where Ф0 = hc/2e is the flux quantum. critical field fitting (solid lines). iii. Thermodynamics Fig. 5a shows the zero-field heat capacity as a function of temperature for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7 down to around 0.5 K. Clear anomalies can be seen at the superconducting transitions. Normal state heat capacity data (from 2.3 K to 5 K) are fitted using 3 5 Cp T T T γ β δ = + + , which yields the respectively. The γ values for In-doped PbBi2Te4 are slightly smaller than the reported values in superconducting In-doped SnBi2Te4. Note that the normal state heat capacity cannot be fitted well without the 5 T term, which may suggest the existence of anharmonic phonons in this system. (In fact, the 5 T term is also claimed to be necessary to explain the normal state heat capacity of In-doped SnBi2Te4.) Fig. 5b displays Cp/T after subtracting the normal electron and phonon contributions, and it shows clear λ-anomalies at the superconducting transitions. The heat capacity jumps over temperature (ΔCp/Tc) at the superconducting transitions are estimated using the dashed lines in Fig. 5b. The results give ΔCp/(γTc) = 1.31, 1.47, and 1.52 for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively, which are close to the expected value of 1.43 for BCS superconductivity in the weak coupling limit. The fitting of normal state heat capacity data also yields β = 3.7(2), 3.8(9), and 4.0(2) mJ/mole/K4 for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively, and Debye temperatures (ΘD) are calculated to be 154.0 K, 151.8 K, and 150.1 K using this relation: 1/3 12 4 5 D π nR β   Θ =     . We found that the crystals with higher In doping concentrations become harder to bend (qualitatively). The electron- phonon coupling constant, λep, can be obtained using the inverted McMillan equation: * * 1.04 ln 1.45 )ln 1.04 1.45 D c ep D c T T μ λ μ   Θ +     =   Θ − −     , where the μ* is the Coulomb pseudo potential parameter and is typically given a value of 0.13. The calculation yields λep = 0.56, 0.59, and 0.60 for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively. These values all suggest that Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 is a weak-coupling superconductor. The density of states at the Fermi energy N(EF) can be calculated from λep and γ by the following equation: 2 2 3 ( ) (1 ) F B ep N E k γ π λ = + , where kB is the Boltzmann constant. N(EF) are calculated to be 1.01, 1.11, and 1.12 states eV-1 per formula unit for x = 0.5, 0.6, and 0.7, respectively, in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Considering the observed disorder from Indium doping in SC-XRD, an important question is, in the In-doped crystals, how the disorder affects the topology in the band structure. First, though In-Pb-Bi anti-site disorder was observed, the whole chemical stoichiometry does not show significant deviation with nominal based on the EDS and SC-XRD refinement results, which suggests that the total charge in each unit cell and the fermi level should be mostly unaffected by the anti-site disorder. However, the anti-site disorder level is expected to show detectable effect on the band gap and the band topology . Also, note that, the reported Sn and Bi in SnBi2Te4 are mostly ordered , which suggests that the anti-site disorder level in In-doped SnBi2Te4 might be lower as well. Consistently, the superconducting transitions of In-doped PbBi2Te4 in Fig. 5 seem less sharp than the reported heat capacity jump in In-doped SnBi2Te4 . Future systematic ARPES measurements in combination with the DFT calculations on In-doped PbBi2Te4 will help to understand the role that anti-site disorder plays in the band structure and potential topological superconductivity. normal state heat capacity. (b) The contribution of superconducting electrons in heat capacity over temperature. The dashed lines are guides for the eye for the equal area construction used for the estimation of heat capacity jump. Conclusions In summary, we have experimentally demonstrated type-II bulk superconductivity in Pb1- xInxBi2Te4 crystals. In contrast with In-doped SnBi2Te4 which was found to be p-type, the Hall results confirm dominate n-type carriers in Pb1-xInxBi2Te4. Although these two systems show opposite types of carriers, their superconducting parameters are close to each other. The quantitative analysis of the electron and superconductivity parameters reveals BCS superconductivity in the weak coupling limit. The maximum Tc and Hc2 (0) are 2.06 K and 1.55 T, achieved for the nominal composition Pb0.3In0.7Bi2Te4 - both slightly enhanced compared to In-doped SnBi2Te4. Our findings establish a new ambient-pressure superconducting system, as well as a promising candidate for topological superconductivity. In future investigations, high-resolution electron microscopy or neutron diffraction studies are desired in order to determine the chemical distribution of different atoms in the lattice and understand how they interplay with superconductivity and topology. Our sizable Pb1-xInxBi2Te4 single crystals also provide excellent opportunities for future spectroscopic studies to search for topological surface states. The superconducting Tc monotonically increases with higher In doping concentration although 70% In for Pb substitution seems to be the upper limit of In solubility for ambient pressure synthesis via a conventional solid-state reaction method, a higher In doping concentration or even InBi2Te4 without changing the structure may be achievable via techniques such as high-pressure synthesis, and there might be a chance for a further promoted superconducting Tc. Acknowledgements The work at Princeton University was supported by the US Department of Energy, Division of Basic Energy Sciences, grant number DE-FG02-98ER45706. W. X. was supported by the US Department of Energy, Division of Basic Energy Sciences, grant number DE-SC0023648.