1 MoS2/Al0.68Sc0.32N negative capacitance field-effect transistors Seunguk Song,1,† Kwan-Ho Kim,1,† Srikrishna Chakravarthi,1,† Zirun Han,1,2 Gwangwoo Kim,1 Kyung Yeol Ma,3 Hyeon Suk Shin,3 Roy H. Olsson III,1 and Deep Jariwala1* 1Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, United States 3Department of Chemistry, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), UNIST- gil 50, Ulsan 44919, Republic of Korea †These authors equally contributed to this work: S. Song, K.-H. Kim, and S. Chakravarthi. *Author to whom correspondence should be addressed: dmj@seas.upenn.edu ABSTRACT Al0.68Sc0.32N (AlScN) has gained attention for its outstanding ferroelectric properties, including a high coercive field and high remnant polarization. Although AlScN-based ferroelectric field-effect transistors (FETs) for memory applications have been demonstrated, a device for logic applications with minimal hysteresis has not been reported. This study reports on the transport characteristics of a MoS2 negative capacitance FET (NCFET) based on an AlScN ferroelectric material. We experimentally demonstrate the effect of a dielectric layer in the gate stack on the memory window and subthreshold swing (SS) of the NCFET. We show that the hysteresis behavior of transfer characteristics in the NCFET can be minimized with the inclusion of a non-ferroelectric dielectric layer, which fulfills the capacitance-matching condition. Remarkably, we also observe the NC effect in MoS2/AlScN NCFETs arrays based on large-area monolayer MoS2 synthesized by chemical vapor deposition, showing the SS values smaller than its thermionic limit (~36-60 mV/dec) and minimal variation in threshold voltages (< 20 mV). 2 MAIN TEXT The advancement of integrated circuit designs has heavily relied on the principles of Dennard scaling to maintain a constant power density as transistor dimensions continue to decrease.1 However, as transistors reach nanoscale dimensions, reducing the supply voltage (Vdd) becomes difficult without increasing leakage current (Ioff) and sacrificing on-state current (Ion).1, 2 Given that power density is directly proportional to Vdd2, alternative approaches to further scale Vdd are imperative to overcome this challenge of power dissipation.3 A promising solution lies in overcoming the room-temperature (RT) thermionic limit of ~60 mV/dec for subthreshold swing (SS), as achieving a steeper switching behavior allows the transistor to maintain the same Ion at lower Vdd without an increase in Ioff.2 To overcome the thermionic limit, negative capacitance field- effect transistors (NCFETs) present a novel approach by incorporating a ferroelectric material in the gate stack. According to the Landau-Ginzburg-Devonshire (LGD) theory, ferroelectrics possess a metastable region in their polarization-dependent energy landscape that exhibits NC.4, 5 By introducing a ferroelectric insulator layer in the gate stack, SS can be reduced to less than 60 mV/dec at RT, as we can have Cs Cins < 0 in the following expression for SS: SS = 2.3kBT q ( ∂Vg ∂ψs) = 2.3kBT q (1 + Cs Cins) (1) , where 2.3kBT q is the thermionic limit at 300 K (~60 mV/dec), and Cs and Cins are the semiconductor and gate insulator capacitance respectively.6 However, despite extensive research on ferroelectric materials and theoretical frameworks of the NC effect, achieving reliable hysteresis-free steep switching in NCFETs has been challenging.4, 5, 7 The main difficulty is stabilizing the NC effect in the NCFET, which requires incorporating a conventional, non-ferroelectric dielectric as an interlayer in series with the ferroelectric material in the gate stack.7 This creates a stable energy minimum in the NC region while reducing device hysteresis.7 To eliminate hysteresis, the overall capacitance of the device must be positive, which can be achieved by ensuring that the magnitude of the ferroelectric capacitance (|CFE|) remains higher than the combination of all remaining capacitances (CREM).7 3 Using the LGD theory, one can obtain the following approximation for |CFE| of a ferroelectric material with a certain thickness (tFE) as follows:8, 9 |CFE| ≈ 2 3√3 Pr Ec∙tFE (2) As suggested by Equation (2), it is preferable to use a ferroelectric material with a large remnant polarization (Pr) and coercive field (Ec) to obtain a high |CFE|.8, 9 Furthermore, the S-shaped polarization-electric field (P-E) characteristics indicate that larger Ec values could expand the NC region, which maintains the NC effect over a wide range of gate voltage (Vg) sweeps.8, 10 Recently discovered wurtzite-structured Al1-xScxN (AlScN) possesses unique ferroelectric properties,11-13 surpassing other thin-film ferroelectrics such as HfxZryO2 and Pb[ZrxTi1-x]O3 in Pr and Ec.14 AlScN exhibits substantially higher Pr ranging from ~70 to 110 μC/cm2 and Ec between ~2 and 9 MV/cm, both of which can be adjusted by modifying the Sc doping levels.11, 12 Consequently, AlScN provides a highly tunable platform for ferroelectric NC devices. Additionally, AlScN demonstrates excellent thermal stability of ferroelectric properties, maintaining its ferroelectricity over 1,000 °C.14 It can also be deposited at low temperatures (< 300-400 °C) compatible with industry-standard Back-End-of-Line processes.13 However, despite these desirable characteristics, no AlScN-based NCFETs have been reported yet. Here, we report NCFETs using few-layer and monolayer MoS2 channels and an Al0.68Sc0.32N ferroelectric material in the gate-dielectric stack. MoS2 is used for the semiconducting channel due to its near-constant channel capacitance enabling steep switching over large current ranges.8 We studied the effect of the interlayer on the hysteresis and SS characteristics of AlScN- based NCFETs using various interlayer materials (AlOx, HfOx, and hexagonal BN (h-BN)) and thicknesses (0.5–2 nm). Notably, we observe HfOx/AlScN-based NCFET devices with sub- thermionic SS value (~30.7 mV/dec) with a reduced shift in threshold voltage (Vth). few-layer MoS2, while a 45-nm-thick Al0.68Sc0.32N layer deposited on Pt(111) functions as the ferroelectric gate insulator. In/Au is selected as S source and drain (S/D) contact electrodes to 4 minimize the possibility of developing a degraded contact interface due to chemical interaction between MoS2 and the contact.15, 16 For the interlayer, HfOx and AlOx with various thicknesses are deposited, and h-BN is inserted via a wet transfer method (see Supplementary Methods for more details on device fabrication). Figure 1b shows a representative optical micrograph of the fabricated NCFETs with a few-layer MoS2 channel (green) and In/Au contacts (gold). V to 12 V; one with only the AlScN layer (blue) and the other with only a normal dielectric oxide layer (SiO2/Si; orange). The AlScN-only FET is referred to as ferroelectric FET (FeFET), commonly used in memory applications due to its ability to provide a large memory window (MW) in the transfer characteristics, which corresponds to a shift in Vth (e.g., MW of ~6.0 V in Figure 1c). However, the large MW is undesirable in digital logic devices, and thus we focus on minimizing MW (i.e., Vth shift) later in this paper. The FeFET exhibits a counterclockwise hysteresis curve that is indicative of ferroelectric gating, as a non-volatile, reduced channel conductance remains at a high Vg regime.17 On the other hand, the FET with SiO2 layer with a thickness of 50 nm (without AlScN) shows a clockwise hysteresis curve, mainly caused by charge traps at the dielectric/MoS2 interface.17 In Figure 1d, the transfer characteristics of a FET incorporating both AlScN and a 1-nm- thick HfOx interlayer are presented. The HfOx/AlScN FET demonstrates significantly reduced hysteresis in the switching behavior. The modulation of Vth due to sweep direction is only ~0.7 V, which is smaller than that in a normal FeFET without any interlayer (~1.1 V in Figure S2). The smaller Vth shift of HfOx/AlScN FET can be attributed to the overall device capacitance being more positive and approaching the NCFET capacitance matching condition. The counterclockwise hysteresis curve observed in the HfOx/AlScN device further confirms that the dominating switching behavior is attributed to the ferroelectricity of AlScN rather than the effect of interfacial charge traps. The MoS2/HfOx/AlScN NCFET exhibits negative drain-induced barrier lowering (DIBL), since the Ids values are higher for Vg values smaller than Vth when measured at drain-source voltage (Vds) of 0.1 V vs. 1.0 V (Figure 1d). This observation further supports our claim of observation of NC in these devices.7, 18 In addition, the minimum SS (SSmin) achieved during the backward Vg 5 sweep (~63.9 mV/dec) is close to the thermionic limit of ~60 mV/dec at RT, as illustrated in the SS-Ids plot in Fig. 1e. The significantly lower SSmin value compared to the AlScN-only FeFET (~209 mV/dec) and SiO2-only FET (~1,558 mV/dec) indicates the stacked gate structure with matched capacitance effectively reduces the SS. Note that, the SSmin can be even smaller (~46 mV/dec) when decreasing Vds step size from 50 mV to 5 mV (Figure S3), which proves the robust NC effect irrespective of sweep speeds.19 Figure 1f presents the Ids-Vds characteristics of the same MoS2 NCFET. At high Vg bias (5 V), negative differential resistance (NDR) is observed (Fig. 1g). The NDR effect is believed to be caused by the negative DIBL effect and/or the self-heating effect resulting from large drain current and voltage in the NCFET7, 9, 18, 20, 21 providing additional support to our claims of an NCFET effect in these devices. showing mechanically exfoliated MoS2 along with patterned electrodes. (c) Semilogarithmic scale transfer characteristics of devices with only oxide dielectric (i.e., SiO2/Si) and only ferroelectric AlScN layer (i.e., AlScN/Pt). Both curves measured at Vds = 1 V and Vg from -12 to 12 V. (d-g) Electrical characterizations of capacitance matched NCFETs with AlScN and 1-nm-thick HfOx layer. (d) Semilogarithmic scale transfer characteristic of the NCFET, measured at Vds of 0.1 V (blue) and 1 V (red) (Vds step: 50 mV). (e) Corresponding SS vs. Ids plot under the backward Vg sweep, indicating the SSmin of ~63.9 mV/dec. (f) Output characteristic of MoS2 NCFET with a Vds step size of 0.1 V. (g) Corresponding conductance (gds) depending on Vds at the Vg of 5 V. 6 To comprehensively investigate the impact of dielectric interlayers on the performance of NCFETs, we have fabricated devices with mechanically exfoliated few-layer MoS2 channels incorporating various interlayer materials and thicknesses. The corresponding transfer curves are presented in Figure 2a-f, allowing for a systematic understanding of how the thickness and type of the interlayer dielectric affect the transport characteristics of NCFETs. All the transfer curves clearly demonstrate the dependence of SS and MW on the type and thickness of the interlayer dielectric. Interestingly, in Figures 2a-f, a reduction in MW to values below ~500 mV is observed, regardless of the interlayer type. Notably, all curves exhibit the counterclockwise hysteric behavior, with an Ion/Ioff greater than ~105 indicating that the ferroelectric switching is actively occurring during Vg sweep of the device. We find that interlayers with higher dielectric constants result in steeper SS values at a constant thickness. Due to the high dielectric constant (i.e., k of ~16-25) of HfOx, it exhibits the lowest SS values, as indicated in Figures 2a-c. Interlayers composed of high-k dielectrics are expected to exhibit a higher capacitance (CIL). It is clear from Equation (1) that to achieve a sub- thermionic SS value, the factor (1 + Cs Cins) = (1 + Cs CIL − Cs |CFE|) must be less than 1. Consequently, the SS of NCFET with a |CFE| is expressed as follows: SS = 2.3kBT q (1 + Cs CIL − Cs (3) Given Equations (2) and (3), to have a SS smaller than 60 meV/dec, the condition of |CFE| < CIL must be met, and increasing the CIL assists in maintaining this relationship.22 To this end, we successfully demonstrate a sub-thermionic SSmin value of ~30.6 mV/dec for the 0.5 nm thick HfOx device, as shown in Figure 2a (the corresponding SS vs. Ids curve is shown in Figure S4.). 7 0.5 nm thick HfOx, (b) 1 nm thick HfOx, (c) 1.5 nm thick HfOx, (d) 1.0 nm thick AlOx, (e) 1.5 nm thick AlOx, (f) 1 nm thick hexagonal BN (h-BN). All curves were measured at Vds = 1 V with a step size of 50 mV. The corresponding SS vs. Ids plots are shown in Figure S4. Equation (2) also indicates that interlayers with greater thickness can lead to higher SS values due to the inverse relationship between CIL and dielectric thickness. Figure 3a illustrates how the SS extracted from our devices appropriately conforms to the expected trend based on the dielectric constant and thickness of the interlayer. Furthermore, Figure 3b demonstrates an excellent linear fit to a SS vs. 1 CIL plot for the devices with the HfOx and h-BN interlayers. By extrapolating to the intercept of 1 CIL = 0, where SS = 2.3kBT q (1 − Cs |CFE| ) , we can extract a range for |CFE| values by using appropriate values of Cs. To this end, we approximate the MoS2 channel as a conventional dielectric as its charge screening length (~7 nm) is larger than the channel thickness of our device.23 Accounting for the variability in the number of MoS2 layers due to exfoliation and utilizing previously reported few-layer dielectric constants for the material,24 we use Cs values 8 range of 2.53 to 3.79 μF/cm2. This in turn allows us to extract a range of CFE values between -2.18 is lower in magnitude compared to the calculated CFE of the 20-nm-thick ferroelectric HfxZryO2 (~ -13.1 μF/cm2);7 however, the NC value for AlScN/MoS2 system will likely be enhanced as the AlScN layer is scaled to lower thickness (tFE) with an accompanying increase in Ec in accordance with Equation (2). Fig. 3. (a) Extracted SSmin values as a function of interlayer type and thickness. (b) SSmin vs. 1 CIL scatter plot. To account for variability in the dielectric constant of HfOx, CIL values are calculated assuming k = 16 and k = 25. As mechanical exfoliation is unsuitable for large-area applications, we additionally fabricated FeFETs and NCFETs utilizing large-area monolayer MoS2 grown through chemical vapor deposition (CVD), as depicted in Figure 4a (and Figure S5a). The device configuration is the same as those using mechanically exfoliated flakes to ensure its comparable capacitance network (see Figure S1 and Supplementary Methods). The transfer curves of the MoS2/AlScN FeFET devices (without dielectric interlayers) exhibit sub-thermionic SS switching behavior (Figure 4b). The minimum observed SSmin values of the six devices are calculated (Figure 4c) and listed (Figure 4d), and the steepest SS is confirmed to be ~36 mV/dec. Importantly, all six devices 9 demonstrate steep SSmin values, which are the same or lower than the thermionic limit (< 60 mV/dec). On the other hand, CVD-MoS2 NCFET with a 2 nm thick interlayer of AlOx results in a nearly hysteresis-free transfer curve (Figure 4e) with an SSmin of ~90 mV/dec (Figure 4f). Additionally, the NCFET exhibits an Ion/Ioff exceeding ~105, despite the relatively narrow Vg sweep range of -3V to 3V, even with a total gate stack thickness of ~47 nm (~2 nm AlOx/~45 nm AlScN). Similar to the observations in the mechanically exfoliated samples, thicker dielectric interlayers lead to reduced hysteresis, though maintaining a steep SS below 60 mV/dec becomes challenging. The AlOx/AlScN-based NCFET follows a similar trend, necessitating a 2 nm thick dielectric layer to achieve minimal hysteresis (~20 mV). As an interlayer, HfOx can surpass AlOx in achieving steeper SS in NCFETs at the same thickness due to higher k. By utilizing the calculated CFE from Figure 3, we determine the optimal thickness of the HfOx interlayer to be 0.9 nm using the capacitance-matching condition, ensuring minimal hysteresis in the CVD-MoS2 NCFET. The representative transfer curve and SS-Ids plot of NCFET with a 0.9 nm-thick HfOx are shown in Figure 4g and Figure 4h, respectively. This specific NCFET exhibits a small MW of ~0.34 V and an SSmin of ~51 mV/dec. Notably, the extracted SSmin (~51 mV/dec) is smaller than that with the AlOx interlayer (~90 mV/dec in Figure 4e) and the RT- thermionic limit (~60 mV/dec). Moreover, this NCFET exhibits negative DIBL and NDR effects, confirming the occurrence of the NC effect (Figure S5). However, not all NCFETs display sub- thermionic SSmin; for example, the averaged MW and SSmin of the NCFETs with a 300-nm-long channel are ~69.7 ± 12.1 mV/dec and ~0.26 ± 0.15 V (average ± standard deviation), possibly due to non-uniformity of channel quality and MoS2/AlScN interface (discussed later). 10 devices without interlayer (Vds = 1 V). The inset shows the zoomed-in curves to highlight their SS values smaller than 60 mV/dec. (c) Corresponding SS-Ids plot and (d) summary of SS of the devices without interlayer, displaying sub-60 mV/dec SS values. (e) Transfer characteristics for a device with 2 nm AlOx interlayer, and its (f) SS values depending on the Ids. (g) Ids-Vg plot of representative NCFET with 0.9 nm thick HfOx interlayer, and (h) its corresponding SS vs. Ids, demonstrating the SSmin of ~51 mV/dec. To analyze device-to-device variations and channel length (L)-dependence on SSmin, the transfer characterization of NCFETs with varying L (300-1,500 nm) is conducted. Figures 5a and b display the overlayed transfer curves of 20 devices during the forward and backward sweep of Vg respectively. As expected, the Ion is highest when the L is shortest (~300 nm) (Figure 5c). The best Ion approaches ~9.0 μA/μm at Vds = 1 V (and ~0.91 μA/μm at Vds = 0.1 V). Remarkably, this high Ion is comparable to those of previously reported HfxZryO2-based NCFETs with the mechanical exfoliated MoS27, 25-28 and WSe229, 30 multilayers (~10-2-2 μA/μm at Vds = 0.1 V) (Table S1). We also observe that the SSmin values increase over L for our MoS2/HfOx/AlScN NCFETs (Figure 5d). Interestingly, this is contrary to the behavior for MoS2 MOSFETs (e.g., increase or unchanged SSmin as L decreases),31, 32 indicating that the transport characteristics are largely influenced by the NC effect rather than dielectric capacitances. However, sub-thermionic SSmin is 11 only observed in three devices with a short L of ~300 or ~600 nm (red points below the dashed line in Figure 5d). The CVD-grown large-area MoS2 possesses crystalline imperfections such as grain boundaries and sulfur vacancies, which may lead to defect-mediated variations on the channel (e.g., decreased Cs, increased interfacial trap density, and field-induced defect migration),33-36 thus altering SSmin. Furthermore, the degradation of SSmin can be substantial as L increases due to an increased number of line defects in longer CVD-MoS2 channels.35 This suggests that using a shorter channel and maintaining a higher crystalline quality of 2D channel are key to achieving reproducible high performance in NCFETs. Representative transfer characteristics of the NCFETs with different L, showing the counterclockwise hysteresis behavior. (d) Boxplot of SSmin depending on the L, where the statistics show the median (lines in the boxes), standard deviations (error bars), and standard errors (boxes). 12 In summary, we present the experimental realization of 2D NCFETs utilizing AlScN as the ferroelectric layer and MoS2 as the channel. Sub-thermionic SSmin values as low as ~30.7 mV/dec, as well as negative DIBL in the transfer characteristics and an NDR effect in output characteristics, were successfully observed, providing clear evidence of the NC effect. By modulating the interlayer dielectric material and its thickness, we are able to reduce hysteresis and MW while simultaneously maintaining a steep SS. Our findings are a first step towards the application of AlScN, a versatile and tunable ferroelectric material, in steep-switching logic devices. Future work on these devices will involve optimizing AlScN composition and thickness together with interlayers for lower operating voltage NCFETs with sub-thermionic SS values for a large swing in current magnitudes. SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL See the supplementary material for Supplementary Methods and Figure S1-5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT D.J. and S.S. acknowledge support from AFOSR GHz-THz program grant number FA9550-23-1- 0391. S.S. also acknowledges partial support for this work by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (Grant No. 2021R1A6A3A14038492). AUTHOR DECLARATIONS Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. Author Contributions D. J. supervised the study. S.S. and K.-H.K. fabricated the devices. S.S., K.-H.K., and S.C. performed the measurements. Z.H. and G.K. contributed to the discussion. K.Y.M. and H.S.S. 13 grew and provided h-BN layers. R.H.O. contributed to the preparation of AlScN. S.S., K.-H. K. and S. C. wrote the manuscript. DATA AVAILABILITY The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.