Imaginary phonon modes and phonon-mediated superconductivity in Y2C3 Niraj K. Nepal1, Paul C. Canfield1,2, and Lin-Lin Wang1∗ Ames National Laboratory, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA and Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA (Dated: February 23, 2024) Abstract For Y2C3 with a superconducting critical temperature (Tc) ∼18 K, zone-center imaginary optical phonon modes have been found for the high-symmetry I-43d structure due to C dimer wobbling motion and electronic instability from a flat band near Fermi energy. After lattice distortion to the more stable lowest symmetry P1 structure, these stabilized low-energy phonon modes with a mixed C and Y character carry a strong electron-phonon coupling to give arise to the observed sizable Tc. Our work shows that compounds with the calculated dynamical instability should not be simply excluded in high-throughput search for new phonon-mediated superconductors. Moreover, we have studied the phase stability of the I-43d structure by calculating the enthalpy of different structural motifs of binary compounds containing group IV elements at the 2:3 composition and also exploring the energy landscapes via ab initio molecular dynamics near and out of the I-43d structure. Our results show that the I-43d type structures with C dimers are preferred in the low to medium pressure range. Because of the wobbling motion of the C dimers, there are many local energy minimums with degenerated energies. Thus, the ensemble average of many I-43d-distorted structures with C dimer wobbling motion at finite temperature still gives an overall I-43d structure. I. INTRODUCTION Computational search for new phonon-mediated super- conducting (SC) compounds has become an active field since the discovery of SC critical temperature (Tc) near room temperature for metal hydrides under high pressure (∼200 GPa) [1–6]. The search requires the computa- tion of electron-phonon coupling (EPC) matrices within the density functional perturbation theory (DFPT) to estimate Tc using Migdal-Eliashberg approximations [9–13]. However, compounds with calculated imagi- nary phonon modes are regarded as dynamically unsta- ble and often discarded as promising candidates in high- throughput. As the phonon eigenmodes are solved in the quasi-harmonic approximation, if some diagonal ele- ments of the dynamical matrix are negative, the square root will give imaginary values for frequency, which cor- respond to local maximum instead of minimum for the potential energy surface. It means the total energy of the system can be lowered via distortion by following the eigenvectors of these imaginary phonon modes, for which the frequencies are usually plotted as negative values. On the other hand, some well-known SC are metastable, such as YPd2B2C . In this study, using yttrium sesquicarbide (Y2C3) as an example among rare-earth carbides R2C3 (R = rare-earth, Y and La) with their SC being discovered and improved over the years [16– 21], we find that the high-symmetry body-centered cu- bic (BCC) Pu2C3-type structure, Pearson symbol cI40 in space group I-43d (220), is dynamically unstable with zone-center imaginary optical phonon modes, which once stabilized carry a large EPC strength (λ) to give the siz- able Tc. Thus, overlooking new compounds with the sim- ilar imaginary phonon modes in high-throughput search can leave out promising SC candidates. ∗ llw@ameslab.gov Y2C3 in the space group I-43d (220) with C dimers was first synthesized in 1969 using high-pressure, high- temperature techniques to show Tc ranging from a low of 6 K to a high of 11.5 K . Subsequent exper- iments with Thorium (Th) alloying increased the Tc to 17 K in (Y0.7Th0.3)2C3 . Recently in 2004, for the samples prepared under 4.0-5.5 GPa followed by differ- ent heat treatment and sintering conditions, a Tc up to 18 K in binary Y2C3 has been observed . Electronic structure calculations have found that the states near the Fermi energy (EF ) are hybridized [23–25] between Y 4d and C-C antibonding 2p orbitals with an interesting flat band close to the EF , as well as highly degener- ated Kramers-Weyl points at ∼1 eV below the EF . It has been proposed that the sensitivity of SC proper- ties for the related La2C3 with respect to synthesis condition is due to the change of density of states (DOS) at the EF from C deficiency. An earlier EPC calculation on Y2C3 has focused only on two zone- center modes; a Y-dominated mode at 175 cm−1 (5.2 THz) and the C-C bond stretching mode at 1442 cm−1 (43.3 THz), and found a much larger EPC contribution from the Y-dominated than C-C bond stretching mode. However, here with DFPT calculation over all the phonon modes, we find that the high-symmetry I-43d structure is dynamically unstable with zone-center imaginary phonon modes of C dimer wobbling motion due to electronic in- stability from the flat band along the Γ-N direction at EF . By following the lattice distortion of the imaginary modes with full relaxation, more stable low-symmetry structures of Y2C3 have been found, where the imaginary modes be- come stabilized in a low-energy range, lower than the Y- dominated modes. These stabilized low-energy phonon modes carry large λ, which contributes significantly to Tc. The imaginary phonon modes can also be stabilized with a large electronic smearing and under pressure, with the latter enhancing the Tc in a trend agreeing with the previous experiment . 1 arXiv:2308.00201v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 22 Feb 2024 II. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS We used quantum espresso (QE) package with ultrasoft pseudopotentials for ground-state and EPC calculations. The exchange-correlation energy was approximated by Perdew-Burke-Ehrnzerhof (PBE) func- tional . Kinetic energy cutoff of 50 Ry, Brillouin zone (BZ) sampling of (6×6×6) k-point mesh, and a Gaus- sian smearing of 0.05 eV were utilized for ground-state calculations. Phonon calculations were performed with momentum transfer grid (q) of (2×2×2). Further k- mesh and q-mesh were interpolated to (12×12×12) fine- mesh to compute EPC properties. The Coulomb poten- tial μ∗ c was kept fixed at 0.16. The Fermi surfaces were plotted using the Fermi surfer package . The Birch- Murnaghan equations were employed for the calculation of the equation of state (EOS) . The formation energy per atom was computed as, ∆Ef = EY2C3 − 2 5EY − 3 5EC, (1) where Ei’s are the total energy per atom of the compound Y2C3 and its constituents, namely, Y in hexagonal closed packed and C in the diamond structure. For ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) and phase stability calcula- tions with different structural motifs, we used Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP) and projector augmented wave (PAW) method with a kinetic en- ergy cutoff of 500 eV. The MD simulations with NpT en- sembles were first performed on the I-43d primitive cell of Y2C3 to search for new structures at different pres- sure near and out of the energy minimum of I-43d, and then used on the (2×2×2) supercell of the conventional cell with 320 atoms to explore the degeneracy of the C dimers orientation due to wobbling motion. From the MD trajectories, the snapshots of the low potential en- ergy configurations were selected for full relaxation . III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS In Figure. 1, we first establish that the BCC-type I- 43d structure is the ground-state phase in the moderate pressure range. (We will use BCC and I-43d interchange- ably.) In Fig. 1(a), we have plotted the total energy (E) with respect to volume (V ) per atom for different phases. First, we have considered all the binary compound struc- tural types containing group IV elements at the 2:3 com- position (Fig.1(c)) and found several structural motifs of C atoms (P63/mmc), C trimers (Pbcn), zig-zag C chains (Cmcm), and mixed C dimers and atoms (Pnma and P- 4c2). Then, we also used ab initio MD to explore energy landscape near and out of the I-43d structure at 20 GPa (MD1) and −5 GPa (MD2) for possible other low- symmetry structures (Fig. 1(d)). We found structures of mixed C dimer and tetramer (MD1-1), mixed C dimer and trimer (MD1-2) and C dimers in a different lattice (MD2-1). As shown by the E(V ) EOS in Fig. 1(a), for (a) (c) (d) I-43d (220, cI40) P63/mmc (194, hP10) Pbcn (60, oP40) Pnma (62, oP20) Cmcm (63, oS20) P-4c2 (116, tP20) MD1-1 (1, aP20) MD1-2 (1, aP20) MD2-1 (1, aP20) (b) Y C various structural motifs of the binary compounds containing group IV elements at the composition of 2:3 and the struc- tures close to I-43d phase obtained from ab initio molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. (b) Enthalpy difference (∆H) calculated for each phase vs pressure (p) with respect to the I-43d phase. (c) Fully relaxed Y2C3 in the different struc- tural motifs as plotted in (a) and (b). (d) Fully relaxed Y2C3 structures obtained from the MD simulations under pressure of 20 GPa (MD1-1 and MD1-2) and −5 GPa (MD2-1). The space group number and Pearson symbol are also shown in parenthesis. a large range of volume from 11 to 16 ̊A3/atom, the I- 43d structure has the lowest energy, and only for volume larger than the equilibrium of the I-43d (negative pres- sure), two structures (Pnma and MD2-1) become more stable. With the E(V ) data, we computed the enthalpies (H = E + pV ) for different pressure (p) relative to the I- 43d phase and present in Fig. 1 (b). Except for negative pressure less than −5 GPa (expanding volume), the I-43d phase is preferred up to 40 GPa, which is the range we are focusing in the current study to stabilize the imag- inary phonon modes to reveal their large EPC contri- bution for enhancing Tc in comparison to the relevant experiments. From the slope of H(p), there are possible structural phase transitions at pressure well above 100 GPa, but it is beyond the scope of the current paper and needs to be further explored in a future work. 2 Y C (c) (b) (a) (e) (h) (d) (i) (f) R3c Y C c P1 b a (g) a b ture exhibiting imaginary modes shown as negative frequen- cies (ω). First Brillouin zone (BZ) and high-symmetry paths are in inset. (b) Atom-projected phonon dispersion <10 THz zoomed from (a). Red represents for Y, blue for C, and purple for contributions from both as defined in Eq. 2. (c) Formation energy (∆Ef) with respect to volume (V ) for I-43d (220), rhombohedral structure in space group R3c (161), and the low-symmetry structure relaxed from eigenmode 4 in space group P1 (1), compared to the experimental data around the equilibrium. (d) Enthalpy difference (∆H vs p plot com- puted for the structures with respect to I-43d structure. (e) Primitive unit cell of Y2C3 in the R3c and P1 structures. For P1, the structure is presented along the direction with atomic displacements represented by red arrows according to the imaginary eigenmode 4. (f) Potential energy vs time plot for ab initio MD simulations. (g) Zoomed-in sections of the supercell of 320 atoms in the I-43d structure and (h)-(i) those distorted structures having degenerate energy with different C dimer orientations obtained from the MD simulations. The different C dimer orientations due to wobbling motion are highlighted in the dashed red squares. (d) 0.1 0.82 Fermi Velocity 4 1 (c) (b) v! (∗ 10"cm/s) 1 2 3 4 (a) the I-43d structure on Y 5s, Y 4d, C 2s and C 2p orbitals, showing a DOS peak near the Fermi-level (EF ). (b) Electronic band structure in the range of EF ±1 eV showing four bands crossing the EF (3 valence and 1 conduction bands indicated by black arrow, indexed from “1” to “4” at the top). The flat band section is along the Γ-N direction (4th band indicated by red arrow). (c) Fermi surface (FS) corresponding to the four different bands, labelled by their band index defined in (b). (d) Fermi velocity (vF ) plotted on the FS. 2D FS contour on the (111) and (001) planes are also shown. primitive unit cell (20 atoms), where eight Y atoms oc- cupy 16c sites and twelve C atoms at 24d sites form six dimers. Our PBE-relaxed lattice constant of 8.239 ̊A and C-C bond length of 1.34 ̊A agree well with the experimen- tal 8.237 ̊A and 1.298 ̊A , and also 8.254 ̊A and 1.33 ̊A from the previous DFT calculation, respectively. The DFPT-calculated I-43d phonon dispersion is plotted in Fig. 2(a) with the inset showing the Brillouin zone (BZ) and high-symmetry points. To analyze the contribu- tion of different atomic species to phonon eigenmodes, we have summed the atomic displacements of each eigen- mode for different species (|ei νk|2) as in Eq.( 2) and color- coded the dispersion, |ei νk|2 = Ni � j=1 |eij νk|2, (2) where eij νk are the displacements obtained for atom type 3 i from the eigenvector of mode ν for k-point k by diag- onalizing dynamical matrix, and index j runs to Ni as the number of atoms for type i. For Y2C3 in Fig. 2(a), the modes with the highest frequency ∼40 THz are well separated from the rest and solely contributed from the C dimer stretching mode. Our atomic projection also re- veals that the modes from 10 to 15 THz are dominated by other C-related motion (blue). In contrast, the Y contri- butions (red) are mostly around 5 THz due to the much larger mass of Y than C. As zoomed in Fig.2(b) for the frequency <10 THz, there are modes with mixed contri- butions from both Y and C (purple). Interestingly, we find three zone-center modes at Γ are imaginary shown by the negative frequency and are also dominated by C contributions. Figure 2(e) shows one of imaginary modes (eigenmode 4) with the arrows representing the direction and size of the atomic displacements for the eigenvector. Usually the C-related modes are assumed to have high frequency due to the tendency of C to form stronger co- valent bonds and smaller mass than Y. But as shown in the Appendix Fig.A1(a)-(c) with the conventional unit cell, each Y is surrounded by 12 C dimers in a twisted prism, while each C dimer is surrounded by eight Y atoms in a cage of two trapezoids. The wobbling motion of the C dimers within these cages have zero to even negative energy cost, giving arise to the three imaginary optical modes. The other two imaginary modes (eigenmode 1 and 10) are displayed in Appendix Fig.A2. The zone-center imaginary phonon modes indicate that the I-43d structure of Y2C3 is dynamically unstable. To search for more stable structures, we have used the imag- inary modes to distort the primitive unit cell to perform full relaxation with atomic positions and cell vectors, and we find new low-symmetry structures with total energies of 2.34 (mode 4 and 10) and 0.9 meV/atom (mode 1) below that of the I-43d structure. For the most stable structure of mode 4, the lattice symmetry is also the lowest in space group P1 (1). We have also considered the cubic to rhombohedral distortion along the di- rection to retain some symmetry as in space group R3c (161). In Fig. 2(c), the formation energy (∆Ef) is plot- ted with respect to V close to the equilibrium for the three structures with gradually lowered symmetry. The ∆Ef of −281meV/atom agrees well with the experimen- tal −261meV/atom . The relaxed C-C (Y-C) bond length in the I-43d structure around 1.34 (2.51) ̊A is con- sistent with previous DFT calculation , and also com- parable to the experimental 1.298 (2.51) ̊A . Com- pared to the high-symmetry I-43d structure, the R3c and P1 structures are more stable at the equilibrium and larger volumes with P1 being the most stable in the low- est symmetry. But at volumes smaller than the equilib- rium or under increasing pressure, the three EOS E(V ) plots converge to the same curve. In other words, I-43d structure becomes the ground state under pressure. In addition to the E(V ), We also plot ∆H(p) in Fig. 2(d), which shows the low-symmetry BCC-distorted structures have lower H than the high-symmetry I-43d only in the small pressure range below 7 GPa. However, we would like to point out a major difference between these BCC-distorted structures and the various struc- tures presented in Fig. 1, because at positive pressure and smaller volume, the EOS of the BCC-distorted struc- tures merge into that of BCC. The underlying reason is that these distortions are from the wobbling motion of C dimers in the Y cages of I-43d, which can have many sim- ilarly distorted structures with degenerated energy. Us- ing ab initio MD simulation of a supercell of 320 atoms to explore the trajectories of C dimer wobbling motion (Fig. 2(f)), we can then take snapshots of the configura- tions for full ionic relaxation. For example, we show two configurations with degenerated energy have C dimers in different orientations in Fig. 2(h) and (i). Thus, the ensemble of the many BCC-distorted structures with C dimer wobbling motion at finite temperature should still give an overall BCC structure as seen in X-ray diffraction. This type of metastable BCC Y2C3 structure is similar to the austenitic NiTi phase, for which the high-symmetry CsCl (B2) structure has imaginary phonon modes and multiple local energy minimums, thus, the overall stable B2 structure is represented by distorted supercells of the B2 structure . To find out the origin of such instability in BCC Y2C3, we have calculated the electronic structures. As plot- ted in Fig. 3(a), the partial DOS (PDOS) projected on atomic orbitals shows that the bonding states of C dimer with 2s and 2p orbitals dominate from −8 to −3 eV, while the Y 4d orbitals dominate the empty states above +2 eV. In the middle, the hybridization between the C dimer an- tibonding states and Y 4d form a pseudo-gap from −0.5 to +0.5 eV. However, inside this broad pseudo-gap, there is a sharp local DOS maximum at EF , which hints at an electronic instability. From the calculated electronic band structures in Fig. 3(b) in the range of ±1 eV, there are four bands crossing EF with the corresponding 3D Fermi surface (FS) plotted in panel (c). As numbered from low to high energy in Fig. 3(b-c), the first two va- lence bands form small spherical hole pockets around Γ. The third and highest valence band has disc-like features along the Γ-H direction besides a cubic hole pocket. The 4th and lowest conduction band forms spike-like features along the Γ-N direction besides a spherical double-layered shell around Γ. The spike-like features come from the flat band along the Γ-N direction in (b) and corresponds to the sharp local DOS maximum at −10 meV (red arrow). The Fermi velocity (vF ), ∇kEk, has also been calculated and overlaid on FS in panel (d). The maximum value appears on the outer surface of the disc-like feature of FS3. 2D cuts of FS along (111) and (001) planes show that the distribution of vF with high values across FS1 and FS2, relatively lower value for FS3 except for the disc-like feature, and the lowest for FS4 (blue and green patches), consistent with previous result. Although the presence of the flat band in Y2C3 has been noted before (Refs. and ), its implication on the struc- tural instability has only been revealed in our current 4 (c) 1.16 vF (∗ 108cm/s) 0.05 (b) C (e) Y λ = 0.92 (a) (d) 2 4 3 (a) Atom-projected phonon dispersion for low- symmetry P1 structure of Y2C3 relaxed from eigenmode 4. Atom-projections are highlighted by red for Y, blue for C, and purple for both contributions. The mode-resolved electron- phonon coupling (EPC) strength (λ) is represented by green shade. (b) Atom-projected phonon dispersion without the shade of EPC zoomed <4 THz to show the contributions from both Y and C atoms to the λ. (c) Fermi velocity (vF ) plot- ted over the Fermi surfaces (FS), which are indexed with the same numbers as in Figure. 3 but become distorted because of the relaxation. The 2D FS contour on (111) plane is also shown. (d) Electronic band structure of P1 structure show- ing the absence of flat band, thereby flattening the density of states peak (red arrows) at the Fermi-level (EF ). (e) Isotropic Eliashberg spectral function (α2F(ω)) of P1 structure gives the overall integrated λ=0.92. work by finding the zone-center imaginary phonon modes and the more stable structures via distortion according to the imaginary phonon modes. The flat band in Y2C3 is present in the high-symmetry BCC structure not the low- symmetry BCC-distorted structure at ambient pressure. Our Fig.A3(a) shows the flat band crosses the EF with increasing pressure in the pressure-stabilized BCC struc- ture. Thus, experimental observation of the flat band in Y2C3 requires angular-resolved photo-emission spec- troscopy (ARPES) experiment on single crystal samples of Y2C3 at elevated pressure. After establishing the electronic origin of the insta- bility in BCC Y2C3 and finding the more stable low- symmetry P1 structure, next we calculate EPC in DFPT to explain SC properties. In Figure. 4, we plot the phonon dispersion of the P1 structure relaxed from eigen- mode 4 (∼2.34 meV/atom more stable than I-43d) in (a) with and (b) without the mode-resolved EPC projec- tions. Atomic characters are also similarly projected as in Fig. 2(d-e). Due to the lowest symmetry, many degen- eracy at the high-symmetry points have been lifted in P1 (Fig. 4(a)) when compared to the I-43d phonon disper- sion (Fig. 2(e)). Importantly, the P1 structure does not have imaginary modes and is dynamically stable. The original imaginary modes in I-43d are now stabilized in the low frequency range of 2-3 THz at Γ. Moreover, the largest EPC contribution is found around Γ (green shade) along the Γ-H, Γ-N, and Γ-P directions within the same low frequency range, where both C dimers and Y atoms provide significant contributions (see purple in Fig. 4(b) without EPC). As confirmed in the Eliashberg spectral function of Fig 4(e), the largest EPC contribution peak comes from the 2-3 THz range, followed by another peak around the 6 THz, both have the mixed C and Y charac- ters, giving an overall EPC strength λ of 0.92, logarithmic average of phonon frequencies (ωlog) of 219.6 K, and Tc of 9.3 K as listed in Table I. The calculated Tc is in a good agreement to the experimental data. For the change in electronic structures, the FS of the P1 structure now consists of only three bands, completely removing the spike-like features due to the flat band along the Γ-N di- rection [Fig. 4(b)]. As the result, the electronic instability associated with the flat band is eliminated, and the local DOS maximum at EF is flattened out, as seen in Fig. 4(c) (red arrows). The results from the other I-43d imaginary phonon modes, namely mode 1 (∼ 0.9 meV/atom lower) and 10 (∼ 2.34 meV/atom lower, similar to eigenmode 4) are presented in Fig.A2. The corresponding proper- ties are listed in Table I showing a similar Tc to the P1 structure of eigenmode 4. Thus, one of the key findings of our work is that the EPC for the phonon-mediated SC in Y2C3 with a sizable Tc arise from the stabilized imaginary phonon modes after removing the flat band and electronic instability, and the largest EPC contribu- tions are from these stabilized low-energy optical phonon modes of mixed C and Y characters. frequencies ωlog, and critical temperature Tc computed from isotropic Eliashberg approximation with distorted structures, pressure, and large electronic smearing for Y2C3 using the Coulomb potential μ∗ c of 0.16. (These quantities are not avail- able for the dynamically unstable structures with imaginary modes, for example Y2C3 < 20 GPa, σ < 0.10 Ry and dis- torted structure with mode 1.) Experimental Tc for Y2C3 ranges from 6 K to 18 K depending on synthesis conditions and measurement techniques . Stabilization λ ωlog (K) Tc (K) Mode 4 0.92 9.3 Mode 10 0.93 9.5 20 GPa 3.14 96.1 16.0 30 GPa 1.38 22.3 σ = 0.10 Ry 1.14 14.5 Besides distorting the I-43d structure for more stable low-symmetry structures, increasing pressure and elec- 5 λ = 3.14 λ = 1.14 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (a) Atom-projected phonon dispersion of Y2C3 in the I-43d structure under 20 GPa. Atom-projections are highlighted by red for Y, blue for C, and purple for both contributions. The mode-resolved electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength (λ) is represented by green shade. (b) Atom-projected phonon dispersion without the shade of EPC zoomed around the modes with the largest EPC to show the contributions from both Y and C atoms to the λ. (c) Isotropic Eliashberg spectral function (α2F(ω)) of the I-43d structure under 20 GPa giving the overall λ=3.14. (d)-(f) Similar plots to (a)-(c) with a large electronic smearing of 0.1 Ry at zero pressure. The overall integrated λ=1.14. The spectral func- tion (α2F(ω)) is computed in isotropic Eliashberg approxi- mation and then integrated (dashed lines) for the overall λ. tronic smearing are other ways to shift the flat band away from EF (see Fig.A3 and A4) to stabilize the imaginary phonon modes. As plotted in Fig. 5(d), a large electronic smearing of 0.1 Ry on the I-43d structure reasonably mimics the results of the low-symmetry P1 structure,as seen in phonon dispersion of Fig. 5(e) and spectral func- tion (α2F(ω)) of Fig. 5(f). But pressure stabilizes these imaginary phonon modes with additionally interesting behaviors. As shown in Fig. 5(a) and Fig.A3(c), pres- sure of 20 GPa stabilizes the imaginary phonon modes, one at ∼4 THz and the other at as low as ∼2 THz, with unusually large λ coming from those modes with large contribution from C dimers. The increasing pressure also shifts the flat band and the associated local DOS maximum peak first to cross EF and then to higher en- ergy away from EF , resulting in a smooth part of DOS at EF , thereby stabilizing the imaginary phonon modes (Fig.A3(a)). As listed in Table. I, the large λ ∼ 3.14 at 20 GPa and low ωlog ∼ 96.1 K are the results of the ex- tremely soft or low-energy modes with a large EPC con- tribution, also seen in Fig. 5(c). For a further increase of pressure to 30 GPa, the lowest soft mode is pushed up- ward to bring the two stabilized phonon modes close to each other at Γ, similar to the cases of the P1 structure and the large electronic smearing, but achieving both a larger λ of 1.38 and a larger ωlog of 263.6 K (Fig. A3(c)), thereby enhancing the Tc from 9.3 and 14.5 K to 22.3 K. This trend of higher Tc for smaller lattice constants under pressure is consistent with the experimental observation , where an increase of Tc from sub-10 K to 18 K has been observed when the lattice constant is decreased from 8.24 to 8.20 ̊A mostly due to different heat treatment and sintering conditions. IV. CONCLUSIONS In conclusion, we find that the high-symmetry body- centered cubic (BCC) I-43d structure of Y2C3 is dynami- cally unstable with zone-center imaginary optical phonon modes from C dimer wobbling motion due to the elec- tronic instability from a flat band at the Fermi level (EF ). Once the imaginary modes are stabilized in a more stable low-symmetry structure, under pressure or with a large electronic smearing, these low-energy modes of mixed C and Y characters give arise to strong electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength determining the superconduct- ing properties. Our work demonstrates the necessity of further exploration in the compounds with imaginary phonon modes. EPC calculations may not always be fea- sible for the distorted structures due to low symmetry for large unit cells, however, pressure and electronic smear- ing are the alternatives to stabilize the imaginary phonon modes to study superconductivity. This can open a myr- iad of opportunities to discover high-temperature super- conductors via high-throughput screening. Furthermore, we provide a thorough analysis of the phase stability of Y2C3. We have considered the different structural mo- tifs of binary compounds containing group IV elements at the 2:3 composition and also explored energy land- scapes via ab initio molecular dynamics near and out of the BCC structure. We plot their enthalpy vs pressure to confirm that the BCC-type structures with C dimers are indeed preferred in the low to medium pressure range. Because of the wobbling motion of the C dimers, there are many local energy minimums of the BCC-distorted structures with degenerated energies. Consequently, the ensemble average of numerous BCC-distorted structures with C dimer wobbling motion at finite temperature is expected to yield an overall BCC structure, consistent with what was observed in X-ray diffraction. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We acknowledges Dr. Lorenzo Paulatto for the helpful discussion of atom-projected phonon dispersion. This work was supported by Ames National Laboratory 6 LDRD and U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Science, Division of Materials Sciences and Engi- neering. Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State University un- der Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. Y. Li, J. Hao, H. Liu, Y. Li, and Y. Ma, The metalliza- tion and superconductivity of dense hydrogen sulfide, J. Chem. Phys. 140, 174712 (2014). G. Webb, F. Marsiglio, and J. Hirsch, Superconductivity in the elements, alloys and simple compounds, Phys. C: Supercond. Appl. 514, 17 (2015). A. Drozdov, M. Eremets, I. Troyan, V. Ksenofontov, and S. I. Shylin, Conventional superconductivity at 203 kelvin at high pressures in the sulfur hydride system, Nature W. E. Pickett, Colloquium: Room temperature super- conductivity: The roles of theory and materials design, Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 021001 (2023). B. Lilia, R. Hennig, P. Hirschfeld, G. Profeta, A. Sanna, E. Zurek, W. E. Pickett, M. Amsler, R. Dias, M. I. Eremets, et al., The 2021 room-temperature supercon- ductivity roadmap, J. Phys. Condens. Matter 34, 183002 K. Choudhary and K. Garrity, Designing high-tc su- perconductors with bcs-inspired screening, density func- tional theory, and deep-learning, Npj Comput. Mater. 8, S. Baroni, S. De Gironcoli, A. Dal Corso, and P. Gi- annozzi, Phonons and related crystal properties from density-functional perturbation theory, Reviews of mod- ern Physics 73, 515 (2001). A. Dal Corso, Density-functional perturbation theory with ultrasoft pseudopotentials, Physical Review B 64, A. Migdal, Interaction between electrons and lattice vi- brations in a normal metal, Sov. Phys. JETP 7, 996 G. Eliashberg, Interactions between electrons and lattice vibrations in a superconductor, Sov. Phys. JETP 11, 696 P. B. Allen, Neutron spectroscopy of superconductors, Physical Review B 6, 2577 (1972). P. B. Allen and R. Dynes, Transition temperature of strong-coupled superconductors reanalyzed, Physical Re- view B 12, 905 (1975). E. R. Margine and F. Giustino, Anisotropic migdal- eliashberg theory using wannier functions, Physical Re- view B 87, 024505 (2013). R. Cava, H. Takagi, H. Eisaki, H. Zandbergen, T. Siegrist, B. Batlogg, J. Krajewski, W. Peck Jr, S. Carter, K. Mizuhaski, et al., Good news from an abandoned gold mine: A new family of quaternary in- termetallic superconductors, Physica C: Supercond. 235, Y. Sun, I. Rusakova, R. Meng, Y. Cao, P. Gautier-Picard, and C. Chu, The 23 k superconducting phase ypd2b2c, Physica C: Supercond. 230, 435 (1994). M. Krupka, A. Giorgi, N. Krikorian, and E. Szklarz, High pressure synthesis and superconducting properties of yt- trium sesquicarbide, J. Less-Common Met. 17, 91 (1969). G. Amano, S. Akutagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, and J. Akimitsu, Superconductivity at 18 k in yttrium sesquicarbide system, y2c3, Journal of the Physical Soci- ety of Japan 73, 530 (2004). K. Sugawara, T. Sato, S. Souma, T. Takahashi, and A. Ochiai, Anomalous superconducting-gap symmetry of noncentrosymmetric la 2 c 3 observed by ultrahigh- resolution photoemission spectroscopy, Physical Review S. Kuroiwa, Y. Saura, J. Akimitsu, M. Hiraishi, M. Miyazaki, K. Satoh, S. Takeshita, and R. Kadono, Multigap superconductivity in sesquicarbides la 2 c 3 and y 2 c 3, Physical review letters 100, 097002 (2008). J. Chen, M. Salamon, S. Akutagawa, J. Akimitsu, J. Sin- gleton, J. Zhang, L. Jiao, and H. Yuan, Evidence of nodal gap structure in the noncentrosymmetric superconductor y2c3, Physical Review B 83, 144529 (2011). S. Akutagawa, T. Ohashi, H. Kitano, A. Maeda, J. Goryo, H. Matsukawa, and J. Akimitsu, Quasiparti- cle electronic structure of a new surperconductor, y2c3, in the mixed state investigated by specific heat and flux- flow resistivity, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan M. Krupka, A. Giorgi, N. Krikorian, and E. Szklarz, High-pressure synthesis of yttrium-thorium sesquicar- bide: a new high-temperature superconductor, J. Less- Common Met. 19, 113 (1969). Y. Nishikayama, T. Shishidou, and T. Oguchi, Electronic properties of y2c3 by first-principles calculations, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 76, 064714 (2007). I. Shein and A. Ivanovskii, Electronic properties of the novel 18-k superconducting y2c3 as compared with 4-k yc2 from first principles calculations, Solid state commu- nications 131, 223 (2004). D. Singh and I. Mazin, Electronic structure and electron- phonon coupling in the 18 k superconductor y2c3, Phys- ical Review B 70, 052504 (2004). L. Jin, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Dai, and G. Liu, Sixfold, fourfold, and threefold excitations in the rare-earth metal carbide R2c3, Phys. Rev. B 104, 045111 (2021). J. Kim, W. Xie, R. Kremer, V. Babizhetskyy, O. Jepsen, A. Simon, K. Ahn, B. Raquet, H. Rakoto, J.-M. Broto, et al., Strong electron-phonon coupling in the rare-earth carbide superconductor la 2 c 3, Physical Review B 76, W. E. Pickett, The next breakthrough in phonon- mediated superconductivity, Physica C Supercond 468, P. Giannozzi, S. Baroni, N. Bonini, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, D. Ceresoli, G. L. Chiarotti, M. Cococ- cioni, I. Dabo, et al., Quantum espresso: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simula- tions of materials, Journal of physics: Condensed matter P. Giannozzi, O. Andreussi, T. Brumme, O. Bunau, M. B. Nardelli, M. Calandra, R. Car, C. Cavazzoni, 7 D. Ceresoli, M. Cococcioni, et al., Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with quantum espresso, Journal of physics: Condensed matter 29, 465901 (2017). G. Prandini, A. Marrazzo, I. E. Castelli, N. Mounet, and N. Marzari, Precision and efficiency in solid-state pseu- dopotential calculations, npj Computational Materials 4, K. F. Garrity, J. W. Bennett, K. M. Rabe, and D. Van- derbilt, Pseudopotentials for high-throughput dft calcu- lations, Computational Materials Science 81, 446 (2014). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. F. D. Murnaghan, The compressibility of media under extreme pressures, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 30, 244 (1944), . F. Birch, Finite elastic strain of cubic crystals, Phys. Rev. G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mater. Sci. 6, 15 (1996). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). P. E. Bl ̈ochl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 50, 17953 (1994). M. Kawamura, Fermisurfer: Fermi-surface viewer provid- ing multiple representation schemes, Computer Physics Communications 239, 197 (2019). L.-L. Wang and D. D. Johnson, Density functional study of structural trends for late-transition-metal 13-atom clusters, Phys. Rev. B 75, 235405 (2007). T. Mochiku, T. Nakane, H. Kito, H. Takeya, S. Harjo, T. Ishigaki, T. Kamiyama, T. Wada, and K. Hirata, Crystal structure of yttrium sesquicarbide, Physica C: Superconductivity 426, 421 (2005). V. Novokshonov, Synthesis of sesquicarbides of heavy rare earths and yttrium at high pressures and temper- atures, Zhurnal Neorganicheskoj Khimii 25, 684 (1980). N. A. Zarkevich and D. D. Johnson, Stable atomic struc- ture of niti austenite, Phys. Rev. B 90, 060102 (2014) . 8 VI. APPENDIX crystal. In the high-symmetry body-centered cubic (BCC) structure in space group I-43d (220), each Y ion is enclosed by six C dimers arranged in a twisted prism configuration. Conversely, each C dimer is surrounded by eight Y atoms forming a cage comprised of two trape- zoids. This arrangement results in a wobbling motion of the C dimer, contributing to its inherent instability. In ferent structures of lattice distortion from different imag- inary phonon modes, including Mode 10 (which exhibits the same total energy as Mode 4 mentioned in the main text) and Mode 1 (slightly higher in total energy). Fig- ure A3 shows the influence of pressure on the electronic band structure and dynamic stability. Upon applying pressure exceeding 20 GPa, the flat band in close prox- imity to the Fermi level (EF ) undergoes an upward shift. This change causes the local maximum of the density of states (DOS) to shift towards the conduction band region, leaving behind a relatively smoother region at EF . As the result, the electronic instability is gradually removed and the imaginary phonon modes become sta- bilized, which provides significant electron-phonon cou- pling (EPC). Finally, Figure A4 illustrates the shift of the flat band and local DOS peak away from the EF result- ing from increased electronic smearing. After charge den- sity is converged self-consistently with different smearing values, the DOS calculation is then performed with the tetrahedron method. 9 Ysurrounded by 6 C2dimers in a twisted prism C2surrounded by 8 Yatoms in acageof 2 trapezoids 1 3 2 4 5 6 7 8 mode 1 mode 4 hR C2dimers wobble motion gives 2 imaginary modes with very low energy (a) (b) (c) (d) perspectives as labelled. Y and C atoms are represented by large and small spheres, respectively. (d) Atomic displacements from phonon eigenvectors plotted for mode 1 and mode 4; crystal structure of hR low-symmetry structure in space group R3c (161). 10 Mode 1 Mode 10 (a) (b) (c) (d) lattice from mode 1. (c) Phonon dispersion for the distorted lattice from mode 10 (with same total energy as mode 4) indicating dynamic stability; electron-phonon coupling (EPC) strength is plotted (green color near Γ-point close to 2 THz phonon frequency). (d) Same plot as of (c) without EPC, but only with atomic character projection; purple color at the maximum EPC contribution indicates the contribution from both Y (red) and C dimer (blue); 11 hR (a) (b) (c) 0 10 20 30 E − Ef (eV) Γ Γ 0 GPa to 30 GPa], leaving relatively smooth DOS at EF (black arrow on right plot); A section of flat band near EF (shown by red arrow) is also pushed towards conduction band region (black arrow on left plot). (b) Phonon dispersion presenting dynamic instability of low-symmetry R3c structure and I-43d (BCC) under 10 GPa pressure. (c) Phonon dispersion plots with projected atomic character for various pressure with/without EPC; two soft modes stabilized at 20 GPa are pushed upward with 30 GPa pressure. 12 0.1 Ry E − Ef (eV) Γ 0.5 -0.5 Γ energy with increased Gaussian smearing from 0.0037 Ry to 0.1 Ry. Note the DOS calculation is performed with the tetrahedron method, after the charge density is converged self-consistently with different smearing values. 13