Accelerated Neural Network Training through Dimensionality Reduction for High-Throughput Screening of Topological Materials Ruman Moulik∗, Ankita Phutela, Sajjan Sheoran, Saswata Bhattacharya† Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, India Machine Learning facilitates building a large variety of models, starting from elementary linear regression models to very complex neural networks. Neural networks are currently limited by the size of data provided and the huge computational cost of training a model. This is especially problematic when dealing with a large set of features without much prior knowledge of how good or bad each individual feature is. We try tackling the problem using dimensionality reduction algorithms to construct more meaningful features. We also compare the accuracy and training times of raw data and data transformed after dimensionality reduction to deduce a sufficient number of dimensions without sacrificing accuracy. The indicated estimation is done using a lighter decision tree-based algorithm, AdaBoost, as it trains faster than neural networks. We have chosen the data from an online database of topological materials, Materiae. Our final goal is to construct a model to predict the topological properties of new materials from elementary properties. I. INTRODUCTION Topology is a modern branch of mathematics that emerged in the early 1900s . It is a qualitative ap- proach to geometry, to measure the properties of objects that remain unchanged when subjected to continuous de- formation. It has been of great interest in the field of condensed matter physics in recent years, mainly because of the discovery of topological insulators (TI) [4–6] and topological crystalline insulators (TCI) [7–9]. They are an entirely new class of quantum materials that act as an insulator in bulk but have conducting surface states. Those surface states have a Dirac-cone-like struc- ture which facilitates dissipationless electronic currents . This allows TIs and TCIs to have plenty of novel applications, inspiring the search for new materials of such kind with varying properties that suit different applications. The surface states are protected by time-reversal sym- metry in the case of TIs, and various crystal symmetries in the case of TCIs [12–16]. Traditionally TIs have been characterised by their non-zero Z2 invariant, while TCIs have been characterised by their non-zero Chern num- bers . Therefore, the prediction of topological materi- als requires tedious calculations of topological invariants or identification of topological nodes . Such meth- ods are limited to one material at a time . Recently, the development of symmetry-based indicators has enabled high-throughput screening for topological ma- terials. Notably, the SymTopo package was devel- oped based on the above paradigm and has allowed high- throughput screening to search for new topologically non- trivial materials. The results of these calculations are available publicly in the Materiae database through the magic of application programming interface (API). ∗phz218064@physics.iitd.ac.in †saswata@physics.iitd.ac.in However, looking at the Materials Project database, it is quickly realised that the number of unexplored ma- terials is much greater than the ones explored for topo- logical properties. The symmetry-based approaches only minimise the band structure calculations needed to pre- dict topological behaviour but do not eliminate the need for such first-principles analyses. Such methods cannot hope to cover such a vast database in reasonable time and computational costs. The high resource cost calls for a predictive approach that would use previously calculated data, bringing us to Machine Learning (ML). In recent years ML has taken the world by storm, find- ing a plethora of applications in every field possible like image and speech recognition [24–26], weather and traf- fic predictions , and medical diagnosis . The basic idea of ML is to take pre-existing data and develop complex models to extrapolate them, a kind of fancy curve-fitting. There are various kinds of available predictive models, such as, regression , support vector machines , decision trees and random forests among which artificial neural networks (ANN) [35–37] are the most complex but also result in the best predic- tions. However, their substantial training expense poses a significant constraint which is noteworthy considering the large number of features we are aiming to train on. In this article, an attempt has been made to address the aforementioned issue using dimensionality reduction to streamline the number of features we use to train our model. Finally models are trained for predicting TIs and TCIs in various materials systems using ANN. The mod- els are used to predict respective properties for materials taken from the Materials Project database. Electronic structure calculations are performed on the predicted ma- terials to validate the accuracy of our models. arXiv:2308.12722v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 24 Aug 2023 2 Classification of compounds Projection into lower dimensions Reduced Feature Space with True or False Marked for Topological Insulator Determine the cut-off for lower dimensions Available data on Materials Project Space group and Wyckoff sites PCA AdaBoosting Classifier Neural Networks Models for prediction Data from Materiae predictive models using neural networks. II. METHODOLOGY & ANALYSIS A. Data acquisition A flowchart of the methodology followed to construct predictive models using neural networks is illustrated in Fig. 1. ML is a data-driven science, meaning a substan- tially sized topological property dataset is needed to con- struct a reliable prediction model. Topological properties can be calculated from ab initio methods, viz., density functional theory (DFT) taking spin-orbit coupling (SOC) into account and using various symmetry-based indicators . These calculations have been performed on a lot of materials by researchers worldwide. However, the collection and access of the same can be cumbersome. Our work ahead is made more accessible by databases that archive such calculations and present them in an easily accessible format. Materials Project is a growing database of ma- terials containing structural data, electronic structures, compounds. SG Ns No. of TIs and TCIs 62 12 129 139 5 130 189 9 96 225 2 64 221 2 53 221 5 43 various physical properties, etc., calculated using DFT. This database has been integrated with web-based tech- nologies to allow the retrieval of data through API. A Python library has been developed to use the API easily and is available with the name mp-api. Materiae is a database dedicated to storing topological data. It uses structures from the Materials Project and an automated algorithm, SymTopo , based on exhaustive mappings between symmetry representations of occupied bands and topological invariants. Their database also supports the use of APIs, and the standard Python requests library is used. As of 15th February 2023, Materials Project had 154,718 materials, while Materiae had only 28,605 mem- bers in its catalogue. This size mismatch indicates how much of the available database is yet to be explored for topological properties. B. Site distinction As the intention is to train models using elemental properties as features, similar materials related by site substitutions are grouped together, and separate models are made for individual groups. For this purpose, we do a broad classification based on their space group (SG), number of sites (Ns), and number of distinct sites (Nd) of the compounds. To ensure that models are trained upon sizeable populations, the number of TIs is checked from Materiae for each group, and ones with sufficiently large numbers are chosen, as tabulated in Table I. For the sake of being stricter on the condition of substi- tutions, the sites are also checked by their Wyckoff posi- tions, considering transformations between them. Atoms with the same Wyckoff positions across different materi- als are considered substitutions of each other. The differ- ent sites and considered Wyckoff schemes are tabulated in differently as their sites can always be interconverted by suitable transformations. Such cases are distinguished by using electronegativities to order the respective elements. This concept is also extended to systems with more than two sites but multiple sites having the same Wyckoff po- sitions, like the system with SG = 12;Ns = 12. Com- pounds with a different Wyckoff position scheme from the majority are discarded. 3 tutions in lattice for materials with 3 distinct sites per unit cell. SG Ns Nd Wyckoff Positions Site 1 Site 2 Site 3 62 12 3 c c c 139 5 3 a d e b d e 189 9 3 a f g b g f 221 5 3 a b c b a d C. Construction of feature space Previous attempts to predict properties of materials from elementary properties of atoms provide insight into constructing our feature space [40–43]. The idea is to build an ample feature space to accommodate as many varied properties as possible and then let various ML methods choose the significant ones for our data. A to- tal of 12 features for each atom are selected from our survey. They are electronegativity, atomic number, ion- isation energy, electron affinity, atomic radius, number of valence electrons, Matynov-Batsanov electronegativ- ity , pseudopotential core radius, and number of elec- trons in the outermost s-, p-, d- and f -orbitals. This translates to 24 features for Nd = 2 and 36 features for Nd = 3. The problem we are addressing is a classifica- tion problem of topologically active materials. We con- sider those classified on Materiae as TI or TCI as “true” and others as “false”, and our predictions follow the same classification. D. Normalisation and dimensionality reduction The ideal data distribution is usually a normal curve. Most predictive models have better accuracy when ap- plied to normal distributions. A power transformer trans- forms the data to have zero-mean, unit-variance satisfy- ing the condition. The Yeo-Johnson method imple- mented in the scikit-learn library is used for this step. As discussed earlier, a total of 12 features for each site are considered, i.e., 24 features for binary materials and 36 features for those with three Nd. Such a considerably large number of features makes it hard to train a neural network in a reasonable time. Choosing to train on such a vast number of features also has the potential to confuse the final model if too many non-correlated features are provided. For this reason, a principal component analysis (PCA) is performed to take better projections of features that correlate better with the data and reduce the number of features to build our final model. The scikit-learn package provides different PCA meth- ods, using different kernels like linear, polynomial, ex- ponential, etc. Kernels help project the linearly insep- arable data onto a higher dimensional space where they might be linearly separable. The implementation of PCA with kernels is called kernel principal component analy- sis (KPCA) . The various kernels are used, and re- sults are plotted up to three dimensions to check which method gives better visual separation of the data, which are included in the supplemental material (SM). It is ob- served that using KPCA with radial basis function kernel results in the best visual separation. The data is trans- formed into its principal components in this step, which is used for further studies. E. Dimension Pruning While PCA can construct the best dimensions for use, it provides no useful information for determining the number of dimensions to be chosen. For this purpose, a decision tree-based model is trained on both the original data and the data transformed from PCA but with varying dimensions. The reason to choose a deci- sion tree-based model is their comparatively faster train- ing time while maintaining the ability to build complex models. Adaboost is a good choice for our binary classification problem, with the advantage of having rel- atively fewer hyperparameters as well as lesser chances of overfitting. The PCA-transformed dataset of each system is used to train Adaboost models, starting from a single dimen- sion to twenty dimensions. Using the same data to learn the parameters of a prediction model and testing the model is usually considered a mistake. This is because we can not be confident about the predictions on yet unknown data. Hence, some of the available training data is actually held out of the training set to make a test set to be used for validation. A common practice is to do a k-fold cross-validation in which the data is equally split into k parts. A model is trained on k − 1 parts, and remaining 1 part is used to score the model. k different models with respective scores are obtained by changing the part of the data not used in training. Finally, the model with the highest score is chosen. Five-fold cross-validation is used at each step to help select better models. The accuracy of each model vs. the number of dimensions being considered is plot- ted, as in Fig. 2. The two hyperparameters, viz., learning rate and the maximum number of trees, are tuned such that further increasing them doesn’t change the nature of the plot mentioned above. This is observed at a low learning rate of 0.01 and maximum estimators of 2500 and above. The same model is also trained on the raw data to compare accuracy and training times. Fig. 3 shows the respective plots and a suitable number of di- mensions (dim) are chosen to achieve the best trade-off of accuracy vs. computational times, as given in Table III. It is observed that about 3-6 dimensions are suffi- 4 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 SG:62; Ns=12 SG:189; Ns=9 SG:221; Ns=5 1 5 10 15 20 0.70 0.75 0.80 0.85 0.90 SG:139; Ns=5 1 5 10 15 20 SG:221; Ns=2 1 5 10 15 20 SG:225; Ns=2 dotted lines represent the raw data while the cyan lines represent the respective dimensions, as given on the x-axis. The accuracies are given on the y-axis. 1 5 10 15 20 No. of dimensions 20 30 40 50 60 Time (s) SG:221; Ns=2 SG:221; Ns=5 SG:221; Ns=2 raw data SG:221; Ns=5 raw data number of dimensions. Only SG = 221 is shown, but other datasets show the same patterns. cient to achieve almost the accuracy of the raw data in most cases. The time comparison shows a linear increase with dim. Choosing dim = 5 improves training time by about two-fold for systems with Nd = 2, i.e., 24 features, and nearly three-fold for systems with Nd = 3, i.e., 36 features. F. Neural Networks for Prediction Neural networks are chosen as the final model we train to output predictions of topological materials due to their generally high complexity and accuracy. Their primary disadvantage is the model training cost, but once trained, the predictions can be churned out quickly and en masse if needed. A Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) classifier is used, as implemented in the scikit-learn li- brary. The default setting of using Adam solver is not changed. In the case of MLP, unlike AdaBoost, a lot of hyperparameters are to be considered, i.e., learning rate (lr), strength of the L2 regularization (α), number of hidden layers (hld), sizes of hidden layers (hls), and maximum number of iterations (ni) to run for. These have been extensively tested across multiple values us- ing the Optuna framework and the best ones were chosen for each dataset individually. A five-fold cross- validation method is also implemented within the scor- ing model to help select a better predictive model. It is in this step that our earlier method of reducing the overall time taken to train a neural network becomes significant. The computational cost of extensively test- ing models across a wide range of hyperparameters along with cross-validation would be very high. The achieved 5 our MLPs. It lists the number of dimensions kept from PCA and all the parameters passed as arguments while training our final model SG/NS dim ni lr α hls hld 6 2000 135 3 4 1108 9 4 2234 146 9 6 3684 73 7 3 2800 75 10 3 3999 79 10 validation scores and corresponding hyperparameters are listed in Table III. To validate our predictions, we have adopted the same method as the Materiae website, which uses the SymTopo package. It is to be kept in mind that their theory only works for nonmagnetic materials. Additionally it per- forms a hard-check on number of electrons in the DFT calculation, only accepting an even number of electrons. This property is masked by our methodology due to the initial transformation and PCA of our original features. Materials that are not included in Materiae are picked up from Materials Project and checked for the former two conditions. Features are generated for the ones that pass. Previously trained power transformer, PCA transforma- tion and MLP prediction are applied in that order. Posi- tive outcomes from our predictions are then tested using SymTopo for further validation and reported. The steps followed for predictions are represented as a flowchart in Fig. 4. SymTopo is used to prepare input files for Vi- enna ab initio simulation package (VASP) [57–59], which performs the actual electronic structure calculations ac- cording to DFT with projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials . Perdew–Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) ex- change correlation function is used. The results from SymTopo are discussed in the section below. III. SUMMARY OF PREDICTIONS The count of different kind of materials as output from SymTopo are listed in Table IV. The number in “To- tal” column only includes candidates with an even num- ber of valence electrons, nonmagnetic nature, i.e., very low magnetic moment and predicted as ”true” for non- trivial topological behaviour by our models. The correct predictions made by our model are those which Sym- Topo also computes as being of the TI or TCI category. The “Semimetal” column includes both high-symmetry point semimetals and high-symmetry line semimetals. Both systems are topologically non-trivial with topologi- cal nodes at high-symmetry points or lines respectively [? ]. However, they are of less interest to us as they cannot be used as TI or TCI due to their degeneracy at high- symmetry points or lines, and were consequently marked as false in our training data. However, due to their non- Prediction features Predictions Data from Materials Project N = even; μ < 0.1μB Neural Network Verified Predictions Symtopo calculations dictions from our models. trivial topological nature, a lot of predicted TIs from our model are found to be these semi-metals instead but they cannot be strictly classified as false positive results. The “Trivial” column consists of topologically trivial insula- tors and are strictly false positives in the case of our predictions. ripe for exploration of topological properties, particularly the first three that have been chosen. The predictions of systems with SG = 12;Ns = 12, SG = 139;Ns = 5 and SG = 189;Ns = 9 have 60%, 50% and 63% correctly predicted TI and TCI, respectively, along with a very low percentage of trivial insulators. In those cases it is clear that our method has yielded a high percentage of topologically active materials with no electronic structure calculations of our own, proving the potential of similar data-based studies for exploration of topological proper- ties. The results are not that spectacular for the other three systems, which means our models are not able to capture the essence from their data, or maybe those sys- tems do not have too much left to explore for non-trivial topology. As more data becomes available, the method can be extended to more systems. Material-wise detailed catalogue of classification has been made available in the SM. 6 SG/NS Semimetal TI TCI Trivial Total 25 36 6 3 70 4 4 3 3 14 10 2 15 0 27 6 0 0 6 12 13 1 1 13 28 0 0 1 1 2 IV. CONCLUSION To conclude, we have construced different MLP models with various accuracies calculated over a five-fold cross- validation method. In the process, we have demonstrated the viability of using dimensionality reduction to reduce the number of features used to train the neural networks, significantly reducing the training times. We have also proposed a method using decision tree-based models to help select the number of dimensions that should be cho- sen from the PCA analysis. All of this now allows us to make predictions about topological properties of new proposed materials related to our chosen systems by site substitutions much faster and to scan a much larger ma- terials space with very little computation. The predic- tions have been verified using the algorithm used to gen- erate the training data in the first place. We expect the method to extend to more systems as more data becomes available. Furthermore, the use of dimensionality reduc- tion to reduce training times appears to be an indepen- dent property that might be extensible to more ML ap- plications beyond the particular application presented in this paper. V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT R.M. acknowledges CSIR, India, for the junior research fellowship [Grant No. A.P. acknowledges IIT Delhi for the senior research fel- lowship. S.S. acknowledges CSIR, India, for the senior research fellowship [grant no. 09/086(1432)/2019-EMR- I]. S.B. acknowledges financial support from SERB under a core research grant (Grant No. CRG/2019/000647) to set up his high-performance computing (HPC) facility “Veena” at IIT Delhi for computational resources. W. Aitken, Review of general topology. part 1: First con- cepts. C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Physical Review Letters 95, B. A. Bernevig, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Science L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, Physical Review Let- M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Reviews of Modern Physics X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Reviews of Modern Physics T. H. Hsieh, H. Lin, J. Liu, W. Duan, A. Bansil, and L. Fu, Nature Communications 3, 982 (2012). W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, and T. L. Hughes, Physical Review B 96, 245115 (2017). J. Kruthoff, J. De Boer, J. Van Wezel, C. L. Kane, and R.-J. Slager, Physical Review X 7, 041069 (2017). J. Cayssol, Comptes Rendus Physique 14, 760 (2013). X.-L. Wang, National Science Review 4, 252 (2017). A. Kitaev, in AIP Conference Proceedings (American In- stitute of Physics, 2009), vol. 1134, pp. 22–30. A. P. Schnyder, S. Ryu, A. Furusaki, and A. W. Ludwig, Physical Review B 78, 195125 (2008). C.-K. Chiu, J. C. Teo, A. P. Schnyder, and S. Ryu, Re- views of Modern Physics 88, 035005 (2016). F. Schindler, A. M. Cook, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, S. S. Parkin, B. A. Bernevig, and T. Neupert, Science Advances 4, eaat0346 (2018). Z. Song, Z. Fang, and C. Fang, Physical Review Letters J. E. Moore and L. Balents, Physical Review B 75, R. Yu, X. L. Qi, A. Bernevig, Z. Fang, and X. Dai, Phys- ical Review B 84, 075119 (2011). A. Phutela, P. Bhumla, M. Jain, and S. Bhattacharya, Scientific Reports 12, 21970 (2022). H. C. Po, A. Vishwanath, and H. Watanabe, Nature Communications 8, 50 (2017). Y. He, Y. Jiang, T. Zhang, H. Huang, C. Fang, and Z. Jin, Chinese Physics B 28, 087102 (2019). T. Zhang, Y. Jiang, Z. Song, H. Huang, Y. He, Z. Fang, H. Weng, and C. Fang, Nature 566, 475 (2019). A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, et al., APL Materials 1 (2013). X. Zhang and W. Dahu, Journal of Visual Communica- tion and Image Representation 61, 42 (2019). L. Chen, S. Li, Q. Bai, J. Yang, S. Jiang, and Y. Miao, Remote Sensing 13, 4712 (2021). S. Alharbi, M. Alrazgan, A. Alrashed, T. Alnomasi, R. Almojel, R. Alharbi, S. Alharbi, S. Alturki, F. Al- shehri, and M. Almojil, IEEE Access 9, 131858 (2021). B. Bochenek and Z. Ustrnul, Atmosphere 13, 180 (2022). M. Shaygan, C. Meese, W. Li, X. G. Zhao, and M. Nejad, Transportation Research part C: Emerging Technologies M. Mirbabaie, S. Stieglitz, and N. R. Frick, Health and Technology 11, 693 (2021). Y. Kumar, A. Koul, R. Singla, and M. F. Ijaz, Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing pp. R. M. Rifkin and R. A. Lippert (2007). A. J. Smola and B. Sch ̈olkopf, Statistics and Computing L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone, ISBN- L. Breiman, Machine Learning 45, 5 (2001). 7 K. Fukushima, Biological Cybernetics 20, 121 (1975). J. A. Feldman, Biological Cybernetics 46, 27 (1982). D. H. Ballard, in Proceedings of the sixth National Con- ference on Artificial Intelligence-volume 1 (1987), pp. L. Van Der Maaten, E. O. Postma, H. J. van den Herik, et al., Journal of Machine Learning Research 10, 13 W. Kohn, A. D. Becke, and R. G. Parr, The Journal of Physical Chemistry 100, 12974 (1996). K. Rabe, J. Phillips, P. Villars, and I. Brown, Physical Review B 45, 7650 (1992). R. Ouyang, Chemistry of Materials 32, 595 (2019). G. Cao, R. Ouyang, L. M. Ghiringhelli, M. Scheffler, H. Liu, C. Carbogno, and Z. Zhang, Physical Review Materials 4, 034204 (2020). Z. Wan, Q.-D. Wang, D. Liu, and J. Liang, Physics Let- ters A 409, 127508 (2021). I.-K. Yeo and R. A. Johnson, Biometrika 87, 954 (2000). F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, et al., Journal of Machine Learn- ing Research 12, 2825 (2011). S. Wold, K. Esbensen, and P. Geladi, Chemometrics and Intelligent Laboratory Systems 2, 37 (1987). A. Ma ́ckiewicz and W. Ratajczak, Computers & Geo- sciences 19, 303 (1993). B. Sch ̈olkopf, A. Smola, and K.-R. M ̈uller, in In- ternational Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (Springer, 1997), pp. 583–588. H. Drucker, in Icml (Citeseer, 1997), vol. 97, pp. 107– 115. T. Hastie, S. Rosset, J. Zhu, and H. Zou, Statistics and its Interface 2, 349 (2009). L. Breiman and P. Spector, International Statistical Re- view/Revue Internationale de Statistique pp. 291–319 R. Kohavi et al., in Ijcai (Montreal, Canada, 1995), vol. 14, pp. 1137–1145. G. E. Hinton, in Machine Learning (Elsevier, 1990), pp. W. Fakhr and M. I. Elmasry, in 1990 IJCNN Inter- national Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IEEE, D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, in Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Phys. Rev. B 47, 558 G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Computational Materials Science 6, 15 (1996). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Physical Review B 54, G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Physical Review B 59, 1758 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Physical Re- view Letters 77, 3865 (1996).