High-frequency suppression of inductive coupling between flux qubit and transmission line resonator Sahel Ashhab,1 Ziqiao Ao,1, 2, 3 Fumiki Yoshihara,1, 4 Adrian Lupascu,5, 6, 7 and Kouichi Semba1, 8 1Advanced ICT Institute, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, 4-2-1, Nukuikitamachi, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8795, Japan 2Department of Applied Physics, Waseda University, Okubo 3-4-1, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan 3Department of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 Okubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan 4Department of Physics, Tokyo University of Science, 1-3 Kagurazaka, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8601, Japan 5Institute for Quantum Computing, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1 6Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1 7Waterloo Institute for Nanotechnology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1 8Institute for Photon Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan 1 arXiv:2308.07849v3 [quant-ph] 2 Mar 2024 Abstract We perform theoretical calculations to investigate the naturally occurring high-frequency cutoff in a circuit comprising a flux qubit coupled inductively to a transmission line resonator (TLR). Specifically, a decoupling occurs between the qubit and the high-frequency modes. The coupling strength between the qubit and resonator modes increases with mode frequency Пү as вҲҡПү at low frequencies and decreases as 1/вҲҡПү at high frequencies. This result is similar to those of past studies that considered somewhat similar circuit designs. By avoiding the approximation of ignoring the qubit-TLR coupling in certain steps in the analysis, we obtain effects not captured in previous studies. In particular, we obtain a resonance effect that shifts the TLR mode frequencies close to qubit oscillation frequencies. We derive expressions for the TLR mode frequencies, qubit-TLR coupling strengths and qubit Lamb shift. We identify features in the spectrum of the system that can be used in future experiments to test and validate the theoretical model. 2 I. INTRODUCTION The fields of cavity quantum electrodynamics (cavity-QED) [1вҖ“5] and circuit quantum electrodynamics (circuit-QED) [6вҖ“8] have proved to be ubiquitous and important in the development of physics for the past few decades. In particular, advances in supercon- ducting circuit technology have allowed the development of qubit-oscillator systems in the ultrastrong- and deep-strong-coupling regimes [9вҖ“15]. Another related development is the design of strong coupling between superconducting qubits and multimode resonators [16вҖ“20]. As we shall discuss in more detail below, a complication arises in the theoretical treat- ment of the high-frequency modes in a multimode resonator. In the perturbative approach in which the qubit-resonator coupling is treated as a perturbation to the bare qubit and res- onator Hamiltonians, high-frequency divergences arise. In particular, the coupling strength between the qubit and individual modes grows indefinitely with mode frequency. Because the Lamb shift depends on the ratio between the coupling strength and the mode frequency, and the coupling strength increases only as the square-root of the mode frequency, the Lamb shift caused by individual modes decreases with increasing mode frequency. However, the decrease is slow, such that the total Lamb shift diverges. This complication was avoided in past theoretical studies by imposing a frequency cutoff above which resonator modes are ignored. It was recently shown, however, that no ad-hoc cutoff is needed. A natural decou- pling occurs between the qubit and high-frequency modes, which eliminates the divergences mentioned above [21вҖ“23]. It is worth noting that there have been other studies on the high-frequency cutoff in superconducting circuits [24вҖ“28] and atom-cavity systems [29вҖ“31]. In this work, we present a theoretical treatment of a circuit-QED system that comprises a flux qubit coupled inductively to a quarter-wavelength transmission line resonator (TLR). The circuit was investigated experimentally in Ref. . Our calculations are complementary to those of Refs. , which focused on charge and transmon qubits coupled capacitively to half-wavelength TLRs, and that of Ref. , which provided a general framework for treating circuit-QED systems that contain multimode resonators. Similarly to past studies, we find a natural decoupling at high frequencies. By avoiding certain approximations, we obtain effects not captured in previous studies, including a resonance effect between qubit and TLR frequencies. As we go along in our analysis, we derive a variety of formulae for the TLR normal modes, the coupling strength and the Lamb shift. 3 II. CIRCUIT, LAGRANGIAN AND HAMILTONIAN вӢҜ L2 Lc lОҙx cОҙx lОҙx lОҙx cОҙx cОҙx cОҙx cОҙx CR ОҰext Cq ,EJ ПҶ1 ПҶ0 ПҶОқ ОҰ ПҶ2 xx = 0вҲ’ xx = 0+ xx = XX elements. After setting up the equations with a finite length Оҙx, we will take the limit Оҙx вҶ’ 0. The TLR is a quarter-wavelength resonator, terminated to ground at one end and with a (near-zero- capacitance) capacitor at the other end. The qubit is modeled as a loop with a single Josephson junction, in addition to linear inductances. The loop is threaded by an externally applied flux ОҰext. The qubit-TLR coupling arises from the shared inductance Lc. The x values at the bottom show the correspondence with the original circuit and mathematical model. We consider the circuit shown in Fig. 1. Compared to the experimental circuit used in Ref. , we make the standard simplification where we keep only one Josephson junction in the theoretical treatment. This one junction is sufficient to provide the anharmonicity needed to create a qubit. Two other (large) junctions in the qubit loop are replaced by a single inductance. The coupling junction that is shared by the qubit loop and the resonator is also replaced by a coupling inductance. As shown in Ref. , these approximations can provide a rather accurate theoretical treatment of circuit-QED systems even in the deep- strong-coupling regime. To maximize the coupling between the qubit and TLR, the TLR is shorted to the ground at the end where the qubit is located. In this case, all TLR normal modes have maximum current amplitudes at the location of the qubit, as illustrated by the electric current profiles in Fig. 2(a). The other end of the TLR is terminated by a capacitor. We replace the spatially extended TLR by a long series of small inductances and capacitors, which is a standard approach to model such resonators. Each inductance-capacitor pair corresponds to a segment of length Оҙx of the TLR. At some point in our derivations below, 4 I(x) (a) 0 X x I(x) (b) TLR in the absence of coupling to the qubit (a) and in the case of coupling to the qubit (b). Note that, apart from the profile of the current as a function of x for each mode, the maximum amplitudes in the figure do not have any physical significance; for example, they should not be compared to each other. The point x = 0 is where the TLR makes contact with the ground plane. In the absence of the qubit (Panel a), there is no charge accumulation, and all the modes have horizontal current profiles at x = 0. The presence of the qubit at x = 0 (Panel b) interrupts the current flow at the location of the qubit, which suppresses the current amplitudes at that location. As with a low-pass filter, the suppression effect becomes increasingly strong with increasing mode frequency, with I(0) вҶ’ 0 in the limit of infinitely high mode frequency. The amplitude suppression is exaggerated in this figure for clarity. we will take the limit in which the inductance-capacitance series is replaced by an infinite series of infinitesimally small elements, corresponding to the infinitesimal length dx. We follow the standard technique for calculating the quantum mechanical Hamiltonian for superconducting circuits . From the circuit diagram shown in Fig. 1, we can construct the Lagrangian: L = 1 2Cq МҮОҰ2 вҲ’ Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext) + N пҝҪ j=0 1 2cОҙx МҮПҶ2 j вҲ’ NвҲ’1 пҝҪ j=0 1 2lОҙx (ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1)2 5 вҲ’ 1 2Lc ПҶ2 0 вҲ’ 1 2L2 (ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ0)2 + 1 2CR МҮПҶ2 N. (1) The flux (or phase) variable ОҰ represents the qubit variable that introduces the nonlinearity in the circuit via the effective Josephson potential Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext) = вҲ’EJ cos {2ПҖ(ОҰ вҲ’ ОҰext)/ОҰ0}. The coefficient EJ = IcОҰ0/(2ПҖ) is the Josephson energy of the junction, Ic is the critical current, and ОҰ0 = h/(2e) is the superconducting flux quantum. The variables ПҶj are the phase variables at the nodes j (j = 0, 1, 2, ..., N) along the TLR. The capacitance Cq is the junction capacitance. The parameters c and l are, respectively, the capacitance and inductance per unit length of the TLR, such that the capacitances and inductances of the elements shown in Fig. 1 are given by cОҙx and lОҙx. Using the Legendre transformation, Q = вҲӮL вҲӮ МҮОҰ = Cq МҮОҰ (2) Оҙqj = вҲӮL вҲӮ МҮПҶj = cОҙx МҮПҶj, 0 вүӨ j вүӨ N вҲ’ 1 (3) ОҙqN = вҲӮL вҲӮ МҮПҶN = (CR + cОҙx) МҮПҶN, (4) we obtain the Hamiltonian: H = 1 2Cq Q2 + Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext) + NвҲ’1 пҝҪ j=0 пҝҪ 1 2cОҙxОҙq2 j + 1 2lОҙx (ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1)2 пҝҪ + 1 2Lc ПҶ2 0 + 1 2L2 (ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ0)2 + 1 2(CR + cОҙx)Оҙq2 N. (5) As is common in the theoretical treatment of superconducting circuits, the main changes that occur when going from the Lagrangian to the Hamiltonian are: (1) the time derivatives of the phase variables are replaced by charge variables, (2) capacitances move from numerators to denominators, and (3) the signs of the potential energy terms are reversed. The smallness of Оҙx adds the following feature in our case: the new variables Оҙqj are proportional to Оҙx. Hence, the term Оҙq2 j/(2cОҙx) is also proportional to Оҙx. Similarly, since the difference ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1 is equal to the spatial derivative of the phase variable multiplied by Оҙx, the term (ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1)2 /(2lОҙx) is proportional to Оҙx. These properties are to be expected and allow a smooth transition from this discrete description to the continuous description that we shall introduce shortly. It is worth pointing out another interesting property of the Hamiltonian: although Lc is the mutual inductance between the qubit and the TLR, it is L2 that appears in the 6 Lagrangian and Hamiltonian terms that combine the qubit and TLR variables, i.e. the variables ОҰ and ПҶ0. Furthermore, L2 appears in the denominator, whereas we expect the mutual inductance to appear in the numerator in the effective coupling term, which should be equal to the mutual inductance times the product of the qubit and TLR currents. This situation might seem paradoxical. However, it is simply a matter of deceptive appearance in the intermediate steps of the derivation. For example, a somewhat similar situation was encountered in Ref. . In that case a Y-вҲҶ transformation produces a coupling term that has the coupling inductance Lc in the numerator, as intuitively expected. It is less obvious how a similar transformation could give rise to a logical-looking coupling term in the present case. We will show in Appendix B how a careful analysis of the Hamiltonian produces logical results. For the time being, we just point out that if we set Lc = 0, we find that we must have ПҶ0 = 0 to avoid a divergence in the ПҶ2 0/(2Lc) term, which in turn causes the term ОҰПҶ0/L2 to vanish. Hence we indirectly obtain the expected result that the value Lc = 0 corresponds to decoupled subsystems. The question of the qubit-TLR coupling term form also leads to the question of gauge choice. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (5) is in the flux gauge, which is characterized by a coupling term containing a product of phase variables. The Hamiltonian can be transformed via a gauge transformation to the charge gauge, in which the coupling term contains a product of charge variables. Using the unitary operator U = exp пЈұ пЈІ пЈі 1 i М„hОҪОҰ N пҝҪ j=0 Оҙqj пЈј пЈҪ пЈҫ , (6) where ОҪ is a constant, we obtain the transformed Hamiltonian HвҖІ = U вҖ HU = 1 2Cq пЈ« пЈӯQ вҲ’ ОҪ N пҝҪ j=0 Оҙqj пЈ¶ пЈё 2 + Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext) + NвҲ’1 пҝҪ j=0 пҝҪ 1 2cОҙxОҙq2 j + 1 2lОҙx (ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1)2 пҝҪ + 1 2Lc (ПҶ0 + ОҪОҰ)2 + 1 2L2 (ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ0 вҲ’ ОҪОҰ)2 + 1 2(CR + cОҙx)Оҙq2 N.(7) The charge gauge is obtained by setting ОҪ = Lc/(Lc + L2), which eliminates the terms that contain the product ОҰПҶ0. Instead, the qubit-TLR coupling is now described by the product Q Г— пҝҪN j=0 Оҙqj. Considering that the coupling term now involves long-range interactions between the qubitвҖҷs charge variable Q and the charge densities at all points in the TLR, it is simpler to work in the flux gauge. This result is consistent with past results in the literature 7 , which found that it is simpler to use the flux gauge when dealing with circuits that comprise flux qubits coupled to resonators. III. EQUATIONS OF MOTION AND BOUNDARY CONDITIONS From the Hamiltonian, we can derive the equations of motion for the dynamical variables straightforwardly: МҮQ = вҲ’вҲӮH вҲӮОҰ = вҲ’dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ вҲ’ ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ0 L2 (8) МҮОҰ = вҲӮH вҲӮQ = Q Cq (9) МҮОҙqj = вҲ’вҲӮH вҲӮПҶj = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі ПҶ1вҲ’ПҶ0 lОҙx вҲ’ ПҶ0 Lc + ОҰвҲ’ПҶ0 L2 , j = 0, ПҶj+1вҲ’2ПҶj+ПҶjвҲ’1 lОҙx , 1 вүӨ j вүӨ N вҲ’ 1, вҲ’ПҶN+ПҶNвҲ’1 lОҙx , j = N, (10) МҮПҶj = вҲӮH вҲӮОҙqj = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈі Оҙqj cОҙx, 0 вүӨ j вүӨ N вҲ’ 1, ОҙqN CR+cОҙx, j = N. (11) It is convenient for the analysis below to turn the first-order equations of motion into second-order equations of motion for the phase variables МҲОҰ = вҲ’ 1 Cq dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ вҲ’ ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ0 CqL2 (12) МҲПҶj = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі ПҶ1вҲ’ПҶ0 clОҙx2 вҲ’ ПҶ0 cОҙxLc + ОҰвҲ’ПҶ0 cОҙxL2, j = 0, ПҶj+1вҲ’2ПҶj+ПҶjвҲ’1 clОҙx2 , 1 вүӨ j вүӨ N вҲ’ 1, вҲ’ПҶN+ПҶNвҲ’1 lОҙx(CR+cОҙx), j = N. (13) We now take the limit in which Оҙx becomes the infinitesimal dx, and we obtain the continuous version of Eqs. (12,13): МҲОҰ = вҲ’ 1 Cq dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ вҲ’ ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ(x = 0+, t) CqL2 (14) вҲӮ2ПҶ вҲӮt2 = пЈұ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈі пҝҪ 1 cl вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ ПҶ cLc + ОҰвҲ’ПҶ cL2 пҝҪ Оҙ(x), x = 0, 1 cl вҲӮ2ПҶ вҲӮx2 , x > 0. (15) In Eq. (15), Оҙ(x) is the Dirac delta function, which is the natural limit for the factor 1/Оҙx, since the Dirac delta function can be thought of as an extremely narrow step-function peak whose height is the inverse of its width. From a different point of view, the role of the j = 0 8 or x = 0+ point is to set the effective boundary condition for the phase variable in the TLR just to the right of the qubit in Fig. 1. The Dirac delta function naturally plays this role, as we shall see shortly. Since the TLR is connected to the ground at x = 0 (to the left of the qubit), the boundary condition there is ПҶ(x, t) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0вҲ’ = 0. (16) If the TLR is well isolated from the environment on the right-hand side of Fig. 1, the capacitance CR will be small. For purposes of this argument, we can take the limit CR вҶ’ 0. find that to avoid a divergence in the last line of Eq. (13) the boundary condition at x = X must be вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (17) In physical terms, this boundary condition means that the current at x = X is equal to zero, which is needed to prevent the accumulation of an infinite charge density at that point. By integrating Eq. (15) from x = 0вҲ’ to x = 0+, we rewrite the equations of motion in the simpler form: МҲОҰ = вҲ’ 1 Cq dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ вҲ’ ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ(x = 0, t) CqL2 (18) вҲӮ2ПҶ вҲӮt2 = 1 cl вҲӮ2ПҶ вҲӮx2 , (19) with modified boundary conditions: пҝҪ 1 cl вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ ПҶ cLc + ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ cL2 пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0 (20) вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (21) IV. TLR MODES AND HIGH-FREQUENCY DECOUPLING We now calculate the frequencies and electric current profiles of the normal modes in the TLR. First, we note that the presence of ОҰ in the boundary condition in Eq. (20) means that in principle the equations for ПҶ cannot be solved without knowledge of ОҰ. We can however, 9 eliminate ОҰ from the equations for ПҶ under the approximation that ОҰ exhibits only small dynamical deviations away from its mean value ОҰ, which is a reasonable assumption for the low-energy states of the system. A detailed derivation on this point is given in Appendix A. If we assume that ОҰ remains identically equal to ОҰ at all times, and we define the new variable МғПҶ(x, t) = ПҶ(x, t) вҲ’ Lc2 L2 ОҰ, (22) where Lc2 = LcL2/(Lc + L2), we obtain ОҰ-independent equations for МғПҶ. The equations are given by вҲӮ2 МғПҶ вҲӮt2 = 1 cl вҲӮ2 МғПҶ вҲӮx2 (23) пҝҪ 1 cl вҲӮ МғПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ МғПҶ cLc2 пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0 (24) вҲӮ МғПҶ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (25) We can now determine the normal modes by solving this one-dimensional wave equation. We do so by substituting sinusoidally oscillating solutions with temporal frequency Пү: МғПҶ(x, t) = eвҲ’iПүtu(x), (26) which gives вҲ’Пү2u(x) = 1 cl d2u dx2 (27) пҝҪ 1 cl du dx вҲ’ u cLc2 пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0 (28) du dx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (29) The solution of the wave equation in Eq. (27) can be expressed as u(x) = uc cos(k[x вҲ’ x0]), (30) where k = вҲҡ Пү2cl. The parameters k and x0 are determined by the boundary conditions. It is worth noting here that, since the differential equation and boundary conditions are linear, they do not impose any conditions on uc. As we will see below, since uc is the amplitude of current oscillations, it will be governed by energy quantization, especially when analyzing 10 the ground state of the system. Considering the boundary condition at x = X, we can write u(x) as u(x) = uc cos(k[x вҲ’ X]). (31) The boundary condition at x = 0 now gives k cl sin(kX) вҲ’ 1 cLc2 cos(kX) = 0, (32) and therefore k tan(kX) = l Lc2 . (33) This transcendental equation has an infinite number of solutions, i.e. there are an infinite number of k values that satisfy the equation, as illustrated in Fig. 3. These solutions characterize the TLR modes. As we will show with a detailed analysis below, the mode current profiles are modified from the form illustrated in Fig. 2(a) to that illustrated in Fig. 2(b). As explained in Appendix A, including the first-order corrections caused by the deviations of ОҰ from ОҰ leads to replacing Eq. (33) by k tan(kX) = l Lc2 Г— пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ1 + Ој пҝҪ k2 clПү2q вҲ’ 1 пҝҪ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , (34) defined in Appendix A. This equation is clearly more cumbersome than Eq. (33). We shall therefore continue the derivations below using Eq. (33), and we shall introduce the corrections that arise from using Eq. (34) only when needed. It is helpful at this point to rewrite Eq. (33) in the form Пү tan(kX) = Пүcutoff, (35) or alternatively, Пү tan(Пү вҲҡ clX) = Пүcutoff, (36) where Пүcutoff = Z0 Lc2 , (37) 11 and Z0 = пҝҪ l/c is the impedance of the TLR, typically set to 50 О©. This expression for Пүcutoff is the one for an inductance-based low-pass filter. This result is in line with that of Ref. , where the authors treated capacitive qubit-TLR coupling and found a cutoff frequency that corresponds to a capacitor-based low-pass filter. We emphasize, however, that in spite of the similarity in the underlying physics, the circuit of Ref. and our circuit are substantially different and cannot be transformed into each other for example via a gauge transformation. Similar expressions for the cutoff frequency also appear in Refs. . The physical meaning of Пүcutoff will become clear when we discuss the high-frequency limit below. A. Low-frequency modes For the low-frequency modes with Пү вүӘ Пүcutoff, the solutions of Eq. (35) must have tan(kX) вү« 1, which implies that kX is slightly smaller than nПҖ + ПҖ/2 with n being an integer. We therefore define the small variable пҝҪ kX = nПҖ + ПҖ/2 вҲ’ kX. By rearranging Eq. (33) and making use of the first-order approximation cot(nПҖ + ПҖ/2 вҲ’ Оҙ) вүҲ Оҙ for Оҙ вүӘ 1, we obtain nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ kX = Xl Lc2 cot(nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ kX) вүҲ Xl Lc2 пҝҪ kX. (38) As a result, пҝҪ kX вүҲ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 1 + Xl/Lc2 . (39) Taking into consideration the fact that Xl/Lc2 вү« 1 (which is required for the validity of the condition Пү вүӘ Пүcutoff), we obtain the approximation kX вүҲ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ 1 + Xl/Lc2 вүҲ пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Г— пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Lc2 Xl пҝҪ , (40) starting at n = 0 for the fundamental mode. From now on, we shall refer to the value of k that corresponds to a certain value of n as kn, and we shall refer to the corresponding frequency as Пүn. 12 0 5 10 15 kX/ПҖ -100 50 0 50 100 kX tan(kX) line represents the constant on the right-hand side of Eq. (33). Here it is set to Xl/Lc2 = 28, which corresponds to the parameters of Ref. . The points of intersection between the red and blue lines correspond to solutions of Eq. (33). For the low-frequency modes, i.e. at small values of kX, these intersection points are close to half-integer values of kX/ПҖ. For the high-frequency modes, as we go to increasingly large values of kX, the intersection points become increasingly close to integer values of kX/ПҖ. The green line replaces the blue line in the more precise calculation presented in Appendix A and Eq. (34), with the parameters Пүq вҲҡ clX/ПҖ = 8.8 and Ој = 0.1. The intersection points between the red and green lines give the solutions to Eq. (34). When compared with the blue line, the green line gives small corrections to most of the intersection points and a resonance feature around k = Пүq вҲҡ cl. The resonance feature includes one additional intersection point that corresponds to a qubit oscillation mode, as well as significant shifts in the TLR mode frequencies. B. Fundamental mode Using various expressions given earlier in this section, we find the (zeroth-order) approx- imate expression for the fundamental mode frequency Пү0 = ПҖ 2X вҲҡ cl = ПҖZ0 2Xl = ПҖ 2XZ0c, (41) 13 as should be expected for a quarter wavelength resonator. It is worth noting that with this expression for Пү0, we find that Xl/Lc2 = ПҖПүcutoff/(2Пү0), and Eq. (33) can be rewritten as knX tan(knX) = ПҖПүcutoff 2Пү0 . (42) It is also worth noting that the factor (1 вҲ’ Lc2/Xl) in Eq. (40) is approximately equal to Xl/(Xl + Lc2). Using the expression Пү0 = ПҖZ0/(2Xl), the small deviation of the factor Xl/(Xl + Lc2) from unity can be understood in terms of the inductance Lc2 increasing the total inductance of the TLR from Xl to Xl + Lc2. C. High-frequency modes For the high-frequency modes with Пү вү« Пүcutoff, the solutions of Eq. (33) must have tan(knX) вүӘ 1, which means that knX must be slightly larger than nПҖ, with n being an integer. We therefore define пҝҪ knX = knX вҲ’ nПҖ, which gives (nПҖ + пҝҪ knX) tan(nПҖ + пҝҪ knX) = Xl Lc2 . (43) Using the approximation tan(nПҖ +Оҙ) вүҲ Оҙ for Оҙ вүӘ 1, we obtain the first-order approximation in Пүcutoff/Пү пҝҪ knX = Xl nПҖLc2 . (44) This formula in turn gives the approximate expression for knX: knX вүҲ nПҖ + Xl nПҖLc2 . (45) Note that in the limit n вҶ’ вҲһ, we obtain knX = nПҖ, and the boundary condition at x = 0 effectively becomes du/dx = 0, which is the appropriate boundary condition if the TLR were terminated with capacitors at both ends, i.e. the connection to the ground is effectively cut and no (high-frequency) current flows at the point where the qubit is located. The low- pass-filter behavior now becomes clear. In fact, this behavior is perhaps more intuitive for the circuit with inductive coupling compared to the case of capacitive coupling studied in Ref. . The intuitive picture of an inductance is as a circuit element that resists changes in current. The time derivative of an ac current in the inductance is given by the product of the oscillation amplitude and the frequency. Put differently, the impedance of an inductance L at frequency Пү is given by iПүL. Increasing the frequency leads to stronger resistance by the 14 inductance, which can be alleviated by suppressing the oscillation amplitude. In the limit of infinite frequency, the current at the location of the low-pass filter must be suppressed to zero to avoid an infinite resistance from the inductance. In addition to Пүcutoff, we can also define the parameter ncutoff as an estimate for the number of TLR modes whose coupling to the qubit is not significantly suppressed: ncutoff = Пүcutoff Пү0 = 2Xl ПҖLc2 . (46) The actual number of modes below the cutoff frequency is ncutoff/2. The factor of 2 in the denominator arises because the fundamental mode (n = 0) has k0X = ПҖ/2 while the distance between adjacent modes is (kn+1 вҲ’ kn)X вүҲ ПҖ. Another way to look at the factor of 2 is to note that the normal mode frequencies of a quarter-wavelength resonator are odd multiples of the fundamental mode frequency, and the even multiples are missing. It should be emphasized, however, that this factor does not have too much significance, because the current suppression with increasing mode frequency is a gradual process and not a sharp cutoff. D. Coupling strengths between qubit and TLR normal modes Now that we have determined the frequencies and current profiles of the normal modes in the TLR, we can calculate their quantum properties and determine how they interact with the qubit. From the form of the Hamiltonian, we can see that the energy is proportional to u2 c: E вүҲ Xk2 nu2 c 2l . (47) In the ground state of any of the modes, the energy should be E = М„hПүn/2, which is the ground-state energy of a harmonic oscillator. Equating these two formulae for the energy gives the formula for the zero-point (root-mean-square) fluctuations in the mode variable: uc,rms = пҝҪ М„h XcПүn . (48) These fluctuations give the zero-point current fluctuations at x = 0: 1 l пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҲӮu вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0,rms = пҝҪ М„h XcПүn kn sin(knX) l 15 = пҝҪ М„hk2 n Xl2cПүn Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ tan2(knX) 1 + tan2(knX) = пҝҪ М„hПүn Xl Г— 1 пҝҪ 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2 = 1 Xl пҝҪ М„hПҖZ0 2 Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ Пүn/Пү0 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2. (49) This expression can be substituted in the formula М„hgn = Lc Г— Iqubit Г— 1 l пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҲӮu вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=xqubit,rms (50) to obtain the coupling strength gn as a function of mode frequency Пүn. Here gn is the parameter that enters in the quantum Rabi model (QRM) Hamiltonian HQRM = вҲ’вҲҶ0 2 Пғx вҲ’ Оө 2Пғz + вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 пҝҪ М„hПүn пҝҪ aвҖ  nan + 1 2 пҝҪ + М„hgnПғz пҝҪ an + aвҖ  n пҝҪпҝҪ , (51) where вҲҶ0 is the bare qubit gap, i.e. not including renormalization by the Lamb shift, Оө is the qubit bias, Пғx and Пғz are qubit Pauli operators, and an and aвҖ  n are, respectively, the annihilation and creation operators for mode n. The coupling strength gn grows as вҲҡПүn for Пү вүӘ Пүcutoff and decreases as 1/вҲҡПүn for Пү вү« Пүcutoff, as found in several recent studies. E. Dependence of coupling strength on mode frequency and coupling inductance We now consider the dependence of gn on Пүn. Since the coupling between the qubit and the TLR arises from the shared coupling inductance Lc, it is interesting to also ask how gn depends on Lc. There is a factor Lc that appears explicitly in Eq. (50). Both qubit and TLR currents also depend on Lc in principle, because the same inductance that mediates the coupling can be seen as part of the qubit loop and part of the TLR circuit. For example, following Ref. , the qubitвҖҷs persistent current is given by Iqubit вҲј ОҰ0 ПҖ(Lc + L2). (52) In other words, the flux qubitвҖҷs persistent current Iqubit depends on Lc. However, if we consider the weak-coupling regime with Lc вүӘ L2, and Lc вүӘ Xl, the qubit and low-frequency 16 0 50 100 150 200 Пүn/Пү0 2 4 6 8 10 gn/g0,(ncutoff=50) ncutoff = 50 ncutoff = 25 ncutoff = 10 coupling inductance Lc. The different Lc values are identified by the resulting ncutoff values. Here it is assumed that all system parameters other than Lc are kept fixed and L2 вү« Lc, such that ncutoff вҲқ 1/Lc. The mode frequency Пүn is measured relative to the fundamental mode frequency Пү0. The coupling strength gn is measured relative to g0 for the Lc value that gives ncutoff = 50. mode currents are independent of Lc to lowest order. This approximation gives for the low- frequency modes М„hgn вҲј Lc Г— Iqubit Г— 1 Xl пҝҪ М„hПҖZ0 2 Г— пҝҪПүn Пү0 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2пҝҪ = Lc Г— Iqubit Г— пҝҪ М„hПүn Xl Г— пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 1 2 пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2пҝҪ . (53) In other words, gn вҲқ вҲҡПүn, with relative corrections on the order of (Пүn/Пүcutoff)2. This result is consistent with the low-frequency behavior obtained in previous studies. Additionally, we note that gn вҲқ Lc. This result is intuitively to be expected, considering that Lc is the mutual coupling inductance. This behaviour is illustrated in Fig. 4. For the high-frequency modes 1 l пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ вҲӮu вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0,rms вҲј 1 Xl пҝҪ М„hПҖZ0 2 Г— пҝҪ Пү2 cutoff ПүnПү0 = 1 XlLc пҝҪ М„hПҖZ3 0 2ПүnПү0 17 = 1 Lc пҝҪ М„hZ2 0 XlПүn , (54) which gives М„hgn вҲј Iqubit пҝҪ М„hZ2 0 XlПүn = Iqubit пҝҪ 2 М„hZ0Пү0 ПҖПүn . (55) In agreement with past studies, gn вҲқ 1/вҲҡПүn. Furthermore, Eq. (55) reveals that the coupling strength is independent of the mutual inductance Lc for the high-frequency modes, as can be seen in Fig. 4. This result is quite interesting. It means that we cannot increase the coupling strength to high frequency modes by increasing the qubit-TLR mutual inductance. Instead, treating Z0 and Пүn as constants, the two possible approaches to increase gn are either increasing Iqubit or reducing the total TLR inductance Xl. Note that in this section we assumed that Lc is small compared to other inductances in the circuit in order to be able to derive simple expressions. Taking large Lc would significantly modify the behaviour of the dynamical variables, which can lead to significant deviations from the approximate expressions that we derived. This situation could require numerical analysis of the equations of motion etc. We will not perform any such analysis in this paper. F. Modified frequency pattern for the low-frequency modes In the absence of the qubit, the mode frequencies of a quarter-wavelength TLR follow the this pattern induced by the finiteness of Lc2/Xl. The motivation to look for such deviations is that a modified pattern could serve as an experimental test for the theory and a means to infer system parameters from measured spectra. As can be seen from Eq. (40), the pattern Пүn/Пү0 = (2n + 1) for the low-frequency modes is preserved at the lowest order considered in Sec. IVA. The corrections that we would like to calculate can come from one of two sources. If we start from Eq. (33), including the next order in the expansion of the cotangent function in Eq. (38) will lead to frequency ratio corrections. Alternatively, starting from Eq. (34) will give corrections even without going to higher orders in the cotangent function expansion. For the sake of clarity, we treat these two effects separately. 18 First, we take Eq. (33) and use the expansion: cot(nПҖ + ПҖ/2 вҲ’ Оҙ) вүҲ Оҙ + Оҙ3/3, i.e. nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ knX = Xl Lc2 cot(nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ knX) вүҲ Xl Lc2 пҝҪ пҝҪ knX + ( пҝҪ knX)3 3 пҝҪ . (56) This equation can be rearranged into the form пҝҪ knX вүҲ 1 1 + Xl/Lc2 пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ Xl Lc2 ( пҝҪ knX)3 3 пҝҪ , (57) We now take the lowest-order approximation for пҝҪ knX, i.e. пҝҪ and we substitute it in the cubic term on the right-hand side of Eq. (57) to obtain пҝҪ knX вүҲ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 1 + Xl/Lc2 вҲ’ 1 3 Xl/Lc2 (1 + Xl/Lc2)4 пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ3 , (58) and therefore knX вүҲ пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 1 1 + Xl/Lc2 + 1 3 Xl/Lc2 (1 + Xl/Lc2)4 пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ2пҝҪ . (59) This expression then leads to the approximate relation Пүn Пү0 = kn k0 вүҲ (2n + 1) Г— пЈ® пЈҜпЈ°1 + 1 3 пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ2 (Xl/Lc2)3 вҲ’ 1 3 пҝҪ ПҖ 2 пҝҪ2 (Xl/Lc2)3 пЈ№ пЈәпЈ» = (2n + 1) Г— пҝҪ 1 + ПҖ2 3 пҝҪLc2 Xl пҝҪ3 пҝҪ n2 + n пҝҪпҝҪ = (2n + 1) Г— пҝҪ 1 + 8 (n2 + n) 3ПҖn3 cutoff пҝҪ . (60) For the lowest three modes, we find that Пү1/Пү0 вүҲ 3 + 16/(ПҖn3 cutoff) and Пү2/Пү0 вүҲ 5 + 80/(ПҖn3 cutoff). In Ref. , ncutoff = 13.2, which gives Пү1/Пү0 вҲ’ 3 вүҲ 0.002 and Пү2/Пү0 вҲ’ 5 вүҲ 0.01. In other words, for Пү0/(2ПҖ) вүҲ 2.5 GHz, we obtain (Пү1 вҲ’ 3Пү0)/(2ПҖ) вүҲ 5 MHz and (Пү2 вҲ’ 5Пү0)/(2ПҖ) вүҲ 25 MHz. Since the measurement accuracy for resonance frequencies in spectroscopy measurements is typically well below 1 MHz, a deviation of 5 MHz should be measurable experimentally. Next, we consider Eq. (34). If we take the limit Пүn вүӘ Пүq, Eq. (38) is replaced by nПҖ + ПҖ 2 вҲ’ пҝҪ kX вүҲ Xl Lc2 пҝҪ kX Г— пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ1 + Ој (nПҖ+ ПҖ 2 вҲ’пҝҪ kX)2 X2clПү2q вҲ’ 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё вүҲ Xl Lc2 пҝҪ kX Г— пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Ој пҝҪ 1 + (2n + 1)2Пү2 0 Пү2 q пҝҪпҝҪ . (61) 19 This equation can be rearranged into the form пҝҪ knX вүҲ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 1 + Xl Lc2 пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Ој пҝҪ 1 + (2n+1)2Пү2 0 Пү2q пҝҪпҝҪ, (62) which then gives knX вүҲ пҝҪ nПҖ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ пЈ® пЈҜпЈ°1 вҲ’ 1 1 + Xl Lc2(1 вҲ’ Ој) вҲ’ Ој(Xl/Lc2)(2n + 1)2Пү2 0 пҝҪ 1 + Xl Lc2(1 вҲ’ Ој) пҝҪ2 Пү2 q пЈ№ пЈәпЈ» . (63) We then obtain the approximate relation Пүn Пү0 = kn k0 вүҲ (2n + 1) Г— пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 2 ПҖncutoff(1 вҲ’ Ој)2 пҝҪОј(2n + 1)2Пү2 0 Пү2 q вҲ’ ОјПү2 0 Пү2 q пҝҪпҝҪ вүҲ (2n + 1) Г— пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 8ОјПү2 0 ПҖncutoff(1 вҲ’ Ој)2Пү2 q (n2 + n) пҝҪ . (64) Taking ncutoff = 13.2, Ој = 0.1 and Пүq/Пү0 = 20, we find that Пү1/Пү0 вҲ’ 3 вүҲ вҲ’4 Г— 10вҲ’4 and Пү2/Пү0 вҲ’ 5 вүҲ вҲ’2 Г— 10вҲ’3. These values are smaller than the ones calculated based on Eq. (60) by about one order of magnitude. They should therefore not significantly affect the frequency relations. One potentially important effect that appears when we use Eq. (34) is the fact that the factor Xl/Lc2 in Eq. (61) is now multiplied by the factor 1 вҲ’ Ој for the low-frequency modes. Since Eq. (60) has the factor (Xl/Lc2)вҲ’3, the frequency deviations calculated from Eq. (60) will be amplified by the factor (1 вҲ’ Ој)вҲ’3, which is approximately equal to 1.3 for the parameters that we are using in our estimates. In the context to calculating small variations in Пүn/Пү0, we consider the effect of having a finite CR on the mode frequencies. For this calculation, we ignore the presence of the qubit and focus on the effect of the finite CR. The wave equation for ПҶ is still given by Eq. (19), and its solution can still be expressed as ПҶ(x, t) = uceвҲ’iПүt cos(k[x вҲ’ x0]), (65) with Пү = k/ вҲҡ cl. In the absence of the qubit, the boundary condition at x = 0 is ПҶ(x)|x=0 = 0, which allows us to express ПҶ(x, t) as ПҶ(x, t) = uceвҲ’iПүt sin(kx). (66) The last line of Eq. (13), along with the eвҲ’iПүt time dependence of ПҶ(x, t), now gives the boundary condition: пҝҪ вҲ’Пү2ПҶ + 1 lCR dПҶ dx пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (67) 20 Substituting Eq. (66) into Eq. (67) gives the transcendental equation k tan(kX) = c CR . (68) This equation has exactly the same form as Eq. (33), but with c/CR instead of l/Lc2 on the right-hand side of the equation. Considering the case CR/(Xc) вүӘ 1, we can use the same derivation as the one used earlier in this subsection and obtain Пүn Пү0 вүҲ (2n + 1) Г— пҝҪ 1 + ПҖ2 3 пҝҪCR Xc пҝҪ3 пҝҪ n2 + n пҝҪпҝҪ . (69) The effect of a finite CR is therefore to modify the ratios Пүn/Пү0 in the same way that the coupling to the qubit modifies the frequency ratios. Depending on the relationship between the two small parameters Lc2/(Xl) and CR/(Xc), either one of the two mechanisms can be dominant. The design parameters of Ref. are X = 10.75 mm, l = 437 nH/m, c = 162 pF/m, Lc = 231 pH, L2 = 823 pH and CR = 3.46 Г— 10вҲ’4 pF. These parameters give Lc2/(Xl) вҲј 4 Г— 10вҲ’2 and CR/(Xc) вҲј 2 Г— 10вҲ’4, which suggests that the effect of the qubit will be much larger than the effect of the finite CR. It should be noted, however, that the coupling of the TLR to the measurement transmission line in Ref. was via an additional inductance that is not included in our theoretical model. As a result, the capacitance CR could in principle be made very small in that experiment without affecting the coupling between the TLR and the probe signal. If the circuit is designed such that the TLR is probed via the capacitor CR, one might need to increase this capacitance and take more care in treating the effects of the finite CR. Here it is worth establishing the relation between the ratio CR/(Xc) and the TLRвҖҷs quality factor QTLR (not to be confused with the charge variable Q introduced in Sec. II), because QTLR can be measured more directly than other circuit parameters. Following Ref. , and assuming that all dissipation in the TLR is via the CR capacitor, QTLR is given by QTLR = Xc R = 1 4Пү0Z0Xc пҝҪXc CR пҝҪ2 . (70) Using the last formula for Пү0 in Eq. (41), we find that 4Пү0Z0Xc = 2ПҖ. As a result, we obtain the formula QTLR = 1 2ПҖ пҝҪXc CR пҝҪ2 , (71) 21 or, in other words, CR Xc = 1 вҲҡ2ПҖQTLR . (72) If, for example, we take the relatively low quality factor QTLR = 103, we obtain the relatively high estimate CR/(Xc) = 0.013, which is still significantly lower than the value Lc2/(Xl) = 0.048 for the circuit of Ref. . Since these small factors are raised to the third power in the formula for Пүn/Пү0, the effect of the qubit should be more than an order of magnitude larger than the effect of the finite CR in a realistic setup. V. LAMB SHIFT One of the important questions in the study of multimode cavity QED is the Lamb shift and its convergence as we take into account the coupling between the qubit and an increasingly large number of modes. If the qubit frequency is small relative to the oscillator frequency, the renormalized gap, i.e. the Lamb shifted qubit frequency, is given by вҲҶ = вҲҶ0 exp пҝҪ вҲ’2 пҝҪ n пҝҪ gn Пүn пҝҪ2пҝҪ , (73) which is the straightforward generalization of the single-mode formula вҲҶ = вҲҶ0 exp пҝҪ вҲ’2 пҝҪ g Пү пҝҪ2пҝҪ . (74) It should be emphasized that the above formula is valid in a wide range of parameters. For example, if we think of the normalization process as occurring in steps starting at n вҶ’ вҲһ and gradually going down to n = 0, the above formula is valid as long as the renormalized value of вҲҶ is smaller than Пүn in every step of the process. Using Eq. (49) to infer the functional dependence of gn on Пүn, we can express the formula for вҲҶ as вҲҶ вүҲ вҲҶ0 exp пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі вҲ’2 пҝҪ g0 Пү0 пҝҪ2 пҝҪ n=1,3,5,... 1 n пҝҪ 1 + n2 n2 cutoff пҝҪ пЈј пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҪ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҫ . (75) Using the software package Mathematica, we found that the sum in Eq. (75) is given by пҝҪ n=1,3,5,... 1 n пҝҪ 1 + n2 n2 cutoff пҝҪ = Оі + 2 log 2 2 + ПҲ( 1+incutoff 2 ) + ПҲ( 1вҲ’incutoff 2 ) 4 , (76) 22 where Оі is EulerвҖҷs constant (approximately 0.577), and ПҲ(x) is the digamma function. For large ncutoff, the above expression reduces to the simpler function: lim ncutoffвҶ’вҲһ пЈ® пЈҜпЈҜпЈ° пҝҪ n=1,3,5,... 1 n пҝҪ 1 + n2 n2 cutoff пҝҪ пЈ№ пЈәпЈәпЈ» = Оі + log 2 2 + log ncutoff 2 вүҲ 0.635 + 0.5 log ncutoff. (77) In other words, the expression 0.635 + 0.5 log ncutoff provides a good approximation for the sum, as long as ncutoff вү« 1. Here it is worth making a small digression and giving the related sum пҝҪ n=1,2,3,... 1 n пҝҪ 1 + n2 n2 cutoff пҝҪ = Оі + ПҲ(1 + incutoff) + ПҲ(1 вҲ’ incutoff) 2 . (78) For large ncutoff, we obtain the asymptotic behavior lim ncutoffвҶ’вҲһ пЈ® пЈҜпЈҜпЈ° пҝҪ n=1,2,3,... 1 n пҝҪ 1 + n2 n2 cutoff пҝҪ пЈ№ пЈәпЈәпЈ» = Оі + log ncutoff. (79) This formula can be relevant to a situation in which a qubit is capacitively coupled to a half- wavelength TLR with capacitors at both ends, and the qubit is placed at one of the TLRвҖҷs ends to maximize the coupling to all modes. The differences between Eqs. (77) and (79) are intuitively logical: a slightly different constant term and a factor of 2 in the log ncutoff term. The slow logarithmic dependence of the above sums on ncutoff means that вҲҶ changes very slowly as a function of ncutoff. It also means that the sum remains on the order of 1 and can be treated as almost constant compared to other factors that play a role in determining the Lamb shift. For example, for ncutoff = 100, the sum is approximately equal to 3. VI. CONCLUSION We have performed theoretical analysis of a circuit comprising a flux qubit inductively coupled to a quarter-wavelength TLR. We showed how the qubit naturally decouples from the high-frequency modes of the TLR. Our results on this point agree with past results on somewhat similar circuits. Our analysis therefore complements previous theoretical studies and adds insight into the physics of the decoupling effect. We also derived new formulae for 23 the mode frequencies, coupling strengths and Lamb shift. By avoiding certain approxima- tions used in previous studies, we derived more accurate results, which allow us to predict previously unknown features in the spectrum of the system. Our results can help guide future experiments to test the physics of ultrastrong and deep-strong coupling in multimode circuit QED. Appendix A: Deriving the equations of motion for the TLR variables In this Appendix, we provide a more detailed calculation for how we can decouple the equations of motion for the variables ОҰ and ПҶ, i.e. how we can derive Eqs. (23-25) and Eq. (34) from Eqs. (19-21). If we want to find the oscillation modes of a system with continuous variables in some multi-dimensional trapping potential, we first find the ground state. We can find the semi- classical ground state from Eqs. (18,19) by requiring that all the dynamical variables be constant in time, i.e. looking for stationary solutions for the equations of motion. Setting МҮОҰ = вҲӮПҶ/вҲӮt = 0 in Eqs. (18,19), we obtain the stationary-state equations вҲ’ 1 Cq dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ вҲ’ ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ(x = 0) CqL2 = 0 (80) 1 cl вҲӮ2ПҶ вҲӮx2 = 0 (81) пҝҪ 1 cl вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ ПҶ cLc + ОҰ вҲ’ ПҶ cL2 пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0 (82) вҲӮПҶ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0, (83) which in turn give ПҶ(x) = ПҶGS (i.e. constant independent of x) (84) dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ОҰGS + ОҰGS L2 = ПҶGS L2 (85) ПҶGS = Lc2ОҰGS L2 . (86) Substituting Eq. (86) in Eq. (85), we obtain dUq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ОҰGS + пҝҪ 1 L2 вҲ’ Lc2 L2 2 пҝҪ ОҰGS = 0. (87) 24 In this work, we are assuming that the variable ОҰ describes a flux qubit. Then there will in general be two solutions, i.e. two values of ОҰGS that satisfy Eq. (87), determined to a large extent by the function Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext). Focusing on one of these two solutions (and assuming that ОҰ is nonzero, e.g. ОҰGS вҲј ОҰ0/4), the equation for ПҶs gives a nonzero constant for ПҶ(x). We can now look for deviations of ОҰ and ПҶ away from the ground state values [and we call the deviations ОҙОҰ(t) and ОҙПҶ(x, t)] and analyze their dynamics. Then we find the equations of motion МҲ ОҙОҰ = вҲ’ пЈ« пЈӯ 1 Cq d2Uq(ОҰ, ОҰext) dОҰ2 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ ОҰGS + 1 CqL2 пЈ¶ пЈё ОҙОҰ + ОҙПҶ(x = 0, t) CqL2 (88) вҲӮ2ОҙПҶ вҲӮt2 = 1 cl вҲӮ2ОҙПҶ вҲӮx2 , (89) with boundary conditions пҝҪ 1 cl вҲӮОҙПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ ОҙПҶ cLc + ОҙОҰ вҲ’ ОҙПҶ cL2 пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0 (90) вҲӮОҙПҶ вҲӮx пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=X = 0. (91) The equations of motion are now both linear differential equations, as is expected in calculations of normal modes. If we ignore ОҙОҰ in Eq. (90), we obtain Eqs. (23-25). These equations do in fact provide a generally good approximation for the TLRвҖҷs normal modes while remaining simple. We therefore use these equations as the starting point in several derivations in the main text. We can, however, proceed without ignoring ОҙОҰ in Eq. (90), as we show next. First, we rewrite Eq.(88) as: МҲ ОҙОҰ + Пү2 qОҙОҰ = ОҙПҶ(x = 0, t) CqL2 , (92) where Пүq = 1/ пҝҪ It should be noted that Пүq is not the frequency separation between the qubitвҖҷs 0 and 1 states, but rather the classical oscillation frequency about the appropriate local minimum in the effective potential for the variable ОҰ. In particular, the flux qubitвҖҷs minimum gap is typically a few GHz and is much smaller than Пүq, which is typically a few tens of GHz. Equation (92) is that of a forced harmonic oscillator, with the term on the right-hand side playing the role of the driving force. If we focus on the TLR mode with frequency Пүn, such that 25 B = A CqL2 пҝҪ Пү2 q вҲ’ Пү2 n пҝҪ. (93) Substituting Eq. (93) into Eq. (90), we obtain the modified boundary condition пЈ« пЈӯ 1 cl вҲӮОҙПҶ вҲӮx вҲ’ ОҙПҶ cLc2 + 1 CqL2 пҝҪ Пү2 q вҲ’ Пү2 n пҝҪ ОҙПҶ cL2 пЈ¶ пЈё пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ x=0 = 0. (94) Equation (94) differs from Eq. (24) in the presence or absence of the last term on the left-hand side. If we include this term, Eq. (33) is replaced by Eq. (34). A few comments are in order regarding Eq. (34). We generally assume that Lc вүӘ L2 and Lq <вҲј L2. As a result, Ој вүӘ 1. The factor k2/(clПү2 q) вҲ’ 1 can be expressed as Пү2/Пү2 q вҲ’ 1, which indicates that there will be a resonance effect. The TLR modes that are close in frequency to Пүq will be the ones that are most strongly modified by the additional term in Eq. (34) when compared to Eq. (33). The mode frequencies slightly below Пүq are pushed down, while the frequencies slightly above Пүq are pushed up, as is expected for coupled harmonic oscillators. Far away from the resonance point, the last term in Eq. (34) can be ignored, and Eq. (33) provides a good approximation for the TLR mode frequencies. In fact, even though the blue and green lines in Fig. 3 seem to be significantly different, the mode frequencies (given by the x-axis values obtained from the points of intersection with the red lines) are not significantly different between the two cases. Another point worth noting here is that the 1/x-like feature in the green line results in one additional solution to Eq. (34) compared to Eq. (33). This additional mode is associated with qubit oscillations. It always occurs close to Пүq, as expected. Appendix B: Coupling strength between Qubit and TLR modes In Sec. IV.D, we derived the coupling strength using the standard formula for magnetic coupling between two current-carrying wires, i.e. the product of the mutual inductance and the two relevant currents. In this Appendix, we follow an alternative derivation based on the circuit-variable description of the circuit, i.e. using the variables Q, qj, ОҰ and ПҶn. The motivation to perform this calculation is to follow the same approach used for most other calculations in this work and avoid hand-waving arguments as much as possible, especially considering that we are dealing with an inherently nonlinear system. 26 In the QRM, the flux qubit is approximated as a two-level system, with two quantum states that differ by the current going around the qubit loop. The coupling strength between the qubit and TLR modes can be calculated from the energies of the corresponding states of the electric circuit. These energies can be calculated from the TLR mode frequencies for the two qubit states, as well as the overlap between the mode wave functions for the two qubit states. For this purpose, we consider two flux qubit states with different values of ОҰGS as discussed in Appendix A. We consider the case where the mode frequencies are almost the same for both qubit states. Indeed, this condition is needed for the standard QRM Hamiltonian to be valid. Since we generally expect Lq to be different for the two qubit states, we find that we must have Ој вүӘ 1 for this condition to be satisfied. Next we consider the overlap between the TLR mode ground state wave functions for the two different qubit states. The two qubit states with opposite persistent-current directions have two different values of ОҰGS, which lead to two different values of ПҶGS, as described by Eq. (86). In other words, the TLR ground-state wave functions for the two qubit states will be shifted relative to each other. If we consider the QRM Hamiltonian in Eq. (51), as explained in Ref. , the two Пғz states of the qubit result in effective harmonic oscillator Hamiltonians with ground state field values that are separated by 2Оұ, where Оұ = g/Пү. This separation should be measured relative to the spread of the ground-state wave function, i.e. the vacuum fluctuations of the field variable. When the Hamiltonian is written in terms of the creation and annihilation operators, the formula is simple: пҝҪ a + aвҖ пҝҪ rms = пҝҪпҝҪ a + aвҖ пҝҪ2пҝҪ1/2 = 1. (95) To calculate the vacuum fluctuations of the TLR mode amplitudes, we write the Hamil- tonian in Eq. (5) in terms of the normal mode variables. The eigenvalue problem for the TLR modes is a Sturm-Liouville problem, which means that the eigenfunctions form a com- plete orthogonal set. Considering the mode functions derived in Sec. IV, we define the mode amplitudes ПҶn via the equation ОҙПҶ(x) = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 cos (kn[x вҲ’ X]) ПҶn, (96) with the inverse ПҶn = 1 пҝҪ X 0 cos2 (kn[x вҲ’ X]) dx пҝҪ X 0 cos (kn[x вҲ’ X]) ОҙПҶ(x)dx. (97) 27 In particular, if we take a constant function ОҙПҶ(x) = ПҶ, we find that its amplitude compo- nents ПҶn in the different modes are given by ПҶn ПҶ = 1 пҝҪ X 0 cos2 (kn[x вҲ’ X]) dx пҝҪ X 0 cos (kn[x вҲ’ X]) dx = 1 X 2 пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪ sin(knX) kn вүҲ 2 sin(knX) knX = 2 knX пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ tan2(knX) 1 + tan2(knX) = 2 knX пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2. (98) Considering Eq. (86), we find that the two qubit states result in ПҶn values that are separated by a distance Lc2 (ОҰGS1 вҲ’ ОҰGS2) L2 Г— 2 knX пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2. (99) The relation between the momenta in the original Hamiltonian and the TLR mode mo- menta can be derived from the relation for the phase variables: qn = вҲӮL вҲӮ МҮПҶn = N пҝҪ j=0 cos пҝҪ kn j вҲ’ N N X пҝҪ вҲӮL вҲӮ МҮПҶj = N пҝҪ j=0 cos пҝҪ kn j вҲ’ N N X пҝҪ Оҙqj, which implies that Оҙqj = Оҙx N пҝҪ n=0 1 пҝҪ X 0 cos2 (kn[x вҲ’ X]) dx cos пҝҪ kn j вҲ’ N N X пҝҪ qn. Here we are using the upper limit N to avoid counting more modes (with momenta qn) than the original momentum variables Оҙqj, with the understanding that we will take the limit N вҶ’ вҲһ in the next step. We also do not take the continuous limit for Оҙqj to avoid dealing with intermediate-step infinities and their subsequent cancellation. Focusing on the TLR terms in the Hamiltonian, we can write these as NвҲ’1 пҝҪ j=0 пҝҪ 1 2cОҙxОҙq2 j + 1 2lОҙx (ПҶj вҲ’ ПҶj+1)2 пҝҪ вҶ’ вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 пҝҪ 1 2c пҝҪ X 0 cos2(kn[x вҲ’ X])dxq2 n + k2 n 2l пҝҪ X 0 sin2(kn[x вҲ’ X])dxПҶ2 n пҝҪ = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 пЈ« пЈӯ 1 cX пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪq2 n + k2 nX 4l пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪ ПҶ2 n пЈ¶ пЈё . 28 We do not show the derivation in detail here, but the other terms in the Hamiltonian, which contain the variables ПҶn but not qn, modify the above term in the Hamiltonian to вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 пЈ« пЈӯ 1 cX пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪq2 n + k2 nX 4l пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪ ПҶ2 n пЈ¶ пЈё . As a consistency check, we note that this form of the Hamiltonian gives Пү2 n = 4 Г— 1 cX пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪ Г— k2 nX 4l пҝҪ 1 + sin(2knX) 2knX пҝҪ = k2 n cl , as expected. The term sin(2knX)/(2knX) is small, decays quickly with increasing n and can therefore be ignored. As a result, the vacuum fluctuations of ПҶn can be approximated by ПҶn,rms = пҝҪ М„h XcПүn = пҝҪ 2 М„hПү0Z0 ПҖПүn . Having obtained (1) the nth mode component of the separation between the two ПҶGS values and (2) the vacuum fluctuations in ПҶn, we calculate their ratio ОҙОұn: ОҙОұn = Lc2 (ОҰGS1 вҲ’ ОҰGS2) L2 Г— 2 knX пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2 Г— пҝҪ ПҖПүn 2 М„hПү0Z0 = Lc Г— (ОҰGS1 вҲ’ ОҰGS2) Lc + L2 Г— 2 ПүnXl Г— пҝҪ ПҖПүnZ0 2 М„hПү0 Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ 1 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2, which can then be substituted in the formula gn = ОҙОұnПүn/2 to obtain the coupling strength: М„hgn = Lc Г— (ОҰGS1 вҲ’ ОҰGS2) Lc + L2 Г— 1 Xl пҝҪ М„hПҖZ0 2 Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ пҝҪ Пүn/Пү0 1 + пҝҪ Пүn Пүcutoff пҝҪ2. We therefore recover the standard, intuitive formula for the coupling strength used in Sec. IV.D, i.e. Eq. (50). This derivation also illustrates how the inductive energy is pro- portional to the mutual inductance Lc, in spite of the appearance of the ОҰПҶ0 cross term in Eq. (5). Acknowledgment This work was supported by JapanвҖҷs Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) Quantum Leap Flagship Program Grant Number JPMXS0120319794 29 and by Japan Science and Technology Agency Core Research for Evolutionary Science and Technology Grant Number JPMJCR1775. AL was supported by a NSERC Discovery grant. A. V. Andreev, V.I. EmelвҖҷyanov, and Yi. A. IlвҖҷinski, Cooperative phenomena in optics (Science, Moscow, 1988). D. F. Walls and G. J. Milburn, Quantum optics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994). M. O. Scully and M. S. Zubairy, Quantum optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1997). C. C. Gerry and P. L. Knight, Introductory quantum optics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 2005). A. V. Glushkov, Relativistic quantum theory. Quantum mechanics of atomic systems (Odessa, Astroprint, 2008). L. S. Bishop, Circuit quantum electrodynamics (Yale University, 2010). A. Blais, A. L. Grimsmo, S. M. Girvin, and A. Wallraff, Circuit quantum electrodynamics, Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 025005 (2021). C. Fabre, Quantum processes and measurement (Cambridge University Press, 2023). T. Niemczyk, F. Deppe, H. Huebl, E. P. Menzel, F. Hocke, M. J. Schwarz, J. Garc МҒДұa-Ripoll, D. Zueco, T. H МҲummer, E. Solano, A. Marx, and R. Gross, Circuit quantum electrodynamics in the ultrastrong-coupling regime, Nature Phys. 6, 772 (2010). P. Forn-D МҒДұaz, J. Lisenfeld, D. Marcos, J. J. Garc МҒДұa-Ripoll, E. Solano, C. J. P. M. Harmans, and J. E. Mooij, Observation of the Bloch-Siegert shift in a qubit-oscillator system in the ultrastrong coupling regime, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 237001 (2010). P. Forn-D МҒДұaz, J. J. Garc МҒДұa-Ripoll, B. Peropadre, J.-L. Orgiazzi, M. A. Yurtalan, R. Belyan- sky, C. M. Wilson, and A. Lupascu, Ultrastrong coupling of a single artificial atom to an electromagnetic continuum in the nonperturbative regime, Nature Phys. 13, 39 (2017). F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, S. Ashhab, K. Kakuyanagi, S. Saito, and K. Semba, Superconducting qubit-oscillator circuit beyond the ultrastrong coupling regime, Nature Phys. 13, 44 (2017). F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, S. Ashhab, K. Kakuyanagi, S. Saito, and K. Semba, Characteristic spectra of circuit quantum electrodynamics systems from the ultra-strong- to the deep-strong- coupling regime, Phys. Rev. A 95, 053824 (2017). 30 D. Z. Rossatto, C. J. Villas-BЛҶoas, M. Sanz, and E. Solano, Spectral classification of coupling regimes in the quantum Rabi model, Phys. Rev. A 96, 013849 (2017). P. Forn-D МҒДұaz, L. Lamata, E. Rico, J. Kono, and E. Solano, Ultrastrong coupling regimes of light-matter interaction, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 025005 (2019). N. M. Sundaresan, Y. Liu, Darius Sadri, L. J. Sz МӢocs, D. L. Underwood, M. Malekakhlagh, H. E. T МҲureci, and A. A. Houck, Beyond strong coupling in a multimode cavity, Phys. Rev. X 5, S. J. Bosman, M. F. Gely, V. Singh, A. Bruno, D. Bothner, and G. A. Steele, Multi-mode ultra-strong coupling in circuit quantum electrodynamics, npj Quantum Inf. 3, 46 (2017). S. Chakram, A. E. Oriani, R. K. Naik, A. V. Dixit, K. He, A. Agrawal, H. Kwon, and D. I. Schuster, Seamless high-Q microwave cavities for multimode circuit quantum electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 107701 (2021). Z. Ao, S. Ashhab, F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, K. Kakuyanagi, S. Saito, T. Aoki, and K. Semba, Extremely large Lamb shift in a deep-strongly coupled circuit QED system with a multimode resonator, Sci. Rep. 13, 11340 (2023). B.-M. Ann and G. A. Steele, All-microwave and low-cost Lamb shift engineering for a fixed frequency multi-level superconducting qubit, arXiv:2304.11782. M. F. Gely, A. Parra-Rodriguez, D. Bothner, Ya. M. Blanter, S. J. Bosman, E. Solano, and G. A. Steele, Convergence of the multimode quantum Rabi model of circuit quantum electro- dynamics, Phys. Rev. B 95, 245115 (2017). M. Malekakhlagh, A. Petrescu, and H. E. T МҲureci, Cutoff-free circuit quantum electrodynamics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 073601 (2017). A. Parra-Rodriguez, E. Rico, E. Solano, and I. L. Egusquiza, Quantum networks in divergence- free circuit QED, Quantum Sci. Technol. 3, 024012 (2018). M. Malekakhlagh and H. E. T МҲureci, Origin and implications of an A2-like contribution in the quantization of circuit-QED systems, Phys. Rev. A 93, 012120 (2016). E. McKay, A. Lupascu, and E. Mart МҒДұn-Mart МҒДұnez, Finite sizes and smooth cutoffs in supercon- ducting circuits, Phys. Rev. A 96, 052325 (2017). T. Shi, Y. Chang, and J. J. Garc МҒДұa-Ripoll, Ultrastrong coupling few-photon scattering theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 153602 (2018). M. Roth, F. Hassler, and D. P. DiVincenzo, Optimal gauge for the multimode Rabi model in 31 circuit QED, Phys. Rev. Research 1, 033128 (2019). F. Hassler, J. Stubenrauch, and A. Ciani, Equation of motion approach to black-box quanti- zation: taming the multimode Jaynes-Cummings model, Phys. Rev. B 99, 014515 (2019). S. De Liberato, Light-matter decoupling in the deep strong coupling regime: the breakdown of the Purcell effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 016401 (2014). D. De Bernardis, P. Pilar, T. Jaako, S. De Liberato, and P. Rabl, Breakdown of gauge invari- ance in ultrastrong-coupling cavity QED, Phys. Rev. A 98, 053819 (2018). Y. Ashida, A. МҮImamo МҶglu, and E. Demler, Cavity quantum electrodynamics at arbitrary light- matter coupling strengths, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 153603 (2021). F. Yoshihara, S. Ashhab, T. Fuse, M. Bamba, and K. Semba, Hamiltonian of a flux qubit-LC oscillator circuit in the deepвҖ“strong-coupling regime, Sci. Rep. 12, 6764 (2022). M. H. Devoret, Quantum fluctuations in electrical circuits, in Les Houches Session LXIII, edited by S. Reynaud, E. Giacobino, and J. Zinn-Justin (Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1996). U. Vool and M. H. Devoret, Introduction to quantum electromagnetic circuits, Int. J. Circ. Theor. Appl. 45, 897 (2017). T. Shitara, M. Bamba, F. Yoshihara, T. Fuse, S. Ashhab, K. Semba, and K. Koshino, Non- classicality of open circuit QED systems in the deep-strong coupling regime, New J. Phys. 23, M. G МҲoppl, A. Fragner, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, S. Filipp, J. M. Fink, P. J. Leek, G. Puebla, L. Steffen, and A. Wallraff, Coplanar waveguide resonators for circuit quantum electrodynamics, J. Appl. Phys. 104, 113904 (2008). S. Ashhab and F. Nori, Qubit-oscillator systems in the ultrastrong-coupling regime and their potential for preparing nonclassical states, Phys. Rev. A 81, 042311 (2010). 32