Electronic structure of the putative room-temperature superconductor Pb9Cu(PO4)6O Liang Sia,b and Karsten Heldb a School of Physics, Northwest University, Xi’an 710127, China b Institute of Solid State Physics, TU Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria∗ (Dated: September 26, 2023) A recent paper [Lee et al., J. Korean Cryt. Growth Cryst. Techn. 33, 61 (2023)] provides some experimental indications that Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O with x ≈ 1, coined LK-99, might be a room-temperature superconductor at ambient pressure. Our density-functional theory calculations show lattice parameters and a volume contraction with x – very similar to experiment. The DFT electronic structure shows Cu2+ in a 3d9 configuration with two flat Cu bands crossing the Fermi energy. This puts Pb9Cu(PO4)6O in an ultra-correlated regime and suggests that, without doping, it is a Mott or charge transfer insulator. If doped such an electronic structure might support flat-band superconductivity or an correlation-enhanced electron-phonon mechanism, whereas a diamagnet without superconductivity appears to be rather at odds with our results. Hitherto, milestones of superconductivity research in- clude its discovery by Onnes in 1911, the BCS theory of Bardeen, Cooper and Schrieffer , the discovery of high– temperature superconductors by Bednorz and M ̈uller , and, more recently that of hydride superconductors by Eremets and coworkers as well as nickelate supercon- ductivity by Li et al. [4–6]. Ever since Onnes, finding a room temperature superconductor has been the big dream of condensed matter physics. Such a superconduc- tor would revolutionize the way we generate, transport and consume electric energy. Lee et al. [7–9] proclaim that they have successfully synthesized such a room temperature superconductor, Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O with 0.9 < x < 1, even at ambient pressure. This is indicated by (i) a drastic drop in the resistivity (according to to the order of 10−10 − 10−11 Ωcm despite a quite substantial noise level ); (ii) a negative (diamagnetic) susceptibility and levitation of the superconductor on a magnet ; (iii) extraordinar- ily sharp voltage jumps at the critical currents with a vanishing critical current strength at temperatures of about 400 K and fields of about 3000 Oe . The recipe to synthesize Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O appears easy enough for other groups to follow suit. Thus further experiments will reveal whether Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is indeed the first room-temperature superconductor or not. In any case, the experiments by Lee et al. [7–9] are exiting and definitely call for a more thorough theoreti- cal understanding of this rather unusual material. The crystal structure of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O as obtained by x-ray diffraction (XRD) [7–9] is a modified lead-apatite struc- ture and is shown in Fig. 1. The first step to obtain a theoretical understanding of a new material is an impar- tial density-functional theory (DFT) calculation. In this paper, we perform such DFT calculations, fo- cusing on the crystal and electronic structure. The lat- ter can serve at least as a starting point for subsequent many-body calculations. Relaxing the lead-apatite crys- tal structure, we find very similar lattice parameters as Lee et al. . The calculation further confirms the ob- served lattice compression when substituting Pb by Cu. The DFT electronic structure of the parent compound (x = 0) is insulating, whereas there are two very flat predominately Cu d-bands crossing the Fermi energy for x = 1. These flat bands are prone to be split into Hub- bard bands. In this case undoped Pb9Cu(PO4)6O would become a Mott or charge transfer insulator, depending on the relative position of the lower Hubbard band and the other bands. Computational method— For the DFT structural re- laxations and electronic structure calculations, we use Vasp (projected augmented plane waves) with the GGA-PBESol exchange-correlation potential. More details are available in the Supplemental Material Sec- tion I . Crystal structure— Let us start with the undoped par- ent compound Pb10(PO4)6O, a lead apatite with a hexag- onal structure (P63/m, 176) identical to that displayed in Fig. 1 . For the parent compound, there is still the uncertainty at which position (out of four) the one oxygen is to be placed: open circles or dark red circle at the edge(s) of Fig. 1 (a). Here, we refer to this O as the “extra O”, as it is not part of the six PO4 tetrahe- dra. For a single unit cell all of these O positions are however equivalent. We have relaxed the structure in DFT and find lattice parameters in Table I to agree with experiment. We have further checked all possible distri- butions of four Os in the larger supercell of Fig. 1 (b) consisting of four formula units, see Supplemental Ma- terial Section I. The energy difference between the different oxygen arrangements is only ∼6 meV per unit cell, which corresponds to 70 K and is hence not relevant at room temperature. Next we study the crystal structure of the putative superconductor Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. The XRD data of Lee et al. [7–9] show a modified lead-apatite structure. In one unit cell of this structure there are 4×10 different arrangement of the extra O and doped Cu, some of them related by symmetry. We have calculated all possibili- ties, see Supplemental Material Section I, and find arXiv:2308.00676v3 [cond-mat.supr-con] 25 Sep 2023 2 Pb(1) Pb(2) Pb(1)/Cu P O in PO4 extra O alternative position of extra O (a) a b c a b (b) cell in side view; (b) four unit cells plus surrounding atoms in top view. There is some uncertainty regarding the position of the one extra O per formula unit and at which Pb site Cu is substituted. The extra O can occupy the dark red position as indicated in (a) or one of the empty white circles instead. As for the 10 Pb atoms in the unit cell, these fall into two symmetry classes: Pb(1) [dark gray] and Pb(2) [light gray]. The latter are located around the extra O, see (b). Our DFT calculations show that it is however energetically favorable for the Cu atom to be as far away from the extra O as possible, i.e., to occupy the blue Pb10 position of the Pb(2) class. This leaves us –for a lead-apatite structure and a single formula unit as unit cell– with the structure displayed. Phase a( ̊A) c( ̊A) V ( ̊A3) From Pb10(PO4)6O exp. Pb10(PO4)6O 9.825 7.371 616.22 this work (GGA-PS) exp. Pb9Cu(PO4)6O 9.661 7.226 584.04 this work (GGA-PS) ume compared to experiment. that Cu prefers to occupy the position that is farthest away from O . This results in the supercell dis- played in Fig. 1 (a) with Cu occupying one of the four dark gray/blue Pb(1) sites. The energy gain compared to other Cu-O arrangement is at least 12.1 meV, see Sup- plemental Material Section I B. Indeed it was already discussed in [7–9] that the six Pb sites around the tube where the extra O is located [light gray Pb(2) sites in Fig. 1] are not substituted with Cu, that Cu instead occupies one of the dark gray sites [Pd(1)] further away from the extra O in agreement with our DFT calculation. Our DFT crystal structure also confirms the volume reduction compared to the parent compound, see Table I, albeit it is considerably larger in DFT than in experiment. The periodic continuation of the single unit cell is shown in the the top view of Fig. 1 (b). Here, the Cu atoms (blue) arrange in a two-dimensional triangular lat- tice and the Pb(1) atoms (dark gray) in a similar trian- gular lattice in essentially the same layer, see Fig. 1 (b). In the c direction, this is interlaced by a similar layer of only Pb(1) atoms that sit exactly beneath the first layer and are thus not visible in Fig. 1 (b). The Pb(2) atoms (light gray) arrange instead in a hexagon (two tri- angles in different layers) around the position (channel) of the extra O. We cannot exclude a more complex long- range arrangement of the Cu and extra O sites based on a larger unit cell at the moment. While this can change the lattice of the Cu sites substantially, the main findings presented in the Conclusion are not affected. Electronic structure— Fig. 2 (a) shows the calculated bandstructure of the parent compound and that of the putative superconductor. In agreement with experi- ment , the parent compound is insulating with a rather large gap of 2.3 eV between the O-p and Pb-p states in DFT (see Supplementary Materials Section II for the detailed DOS). Note, this gap may be even underesti- mated in DFT because for sp materials the non-local exchange tends to further separate occupied from unoc- cupied states and thus to increase the bandgap. When substituting one Pb by Cu, two flat bands cross the Fermi energy, labeled “1” and “2” in Fig. 2 (c). The charge distribution of these flat bands in Fig. 2 (d) reveals that they originate from the Cu orbitals but with a very strong hybridization to oxygen. These two narrow bands are occupied by 3 electrons per unit cell. Copper is thus essentially in an effective Cu2+ state with a 3d9 electronic configuration. Due to the large Cu-Cu distance (≈10 ̊A) in the lead- apatite structure, the Cu-Cu hopping is extremely small, which explains that these bands are so narrow. For example, the bandwidth of the conduction band near Fermi energy is only ≈120 meV. The small hopping cer- tainly also contributes to the experimental observation that the high temperature metallic phase is a very bad metal with a large resistivity of 0.02 Ωcm at temperatures T ≳ 380 K . Fig. 3 shows the total as well as the partial-Cu DOS around the Fermi energy. The other partial DOSes can be found in the Supplemental Material Section II. The flat bands are reflected by a narrow peak of the DOS at the Fermi energy of predominately Cu-d character but 3 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 -1.0 -2.0 -3.0 Γ M K Γ A L H A (a) Pb10(PO4)6O Energy (eV) Energy (eV) 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.0 -1.0 -2.0 -3.0 (b) Pb9Cu(PO4)6O Γ M K Γ A L H A 0.2 0.0 -0.2 -0.4 -0.6 -0.8 (c) zoom-in: Pb9Cu(PO4)6O Γ M K Γ A L H A (d) No.1&2 (at Γ) 1 2 3 4 5 A Γ K H L M 2. DFT bandstructure of Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O: (a) parent com- pound at x = 0; (b): putative super- conductor at x = 1); and (c): zoom- in of (b). The Fermi energy is set to zero. The top-right panel shows the high symmetry k-points selected for plotting the bandstructure in (a-c). Panel (d) shows the band decomposed charge density distribution (at k=Γ) of the two bands crossing the Fermi energy: No. 1 and No. 2 indexes the bands in (c) by their energy below the Fermi energy. DOS (1/eV) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Energy (eV) −10 −8 −6 −4 −2 0 2 4 6 8 10 Pb9Cu(PO4)6O Total DOS Cu-3d DOS (1/eV) 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Energy (eV) −1.4 −1.2 −1 −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 zoom-in Total DOS Cu-3d Extra O-2p (atomically and orbitally resolved) for Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. Lower panel: zoom-in. For the other partial DOSes, see Supplemen- tal Material Section II . also with a sizable oxygen intermixing; the DOS at -0.4eV originates from the two somewhat more dispersive bands below the Fermi surface [labeled 3 and 4 in Fig. 2 (c)] and originate predominately from the extra oxygen now with some Cu admixture, see partial DOSes and charge distribution in the Supplemental Material Section II. Discussion: Effects of electronic correlations— The low-energy electronic degrees of freedom are dominated by the two flat Cu d-band crossing the Fermi energy, with a bandwidth of only 120 meV (or hoppings t of the order of 10 meV). The local Cu d-d interaction will be much larger. We can expect it to be similar to that of cuprate superconductors, with a similar 3d9 configuration, and U ≈ 3 eV . If two (instead of one) low-energy Cu d-orbital is relevant, U would even be higher because both orbitals still participates in the screening. On the other hand, the strong oxygen intermixture to this band can also reduce the Coulomb interaction. In any case, this puts these two flat bands of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O in an ultra-correlated regime. With U/W ≈ 25 and for integer filling, the two flat bands can be expected to be split into Hubbard bands, if electronic correlations are included in e.g. DFT+dynamical mean-field theory . Let us emphasize that this conclusion as well as that of a fully spin-polarized DFT+U magnetic state in Supplemental Material Section III does not depend on the pre- cise value of U; U would need to be an order of magni- tude smaller for obtaining a metal or a partially polarized magnetic state. This suggests that at least a slight doping is required to arrive at a metallic system as observed in experiment [7–9]. It would put such a doped Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O compound into the category of a doped Mott or charge transfer insulator. In such a situation, we can expect a very large quasiparticle renormalization of the DFT DOS at the Fermi surface. This will further reduce the width of the flat Cu bands. Also the experimentally observed large resistivity of the metallic phase corroborates this picture. While we can definitely say that the low-energy physics of Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O at x ≈ 1 is dominated by pre- dominately Cu bands, the precise arrangement of the Cu 4 atoms and hence the lattice formed by these very Cu atoms is more difficult to predict in DFT. Periodically extending the single unit cells results in a triangular ar- rangement of the Cu-atoms (blue) in Fig. 1 (b). Other arrangement of the Cu atoms on the Pb(1) sites are possi- ble and have not been studied. They will result, because of the rather larger Cu-Cu distance, in similar flat or even more flat bands. In the presence of disorder or for larger supercells, we would expect a similarly small bandwidth but a further suppression of the conductivity. Such a dis- ordered arrangement of the Cu atoms is also unfavorable for long-range superconductivity. The triangular lattice we find here is highly frustrated regarding magnetic fluctuations. The large distance and thus small hopping between Cu sites further suppresses the strength of prospective magnetic fluctuations. Also the coupling between the layers is weak: the dispersion from Γ to A is about half of that from Γ to M or X in Fig.2 (c). Hence spin fluctuations cannot be expected to be particularly strong, cf. magnetic DFT+U calculations in the Supplemental Material Section III . Discussion: superconductivity— While we have not performed calculations for superconductivity, we will dis- cuss in the following possible mechanism on the basis of the electronic structure found. That is, two flat Cu- bands crossing the Fermi energy and two somewhat more dispersive O bands immediately below. In contrast to cuprates, the small hopping and lattice frustration sup- press antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations. This strongly speaks against spin-fluctuation as the pairing glue at el- evated temperatures. Ferromagnetism is on the other hand known to prevail in flat bands : As U dominates over W, the cost in kinetic energy for a ferromagnetic ar- rangement becomes small compared to the energy gained by avoiding the Coulomb energy in a fully polarized fer- romagnet. Similarly and competing with ferromagnetic order, su- perconductivity can arise from flat bands [20–22]. This flat-band mechanism is discussed, among others, as a possible mechanism for superconductivity in flat moir ́e bands . It is not at all clear however, whether the bandstructure of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O provides for the ideal combination of flat and dispersive bands. With the bands labeled 1,2 and 3,4 in Fig. 2 (c), we have at least the necessary ingredients. Another possibility, as already discussed in is the complicated interplay between strong electronic corre- lations and the BCS electron-phonon mechanism. In- deed this scenario with an increase of TC due to the en- hanced quasiparticle density of states was advocated in , there coined Brinkmann-Rice-BCS mechanism . This scenario is somewhat hampered by the fact that also the pairing interaction gets reduced by the quasi- particle renormalization. Nonetheless, an enhancement of superconductivity by electronic correlations is possible . While we have not calculated the electron-phonon coupling, our DFT results attest an extraordinarily sharp peak at the Fermi energy, which is expected to be even further narrowed through such quasiparticle renormal- ization for the doped Mott or charge transfer insulator. Hence both of the above scenarios for superconductivity are conceivable. Scenarios of one-dimensional superconductivity and tunneling between two-dimensional semiconductor quan- tum wells have also been proposed. This is not sup- ported by the rather similar dispersion of the low-energy Cu d-bands in and out of plane in Fig. 2 (c). Only the extra O bands 3,4 below the Fermi energy with a large Γ- A dispersion could be considered to be one-dimensional in a first approximation. What can we learn from our DFT calculations for prospective non-superconducting explanations of the ex- perimental results of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O [7–9]? The sharp drop in resistivity might also occur from an ordering or structural transition, possibly affecting the lattice of the Cu dopants (at least when seeking to explain the low-T resistivity of the noise level , not the 10−10 − 10−11 Ωcm stated in ). The putative Meißner effect and negative susceptibility could also result from a diamagnetic state. Here however our calculations pro- vide some evidence against such a scenario. The narrow band(s) and the Cu 3d9 electronic configuration, indicate a (only slightly) screened spin- 1 2. A strong paramagnetic response can thus be expected. It is difficult to imag- ine how this can be overcome by a diamagnetic orbital response. Conclusion— Our DFT calculations and consideration regarding correlation effects put Pb9Cu(PO4)6O in an ultra-strongly correlated regime, with U/W of O(10) in- stead of O(1) in cuprate superconductors because of the very narrow Cu band(s) crossing the Fermi energy. In such a situation the Coulomb interaction U clearly domi- nates over the kinetic energy and bandwidth W. This can give rise to flat-band superconductivity or a correlation- enhanced BCS mechanism. A strong diamagnetic re- sponse is, on the other hand, not expected. It is a bit puzzling, why Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O with such a large U/W was not a Mott insulator or charge transfer insulator in experiment. A possible explanation is hole or electron doping through some off-stoichiometry (dif- ferent from x) in experiment. Such an additional doping would put Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O into the class of doped Mott or charge transfer insulators. Note that Pb and Cu are both 2+; hence other dopings x will not change the Cu2+ oxidation state; Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O remains insu- alting for all x. This puts O (or P) deficiency or excess as a possible source for such an accidental doping off- stoichiometry. Given the synthesis procedure also the replacement of O or P by S is conceivable. Against this background, it might be advisable to actively procure such a doping in the synthesis process, e.g. by control- ling the O partial pressure or adding small amounts of a 5 reducing or oxidizing agent. Note added. Independently to our work, three other DFT studies appeared simultaneously on arXiv [27–29] but did not conclude Pb9Cu1(PO4)6O to be insulating. The insulating nature of Pb10(PO4)6O, on the other hand, is already apparent in DFT, and has also been discussed in . The Mott or charge transfer insulating state of Pb9Cu1(PO4)6O has been confirmed in subsequent theoretical calculations [31–35] and experi- ment [36–40]. While we considered here that unintended doping leads to (super)conductivity in LK-99, a plausible alternative explanation is that the observed conductivity jumps are caused by remainders of Cu2 in the sample [41–43].