Multiple Slater determinants and strong spin-fluctuations as key ingredients of the electronic structure of electron- and hole-doped Pb10–xCux(PO4)6O Dimitar Pashov,1 Swagata Acharya,2 Stephan Lany,2 Daniel S. Dessau,3, 4, 2 and Mark van Schilfgaarde2 1King’s College London, Theory and Simulation of Condensed Matter, The Strand, WC2R 2LS London, UK 2National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401 3Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309, USA 4Center for Experiments in Quantum Materials, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309 LK-99, with chemical formula Pb10–xCux(PO4)6O, was recently reported to be a room- temperature superconductor. While this claim has met with little support in a flurry of ensu- ing work, a variety of calculations (mostly based on density-functional theory) have demonstrated that the system possesses some unusual characteristics in the electronic structure, in particular flat bands. We have established previously that within DFT, the system is insulating with many char- acteristics resembling the classic cuprates, provided the structure is not constrained to the P3(143) symmetry nominally assigned to it. Here we describe the basic electronic structure of LK-99 within self-consistent many-body perturbative approach, quasiparticle self-consistent GW (QSGW ) ap- proximation and their diagrammatic extensions. QSGW predicts that pristine LK-99 is indeed a Mott/charge transfer insulator, with a bandgap gap in excess of 3 eV, whether or not constrained to the P3(143) symmetry. The highest valence bands occur as a pair, and look similar to DFT bands. The lowest conduction band is an almost dispersionless state of largely Cu d character. When Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is hole-doped, the valence bands modify only slightly, and a hole pocket ap- pears. However, two solutions emerge: a high-moment solution with the Cu local moment aligned parallel to neighbors, and a low-moment solution with Cu aligned antiparallel to its environment. In the electron-doped case the conduction band structure changes significantly: states of mostly Pb character merge with the formerly dispersionless Cu d state, and high-spin and low spin solutions once again appear. Thus we conclude that with suitable doping, the ground state of the system is not adequately described by a band picture, and that strong correlations are likely. I. INTRODUCTION A recent paper1 reported that Cu-doped Pb10(PO4)6O (AKA LK-99, the trademark name given by its discover- ers) exhibits a Meissner effect up to 400 K. This rather startling claim2,3 has met with healthy skepticism in the scientific community, with wide speculation that the lev- itation they reported was an artifact of some weak fer- romagnetic interaction4,5. If superconductivity at 400 K were indeed confirmed, it would be a truly remarkable and transformational discovery with major consequences for a wide range of technologies. Unfortunately, recent attempts to find superconductivity in LK-99 have been unsuccessful4–9, damping the initial optimism. There have also been suggestions the presence of Cu2S byprod- uct can explain the observed drop in resistivity10. Nev- ertheless this materials system is very interesting in its own right as a template for hosting unusual one-particle properties, which as we show here are highly conducive to interesting and exotic many-body effects. In partic- ular we establish, using a self-consistent form of ab ini- tio many-body perturbation theory, the extremely flat valence and conduction bands are highly susceptible to strong correlations owing to spin fluctuations. Recent density-functional theory (DFT) calcula- tions11–18 agree that Pb10(PO4)6O is a band insula- tor, however, there is little agreement on the metal- lic/insulating character of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. As we have established in , various flavors of DFT predict Pb9Cu(PO4)6O to be a Mott/charge transfer insulator, provided the system is relaxed and not constrained to its nominal P3 symmetry, a crucial ingredient of the elec- tronic structure of LK-99 that most other DFT calcu- lations missed. This13 work also showed the gap to be robust against the most likely kinds of disorder that pre- serve stoichiometry. Here we use a higher level of theory, the Quasiparticle Self-Consistent GW (QSGW )19,20 ap- proximation, and affirm the principal result of that work: the pristine system is insulating and the gap is larger than found from density-functionals15. It also turns out that relaxation of the P3 is not at all essential: the en- ergy band structures of the fully relaxed structures and structures constrained to the P3 symmetry are very sim- ilar. Recent synthesis of phase-pure single crystals21 of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O shows the system to be an insulator and optically transparent, a conclusion in complete consis- tency with our previous13 and present studies. Our study turns to the effect of electron- and hole- doping of Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. Indeed, some remarkable many-body effects emerge in both cases. In the hole dop- ing case, the system can be reasonably approximated by a conventional picture: change in occupation of largely un- altered valence bands. However, two stable magnetic so- lutions emerge at the QSGW level, a high-spin state and a low-spin state. Electron doping is more exotic because of the magnetic (Cu d) character of the lowest conduc- tion band, as we explain below. At the QSGW level of theory the rigid band approximation breaks down, which leads to somewhat exotic changes in the one-particle spectrum, with higher lying bands hybridizing with the arXiv:2308.09900v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 19 Aug 2023 2 in direction of the z axis. Large grey atoms are Pb, pink is Cu, yellow P and red is O. quasi-atomic Cu d state, and give rise to a conduction band consisting several bands, derived mostly from Cu and Pb. As in the hole-doped case, a high-spin and a low-spin state can be stabilized. The presence of two nearly degenerate spin states sug- gests that the ground state is a strongly correlated many- body state that lies outside of a band picture, which is limited to a single Slater determinant. In this picture, the correlations arise from spin exchange between the Cu and O (hole doped case) and between Cu and Pb (electron doped case). II. LATTICE STRUCTURE The parent compound Pb9Cu(PO4)6O, (AKA LK-99, the trademark name given by its discoverers), forms in the hexagonal P3 structure, space group 143. Stoichio- metrically, it may be regarded as combinations of formula units (Pb3(PO4)2)3PbO. Six of the Pb (which may be called Pb(6h) using Wykoff conventions) form a staggered set of triangles consistent with three-fold rotational symmetry along the c axis. The other four Pb(4f ) atoms lie farther from this axis. Each P is surrounded by four almost equidistant O atoms, in a slightly deformed tetrahedron. From the perspective of chemical bonding, the P form sp3 hybrids which bond to an O p orbital and form bond-antibond pairs. Assigning a formal charge of +5 and −2 to P and O, the PO4 unit has a formal charge of −3. Treating the Pb s states as core, Pb has two valence electrons, so (Pb3(PO4)2) forms a combination of covalent and ionic bonds. PbO also forms an ionic bond; thus the parent compound (Pb3(PO4)2)3PbO is a mixed covalent-ionic insulator. This last O sits in the center of the Pb rings and forms a linear chain on the c-axis. Four sites are available to it, but only one site is occupied. We use the minimum-energy configuration as determined from the SCAN functional22 . The Cu-O| distance is 5.78 ̊A. III. ENERGY BAND STRUCTURE OF THE PARENT LK-99 COMPOUND By the parent compound we refer to an ideal Pb9Cu(PO4)6O, with O| occupying the lowest energy configuration determined from the SCAN functional, as described in . Relaxations consistent with P3 were considered (symmetry-restricted), and also the system was allowed to fully relax (unrestricted). As noted in that reference, the electronic structure does not depend on which site O| occupies (all four original O (4e) sites are equivalent. Therefore, the choice of which site to oc- cupy does not matter in the 41 atom cell, however, non- equivalent O configurations exist in supercells). More- over, the Cu-Cu exchange interactions are predicted by SCAN to be much smaller than room temperature (as might be expected in any case owing to the large Cu- Cu separation). Thus, if the Cu have local moments as density-functionals predict, the local moments will have no long range order. also notes that the electronic structure of both antiferrromagnetic and paramagnetic spin configurations are very similar to the ferromagnetic one, provided in the FM case spin up and spin down are symmetrized. We restrict consideration to the FM case here, keeping in mind that to derive a good description of the electronic structure from it, the majority and mi- nority channels should be symmetrized. For the single-particle band structure, we use the Quasiparticle Self-Consistent GW approximation in the Questaal package20,23. Self-consistency is realized in a quasiparticle sense: the energy-dependent self-energy in- cludes many-body effects, especially plasmon excitations, but the quasiparticlization procedure replaces the dy- namical self-energy with a static one to yield an op- timized single Slater determinant. Quasiparticlization uses a principle that minimizes some norm of the dif- ference between the interacting G and the noninteract- ing one19,24 and it also satisfies a variational principle25. Importantly, it has the property that the single-particle band structure should correspond to true excitation ener- gies, in contrast to DFT. Spin orbit coupling is included in these calculations. The energy bands of the parent compound (Fig. 2) neatly divide into a band OP p states well below the Fermi level EF (green), and pair of states of mixed OP +O| character (turquoise) split off from the other O- derived bands, and forming the valence band maximum. Cu is d9 with a lone Cu orbital forming a nearly dis- 3 persionless conduction band minimum (red), and finally states of (mostly s) Pb character sitting above it (blue). Top panels show bands for structures relaxed with the SCAN functional subject to a symmetry constraint (a) and fully relaxed. There is very little difference in the two cases, except in constrained relaxation the two bands at the valence band maximum are degenerate at A (apart from a slight lifting of degeneracies because of major- ity and minority spins are not equivalent owing to the ferromagnetic approximation noted above). In the unre- stricted relaxation, P3 symmetry is lifted and so is the degeneracy. The QSGW band structure has notable differences with those generated by standard density functionals. In the latter case, the symmetry-constrained structure is predicted to be metallic; only by breaking symmetry one Cu d state splits off to form the the conduction band. Even after a gap forms under relaxation, the gap is small, and the conduction band contains much more O char- acter (compare the red color of the QSGW conduction band to the yellowish PBEsol26 result). Adding U to PBE increases the Cu local moment, shifting and con- duction band closer to the QSGW result, the amount depending on the value of U. However, even for U=5 the gap is still ∼1.5 eV. Also note that the gap between higher-lying (Pb-derived) bands and the valence band is much reduced. This reflects a well-known tendency of DFT to underestimate bandgaps. These differences will turn out to be important when doping is considered. On the other hand, QSGW has a well-known tendency to overestimate bandgaps, largely because ladder dia- grams are omitted from the polarizability27. This ten- dency is especially pronounced when levels are spin split by exchange interactions between localized spins on a given site, e.g. in NiO, CoO, and La2CuO4. It has been found that adding ladder diagrams largely ameliorates this tendency.27 Extending QSGW to include ladder di- agrams in W we denote QSG ˆ W , and we consider it here to assess its effect on the ideal LK99 parent compound. The resulting energy band structure, Fig. 2(d) looks quite similar to QSGW , except the unoccupied Cu state is shifted down by ∼0.8 eV. This reduction in the gap is similar to, but slightly less than, what is found for NiO, CoO, CuO, Fe3O4, and La2CuO4.27 We also note that the position of this level is very sensitive to small changes in the potential, and as a result the self-energy was difficult to stabilize. But it hints at the extreme sensitivity of the Cu-derived conduction band to small perturbations. With Cu substituting for Pb, Cu d states must lie at the Fermi level if restricted to nonmagnetic solutions. Indeed calculations show that the Cu d overlap with p states belonging to O| and OP . Cu is formally d9, the valence band maximum has one hole, making the system metallic. Bonds of both the Cu-d O-p are have a disper- sion of ∼0.2 eV or less, and they weakly hybridize with each other. Because of their extremely low dispersion, their kinetic energy is small and both charge and spin easily fluctuate between Cu and the environment. It is −2 0 2 4 6 Γ M K Γ A L H A −2 0 2 4 6 Γ M K Γ A L H A −2 0 2 4 6 Γ M K Γ A L H A|L −2 0 2 4 6 Γ M K Γ A L H A E − EF, eV E − EF, eV (a) (b) (c) (d) 2. Energy bands of the parent compound Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. Top panels show calculations in the QSGW approximation for the symmetry-constrained relaxation (a) and the fully relaxed case (b). Panel (c) shows the band structure obtained from the PBESsol functional, using the fully relaxed structure and panel (d) how the band structure is modified from QSGW (a) when ladders are added to the polarizability (QSG ˆ W )27. Red, green, and blue depict Mul- liken projections onto Cu, OP , and Pb orbitals. Turquoise seen in the highest valence bands is a result of O| mixed in with OP character. All structural relaxations were obtained from the SCAN functional, and all energy bands include spin orbit coupling. noteworthy that any of common bosons responsible for many body effects are strong contenders in this system. First, the electron-phonon interaction can be very strong because of the flat bands, and also because a significant band of phonons involving OP , with energies between 110-140 meV, form part of the PO4 network. (Note that the O| phonons also have rather high energies, between 60-80 meV). Second, charge fluctuations, e.g. between the weakly bonded but spatially separated Cu and O| can be a source strong instabilities. And finally, the spin fluctuations can be low-energy. This will be particularly evident in the doped cases to be discussed next. IV. DOPING To avoid peculiarities of the “chemical personality” of specific dopants, we dope the system by adding a ho- mogeneous nuclear background charge, which must be compensated by adding or removing electrons to keep the unit cell neutral. We consider both electron and hole doping. As check on the appropriateness of uniform back- ground model, we compared the electron-doped case to 4 −2 −1.6 −1.2 −0.8 −0.4 0 0.4 0.8 Γ M K Γ A L H A −2 −1.6 −1.2 −0.8 −0.4 0 0.4 0.8 Γ M K Γ A L H A E − EF, eV (a) (b) right high-spin solution a system with a real dopant — a F atom substituting for the chain-O, and find it similar to a QSGW calculation in the presence of a homogeneous background, requiring one extra electron. A. Hole-doped case Doping LK-99 with holes acts similarly to doping cuprates or sp semiconductors: the energy bands do not change shape significantly and a hole pocket at the va- lence band maximum appears. Fig. 3 shows the result- ing energy band structure with doping of 1/2 electron per formula unit. Perhaps the most surprising result to emerge from QSGW is that two self-consistent solu- tions can be stabilized with different spin configurations: a “low-moment” configuration with 0.5 μB in the unit cell, and a “high-moment” configuration with 1.5 μB. In both cases the Cu moment is very close to the undoped compound (0.81 μB), while the remaining moment is dis- tributed over O and Pb. In the low-moment case, spins align antiferrromagnetically to the Cu on average, while they align ferromagnetically in the high-moment case. This strongly hints that the ground state cannot be com- prised of a single Slater determinant, and that spin fluc- tuations are inherently large. B. Electron-doped case A very different picture emerges when LK-99 is doped with electrons. The rigid-band approximation no longer applies. For small doping, electrons occupy the unoccu- pied Cu d state and reduce the local moment in propor- tion to the doping. When heavily doped, the splitting between states of Pb s character and the lowest conduc- tion band Cu d character can close. This likely occurs because the gap between Cu and the valence band orig- inates primarily from an exchange splitting as a conse- quence of the onsite Hubbard interaction, while much of the splitting between the unoccupied Pb(s) and valence band is a consequence of the long-range screened coulomb interaction W 28. The latter is important in determining the bandgap in sp semiconductors, while the former is −0.8 −0.4 0 0.4 0.8 Γ M K Γ A L H A|L −0.8 −0.4 0 0.4 0.8 Γ M K Γ A L H A|L E − EF, eV (a) (b) Electron doped Pb9Cu(PO4)6O. Left is low-spin solution, right high-spin solution largely responsible for the gap in transition metal ox- ides such as NiO, CoO, CuO and La2CuO4, where the gap closes if the local moment vanishes. When the sys- tem is doped, screening increases and the long-ranged part of W is reduced. However, the local screening on Cu (essentially on-site U and J) is much less affected. When Pb-Cu splitting does close, the conduction band involves multiple states, mixing the localized the Cu d state and more dispersive Pb s states (Fig. 4) Here also a ‘low-moment” configuration with 0.66 μB, and a “high- moment” configuration with 1.4 μB can be stabilized, with the Cu moment approximately similar to the parent compound. We note in passing DFT does not capture this effect, as it requires feedback between the screen- ing and the band structure29.However, electron doping should be taken with some caution. The wide gap miti- gates against thermodynamically stable dopants, and it may not be feasible to electron dope this system. V. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS The original work13 that established pristine LK-99 is insulating, in a DFT framework, has been confirmed theoretically by several groups, using some form of DFT or a combination of DFT and DMFT30,31. This has led these groups to conclude that some form of doping that changes the electron count, is essential for LK-99 to be a metal. The present work confirms that conclusion at a higher level of theory, and turns to the question of electron and hole doping, within the QSGW framework. Two sur- prising results emerge from QSGW that are not found in density-functional theory. The first is the marked change in splitting between Pb states in the conduction band and the O-derived valence band states with doping. This can be understood as a change in the screening as the system becomes metallic. The close relation between bandgaps in sp bonded semiconductors and the long-range form of the screened coulomb interactions has been established for some time28,32 and the effect of changes in screening on the band structure in such systems systems has been also been reported29,33. What is unique in the present case is that bandgaps with two different origins coex- 5 ist: one of another of semiconductor character (Pb-O) which is sensitive to doping and another of Mott char- acter (Cu-O) which is not. The second remarkable find- ing is the coexistence of two spin states, with the Cu aligned either parallel or antiparallel to the host. The presence of an atomic-like d state in a semiconducting conduction band is also seen in Cu-doped ZnO. But in the present case flat bands with low kinetic energy al- low a moment to be induced on the sp subspace that would not occur in Cu-doped ZnO, and the coexistence of two subspaces with different spin channels is new. In the QSGW approach, the quasiparticlization procedure demands a single Slater determinant; thus the alignment of the two kinds of spins emerges as two distinct solu- tions. While it was possible to stabilize two distinct spin configurations, there was a strong tendency to flip be- tween them as self-consistency proceeded. This indicates that the spin configurations are nearly degenerate in en- ergy. Self-consistency is clearly essential here: such a result would be problematic with conventional forms of GW, e.g. one-shot GW based on DFT. The crucial role of self-consistency has been discussed recently for several other insulating systems.34,35 The near-degeneracy of distinct ground states in a one- particle description suggests that the true ground state cannot be described by a single-determinant; and more- over correlations from spin fluctuations between the Cu local moment and delocalized environment are likely to be very strong. This does not by itself indicate a strong propensity for superconductivity, but it does suggest a novel path to strong correlations, which may result in superconductivity. We believe, irrespective of whether room-temperature superconductivity is realized in these classes of materials or not, the fact that Pb10(PO4)6O is a band insulator, Pb9Cu(PO4)6O is a Mott insula- tor and the electron- and hole-doped Pb9Cu(PO4)6O can not be described by a single Slater determinant, makes these class of systems a unique playground to explore the transition from band- to Mott-insulator to multi- determinantal nature of weakly doped Mott physics. VI. METHODS We apply quasiparticle self-consistent GW theory (QSGW )19, which, in contrast to conventional GW methods, modifies the charge density and is determined by a variational principle25. Further, QSG ˆ W 27 is a diagrammatic extension of QSGW where the screened coulomb interaction W is computed including exci- tonic vertex corrections (ladder diagrams) by solving a Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE) within Tamm-Dancoff approximation36. Crucially, both our QSGW and QSG ˆ W methods are fully self-consistent in both self- energy Σ and the charge density34. G, Σ, and ˆW are updated iteratively until all of them converge. Such ap- proaches are parameter-free and have no starting point bias. VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by National Renewable En- ergy Laboratory, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308, funding from Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Ma- terials. We also acknowledge the use of the Eagle fa- cility at NREL, sponsored by the Office of Energy Ef- ficiency and also the National Energy Research Scien- tific Computing Center, under Contract No. DE-AC02- 05CH11231 using NERSC award BES-ERCAP0021783. DD was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, un- der Grant No. DE-FG02-03ER46066, and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation’s EPiQS Initiative through Grant No. GBMF9458. 1 S. Lee, J. Kim, H.-T. Kim, S. Im, S. An, and K. H. Auh, “Superconductor Pb10−x Cux(PO4)6O showing levitation at room temperature and atmospheric pressure and mech- anism.” Preprint arXiv 2307.12037.pdf, 2023. 2 S. Lee, J.-H. Kim, and Y.-W. Kwon, “The firs room- temperature ambient-pressure superconductor,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.12008, 2023. 3 S. Lee, J. Kim, S. Im, S. An, Y.-W. Kwon, and A. K. Ho, “Consideration for the development of room-temperature ambient-pressure superconductor (lk-99),” Journal of the Korean Crystal Growth and Crystal Technology, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 61–70, 2023. 4 K. Guo, Y. Li, and S. Jia, “Ferromagnetic half lev- itation of lk-99-like synthetic samples,” arXiv preprint 5 I. Timokhin, C. Chen, Z. Wang, Q. Yang, and A. Mishchenko, “Synthesis and characterisation of LK-99.” Preprint arXiv 2308.03823v2, 2023. 6 L. Liu, Z. Meng, X. Wang, H. Chen, Z. Duan, X. Zhou, H. Yan, P. Qin, and Z. Liu, “Semiconducting transport in pb10-xcux (po4) 6o sintered from pb2so5 and cu3p,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16802, 2023. 7 K. Kumar, N. K. Karn, Y. Kumar, and V. P. S. Awana, “Absence of superconductivity in lk-99 at ambient condi- tions,” 2023. 8 K. Kumar, N. K. Karn, and V. P. S. Awana, “Synthesis of possible room temperature superconductor lk-99: Pb9cu (po4) 6o,” Superconductor Science and Technology, 2023. 9 H. Wu, L. Yang, B. Xiao, and H. Chang, “Success- ful growth and room temperature ambient-pressure mag- netic levitation of lk-99,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01516, 10 P. K. Jain, “Phase transition of copper (I) sulfide and its implication for purported superconductivity of LK-99.” 6 Preprint arXiv 2308.05222v1, 2023. 11 S. M. Griffin, “Origin of correlated isolated flat bands in copper-substituted lead phosphate apatite,” 2023. 12 J. Lai, J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Sun, and X.-Q. Chen, “First- principles study on the electronic structure of pb10- xcux (po4) 6o (x= 0, 1),” Journal of Materials Science & Tech- nology, 2023. 13 R. Kurleto, S. Lany, D. Pashov, S. Acharya, M. van Schilf- gaarde, and D. S. Dessau, “Pb-apatite framework as a gen- erator of novel flat-band CuO based physics, including pos- sible room temperature superconductivity.” Preprint arXiv 14 L. Si and K. Held, “Electronic structure of the putative room-temperature superconductor pb 9 cu (po 4) 6 o,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00676, 2023. 15 J. Cabezas-Escares, N. Barrera, C. Cardenas, and F. Munoz, “Theoretical insight on the lk-99 material,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01135, 2023. 16 Y. Sun, K.-M. Ho, and V. Antropov, “Metallization and spin fluctuations in cu-doped lead apatite,” 2023. 17 K. Tao, R. Chen, L. Yang, J. Gao, D. Xue, and C. Jia, “The cu induced ultraflat band in the pb10−xcux(po4)6o4 (x = 0, 0.5),” 2023. 18 Y. Jiang, S. B. Lee, J. Herzog-Arbeitman, J. Yu, X. Feng, H. Hu, D. C ̆alug ̆aru, P. S. Brodale, E. L. Gormley, M. G. Vergniory, C. Felser, S. Blanco-Canosa, C. H. Hendon, L. M. Schoop, and B. A. Bernevig, “Pb9cu(po4)6(oh)2: Phonon bands, localized flat band magnetism, models, and chemical analysis,” 2023. 19 M. van Schilfgaarde, T. Kotani, and S. Faleev, “Quasi- particle Self-Consistent GW Theory,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 96, no. 22, p. 226402, 2006. 20 D. Pashov, S. Acharya, W. R. L. Lambrecht, J. Jackson, K. D. Belashchenko, A. Chantis, F. Jamet, and M. van Schilfgaarde, “Questaal: a package of electronic structure methods based on the linear muffin-tin orbital technique,” Comp. Phys. Comm., vol. 249, p. 107065, 2020. 21 P. Puphal, M. Y. P. Akbar, M. Hepting, E. Goering, M. Isobe, A. A. Nugroho, and B. Keimer, “Single crystal synthesis, structure, and magnetism of pb10−xcux(po4)6o,” 22 J. Sun, A. Ruzsinszky, and J. P. Perdew, “Strongly con- strained and appropriately normed semilocal density func- tional,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 115, p. 036402, Jul 2015. 23 https://www.questaal.org. Questaal code website. 24 T. Kotani, M. van Schilfgaarde, and S. V. Faleev, “Quasiparticle self-consistent GW method: A basis for the independent-particle approximation,” PRB, vol. 76, 25 S. Ismail-Beigi, “Justifying quasiparticle self-consistent schemes via gradient optimization in Baym–Kadanoff the- ory,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, vol. 29, p. 385501, 2017. 26 J. P. Perdew, A. Ruzsinszky, G. I. Csonka, O. A. Vydrov, G. E. Scuseria, L. A. Constantin, X. Zhou, , and K. Burke, “Restoring the density-gradient expansion for exchange in solids and surfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 100, p. 136406, 27 B. Cunningham, M. Gr ̈uning, D. Pashov, and M. van Schilfgaarde, “QSG ˆ W: Quasiparticle Self Consistent GW with Ladder Diagrams in W,” https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.06325. 28 E. G. Maksimov, I. I. Mazin, S. Y. Savrasov, and Y. A. Us- penski, “Excitation spectra of semiconductors and insula- tors: a density-functional approach to many-body theory,” J. Phys.:Condens. Matter, vol. 1, 1993. 29 J. Vidal, S. Botti, P. Olsson, J.-F. Guillemoles, and L. Reining, “Strong Interplay between Structure and Elec- tronic Properties in CuInSe2: A First-Principles Study,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 104, p. 056401, 2010. 30 D. M. Korotin, D. Y. Novoselov, A. O. Shorikov, V. I. Anisimov, and A. R. Oganov, “Electronic cor- relations in promising room-temperature superconductor Pb9Cu(PO4)6O: a DFT+DMFT study.” Preprint arXiv 31 L. Si, M. Wallerberger, A. Smolyanyuk, S. di Cataldo, J. M. Tomczak, and K. Held, “Pb10−xCux(PO4)6O: a Mott or charge transfer insulator in need of further doping for superconductivity.” Preprint arXiv 2308.04427, 2023. 32 M. Gr ̈uning, A. Marini, and A. Rubio, “Density functionals from many-body perturbation theory: The band gap for semiconductors and insulators,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 124, 33 J. B. Neaton, M. S. Hybertsen, and S. G. Louie, “Renormalization of Molecular Electronic Levels at Metal- Molecule Interfaces,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 97, p. 216405, 34 S. Acharya, D. Pashov, A. N. Rudenko, M. R ̈osner, M. van Schilfgaarde, and M. I. Katsnelson, “Importance of charge self-consistency in first-principles description of strongly correlated systems,” npj Computational Materials, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2021. 35 M. Grzeszczyk, S. Acharya, D. Pashov, Z. Chen, K. Vak- linova, M. van Schilfgaarde, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Novoselov, M. Katsnelson, et al., “Strongly correlated exciton-magnetization system for optical spin pumping in crbr3 and cri3.,” Advanced Materials, p. 2209513, 2023. 36 S. Hirata and M. Head-Gordon, “Time-dependent density functional theory within the tamm–dancoff approxima- tion,” Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 314, no. 3-4, pp. 291–