Matching the photocurrent of perovskite/organic tandem solar modules by varying the cell width† José García Cerrillo*, Andreas Distler, Fabio Matteocci, Karen Forberich, Michael Wagner, Robin Basu, Luigi Angelo Castriotta, Farshad Jafarzadeh, Francesca Brunetti, Fu Yang, Ning Li, Asiel Neftalí Corpus Mendoza, Aldo Di Carlo, Christoph J. Brabec*, Hans-Joachim Egelhaaf J. García Cerrillo, Dr. A. Distler, R. Basu, Prof. N. Li, Dr. H.-J. Egelhaaf, Prof. C. J. Brabec Institute of Materials for Electronics and Energy Technology (i-MEET) Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU) Martensstraße 7, Erlangen, D-91058, Germany. * E-Mail address: jose.garcia@fau.de. Dr. F. Matteocci, Dr. L. A. Castriotta, F. Jafarzadeh, Dr. Francesca Brunetti, Prof. A. Di Carlo Center for Hybrid and Organic Solar Energy (CHOSE) University of Rome Tor Vergata via del Politecnico 1 00133 Rome, Italy. Dr. K. Forberich, M. Wagner, Prof. N. Li, Dr. H.-J. Egelhaaf, Prof. C. J. Brabec Helmholtz Institute Erlangen-Nürnberg for Renewable Energy (HI ERN) Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH Immerwahrstraße 2, Erlangen, D-91058, Germany. * E-mail address: christoph.brabec@fau.de. Dr. F. Yang Laboratory of Advanced Optoelectronic Materials College of Chemistry Chemical Engineering and Materials Science Soochow University Suzhou 215123, China. Prof. N. Li State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices School of Materials Science and Engineering South China University of Technology Guangzhou 510640, China. Dr. Asiel Neftalí Corpus Mendoza Instituto de Energías Renovables Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Priv. Xochicalco S/N, Temixco, Morelos, 62580 México. Prof. A. Di Carlo Institute of Structure of Matter (ISM) National Research Council (CNR) via del Fosso de Cavaliere 100, 00133 Rome, Italy. J. G. C., A. D. and F. M. contributed equally. Keywords: thin film photovoltaics, organic solar modules, hybrid perovskite/organic tandem modules, Isc matching, cell width. Abstract Photocurrent matching in conventional monolithic tandem solar cells is achieved by choosing semiconductors with complementary absorption spectra and by carefully adjusting the optical properties of the complete top and bottom stacks. However, for thin film photovoltaic technologies at the module level, another design variable significantly alleviates the task of photocurrent matching, namely the cell width, whose modification can be readily realized by the adjustment of the module layout. Herein we demonstrate this concept at the experimental level for the first time for a 2T-mechanically stacked perovskite (FAPbBr3)/organic (PM6:Y6:PCBM) tandem mini-module, an unprecedented approach for these emergent photovoltaic technologies fabricated in an independent manner. An excellent Isc matching is achieved by tuning the cell widths of the perovskite and organic modules to 7.22 mm (PCEPVKT- mod= 6.69%) and 3.19 mm (PCEOPV-mod= 12.46%), respectively, leading to a champion efficiency of 14.94% for the tandem module interconnected in series with an aperture area of 20.25 cm2. Rather than demonstrating high efficiencies at the level of small lab cells, our successful experimental proof-of-concept at the module level proves to be particularly useful to couple devices with non-complementary semiconductors, either in series or in parallel electrical connection, hence overcoming the limitations imposed by the monolithic structure. 1. Introduction More than 13 years after the first report of the application of perovskites in mesoscopic solar cells, the photovoltaic technology based on this groundbreaking material has approached levels of maturity that may allow their introduction into the market of renewable energies in the short- to mid-term. The ever-growing interest in this particular kind of hybrid organic- inorganic semiconductor material has been firmly grounded on several physical and chemical properties, such as strong light absorption, long charge carrier diffusion lengths, bandgap tunability, distinctively high defect tolerance, and others. Furthermore, the possibility to deposit perovskite thin films over large areas by a wide variety of relatively low-cost solution- based methods, like slot-die coating, spray coating and doctor blading, makes them considerably attractive from an industrial perspective. Currently, state-of-the-art perovskite and silicon solar cells have achieved outstanding power conversion efficiencies of 26.0% and 26.81%, respectively. However, in order to have the possibility of fabricating highly efficient solar photovoltaic devices with wide absorption spectra and minimized charge carrier thermalization losses, perovskites have been integrated with silicon solar cells in tandem devices to obtain unprecedented efficiencies as high as 33.7%. Their coupling is usually done in a 2-terminal interconnection (2T), where the photocurrents generated by both sub-cells must be equal so that their voltages add up to deliver the highest possible power. In principle, a 4-terminal (4T) tandem configuration would also be possible, in which the total efficiency equals the sum of the individual efficiencies delivered by the top and bottom cells without restrictions on either Isc or Voc matching. However, it entails the need to employ additional wirings and inverters that would lead to increased material expenditures . Although perovskite/silicon tandem solar cells are the frontrunners for commercialization in the short- to mid-terms, it is also possible to combine perovskites with other semiconductors like copper-indium-gallium selenide (CIGS), gallium arsenide, perovskites, and organic materials. The combination of a wide bandgap perovskite with a narrow bandgap organic module opens new fields of application, as it will allow the design of tandem devices with high average visual transmission, due to the excitonic nature of organic semiconductors. In the conventional, series-connected 2T monolithic architecture the top and bottom sub-cells are fabricated using the same lateral layout, being joined by an interconnecting layer where the carriers of opposite charge recombine to maintain the electrical neutrality within the device. In this case, at least two independent problems arise: 1) depositing the top module may damage one or several layers of the bottom module unless an impermeable indium-tin oxide (ITO) layer and/or a buffer film is employed, such as SnO2 deposited by atomic layer deposition (ALD), due to the polar solvents used to process the perovskite film of the upper module, and 2) as the cells in both modules have exactly the same areas, the only parameter available for matching the currents of the two sub-modules are the thicknesses of the respective active layers. This limits the resulting tandem efficiency, especially for large differences in the bandgaps of the top and bottom active layers, as is the case for tandem modules designed for providing a high average visible transmittance (AVT). Furthermore, in real world applications, the daily variations of light intensity, incidence angle and temperatures in different regions make it even more difficult to keep the Jsc matching required to obtain the maximum performance. We demonstrate herein how both problems can be eliminated by fabricating perovskite and organic sub-modules individually and stacking them subsequently. Based on earlier reports theorizing the possibility to adjust the cell size or number of cells to match the currents of perovskite and silicon or CIGS modules as well as theoretical models to forecast the performance of perovskite/silicon tandems under different outdoor conditions, we make use of the linear relationship between the short circuit current, Isc, and the active areas of the individual cells of the sub-modules to match the photocurrents delivered by a semitransparent wide-bandgap perovskite module based on FAPbBr3 (Eg= 2.28 eV) to that of an opaque organic module based on the ternary system PM6:Y6:PCBM (Eg= 1.39 eV). If the cell areas in both sub-modules were identical, as would be the case for monolithic tandem modules, the large difference in the bandgaps of these semiconductors would impede the realization of efficient tandems in a monolithic architecture due to the significant photocurrent mismatch, the tandem Isc being limited by the perovskite sub-module. However, by fabricating the sub-modules independently and connecting them in series, we accomplish an excellent Isc matching by combining a 6-cell top perovskite and a 13-cell bottom organic mini-module, both having an aperture area of 20.25 cm2 and cell widths of 7.22 mm and 3.19 mm, respectively, thus leading to a champion tandem efficiency of 14.94%. Furthermore, the similarity of the Voc of these mini-modules enables their connection in parallel, leading to an efficiency of 14.11%, which is also higher than the individual sub- module efficiencies. To the best of our knowledge, these results represent the first experimental demonstration of successful Isc matching of thin film photovoltaic modules fabricated in separate production lines, a unique advantage of the mechanically-stacked tandems that lead to higher efficiencies than the monolithic structure for non-complementary semiconductors. The concept demonstrated herein can be extended to match the Isc or the Voc of bigger modules with already optimized deposition conditions, thus circumventing the need to carefully optimize each of the layers comprising a monolithic tandem. Moreover, the replacement of interconnecting layers with simple wire-based connections offers the possibility to simplify the manufacturing process, reduce the fabrication costs, and decrease the optical and electric losses associated with interconnecting layers. Hence, this strategy opens new horizons to simplify the fabrication of tandem modules, and at the same time enables a wider selection of light absorbing materials. 2. Results and Discussion The concept of individual cell widths in bottom and top modules is explained as follows. The general structure of our 2T-interconnected perovskite/organic tandem solar modules is depicted in Figure 1a, which contrasts with the conventional monolithic architecture shown in Figure 1b. The photocurrent generated in the tandem module is collected from the terminals of both sub-modules, which are interconnected by means of electrical wiring. The Voc of the interconnected tandem equals the sum of the individual Voc of the perovskite (Voc,PVK) and organic (Voc,f-OPV) modules and, in order to reach the highest possible efficiency, the short- circuit current generated by the top semitransparent perovskite module (Isc,PVK) must equal the Isc of the organic module (Isc,f-OPV) exposed to sunlight filtered by the top module. Here, the filtering effect imparted to the bottom organic module refers to two aspects: 1) the absorption of the short-wavelength range of the electromagnetic spectrum by the top perovskite module, and 2) the decrease in the light intensity resulting from the absorption and reflection occurring in the top perovskite module. (a) (b) with semitransparent electrodes in the upper perovskite module, and (b) monolithic architecture with a recombination layer. According to Kirchhoff’s laws, the electrical current flowing through each of the elements connected in series is the same. In the case of an ideal solar module, i.e. with infinitely high shunt resistance and low series resistance, the total current is the same as the current photogenerated in each of its constituting cells. A linear relationship exists between the photocurrent generated in a solar cell and its active area, which in turn varies linearly with the cell width for a constant cell length (A= width x length). From this it follows that the total current delivered by a module can be adjusted by varying the width of its constituting cells, hence making it possible to simplify the process of current matching of two modules to fabricate a 2T mechanically stacked tandem module. This additional degree of freedom is unique to the mechanically stacked tandem architecture, an advantage that can be conveniently applied at the industrial level. The electric current Isc,PVK of the perovskite sub-module is obtained as the product of the short circuit current density (Jsc,PVK), which increases with the thickness of the FAPbBr3 film, and the active area (Aac,PVK) of its individual cells. Since all the cells have the same length, the active area is directly proportional to the cell width (wac,PVK). Likewise, the electric current delivered by the bottom organic module depends on the light transmitted by the perovskite module, the thickness of the PM6:Y6:PCBM film (dOPV) and the cell width (wac,f-OPV). The intensity of light transmitted to the bottom organic module is also reduced by the parasitic absorption and reflection across the layers comprising the top perovskite module, especially by the FTO and ITO films employed as the top and bottom electrodes, respectively, as observed in Figure 1a. For a given semiconductor employed in the bottom cell of a monolithic tandem, the condition necessary to attain the highest possible efficiency is to choose a wide bandgap cell that absorbs high-energy photons more efficiently than the bottom semiconductor, hence reducing the excess energy lost as heat (e.g. thermalization losses) in the latter for E > Eg. In a working device, this is reflected by a maximization of both the tandem Jsc and Voc, which is only achieved by a specific combination of wide and narrow bandgaps. The tandem is thus designed to have semiconductors with complementary bandgaps. For example, the specific wide bandgap that complements the bandgap of silicon (1.12 eV) is within the range 1.68-1.70 eV, as demonstrated by the highly efficient tandems fabricated by Mariotti et al.. As shown in Figure S1, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of semitransparent perovskite and opaque organic cells based on FAPbBr3 and PM6:Y6:PCBM display absorption onsets at 544 nm (Eg= 2.28 eV) and 892 nm (Eg= 1.39 eV), respectively. According to efficiency maps previously reported for a 2T interconnection, the complementary perovskite/OPV bandgap pair for FAPbBr3 would be 2.28 eV/1.77 eV and 1.93 eV/1.39 eV for PM6:Y6:PCBM, which means that our tandem fabricated with these two active layers will have non- complementary bandgaps. Nonetheless, given a certain film thickness of the FAPbBr3 layer in the semitransparent perovskite module, it is possible to match its Isc to that of the organic PM6:Y6:PCBM module by adjusting the cell widths, as is demonstrated in the following with optical simulations and experiments. 2.1. Optical simulations In order to assess the design flexibility enabled by the adjustment of the cell width to match the module photocurrents, we perform optical simulations based on the transfer matrix method. The optical constants of the films comprising the individual modules are given in Figure S2, and the full details of the method are provided in the Supporting Information. Two cases are considered to attain the current matching, 1) monolithic tandem cell, where only the variation of the film thickness or optical density (OD) is possible (same active area for both cells, as seen in Figure 2a and 2b), and 2) our tandem concept, where the cell area (i.e. width) of the bottom organic cell is adjusted alongside the OD of the perovskite and organic films to achieve the desired Isc matching. Figure S3a illustrates the OD spectra of the FAPbBr3 and PM6:Y6:PCBM (at 620 nm) films with thicknesses of 150 nm and 110 nm, respectively and density of their respective active layers. (a) (b) (c) (d) active areas (wPVKT = wOPV), (b) 2T-tandem efficiency for equal cell dimensions as a function of the film optical density, (c) Tandem device with varying organic cell width to achieve current matching for fixed perovskite cell dimensions (wPVKT ≠ wOPV), and (d) the corresponding 2T- tandem efficiency map. The efficiencies were calculated by considering the lowest Isc, the sum of the individual Voc and the fill factor was calculated by considering the resistance losses as a function of the cell width. Full details are shown in the Supporting Information. In the case of a monolithic interconnection, the cell areas of both cells are equal (as shown in encountered in all of the tandem solar cells and modules reported so far. Consequently, as observed in Figure 2b, a perfect Isc matching and a maximum tandem efficiency marginally above 11% can be obtained for an organic film with OD620 nm larger than 0.27, which corresponds to a film thicknesses higher than 53 nm that should be combined with a FAPbBr3 film of OD higher than 1.42. The deposition of such ~50 nm-thick PM6:Y6:PCBM films would severely compromise the performance of the organic module due to the increased risk of formation of pinholes, especially when larger substrate areas are considered. At OD620 nm lower than 0.27 (tOPV < 53 nm), the cells of the organic module would deliver a current lower than that of the perovskite module, that is, Jsc,f-OPV/Jsc,PVK < 1 (see Figure S4a) hence deviating from the ideal condition necessary for a series interconnection. However, if the OD620 nm of the organic film is significantly larger, the photocurrent delivered by the organic module will be larger than that of the top module regardless of the perovskite film thickness (Jsc,f-OPV/Jsc,PVK > 1). In this case, the performance of the tandem module is always limited by the perovskite module regardless of the thickness of the PM6:Y6:PCBM active layer and, therefore, the highest attainable efficiency remains at the 11% threshold. These findings highlight one of the major shortcomings of monolithic tandems, which are built on the same substrate and therefore confine the top and bottom cells to the same active area. The maximum performance that can be attained with this specific perovskite/organic pair is considerably limited by the restrictive set of processing variables, i.e. only the film thicknesses of the layers within the stack can be adjusted. In stark contrast, if the cell width of the organic sub-module is adjusted alongside the OD of both active layers, as shown in Figures 2c and 2d, the processing window of the bottom organic layer is widened to reach higher efficiencies. Importantly, for different cell areas or widths of the perovskite and organic modules, the ratio Isc,f-OPV/Isc,PVK does not equal the ratio Jsc,f- OPV/Jsc,PVK, which is the distinctive case proposed in this work. Nevertheless, if the perovskite and organic modules have the same module area and deliver the same electric current, then the requirement for a series interconnection remains: [Jsc,PVK]module = [Jsc,f-OPV]module, while at the same time [Jsc,PVK]cell ≠ [Jsc,f-OPV]cell. Our optical simulations in Figure 2d demonstrate that tandem efficiencies higher than 14% are obtained for modules having organic films with optical densities ranging between the intervals 0.58-0.80 and 1.62-1.87, which correspond to film thicknesses between 126-179 nm and 373- 433 nm, respectively. Such an organic film would have to be combined with a perovskite film with OD higher than 1.56. Preferably, the organic film thickness should lie within the first range to avoid recombination losses and their resultant lower fill factor. In fact, the range found in our simulations is close to the PM6:Y6:PCBM film thickness (~110 nm) leading to organic solar modules with record efficiencies, as reported by Distler et al.. In the present case of adjustable cell widths, the efficiency of the tandem is no longer limited by the Isc of the perovskite module, since the Isc of the organic module can be conveniently tuned to attain the ideal current matching. Figure S4b displays the cell width of the OPV module necessary to achieve the current matching with the semitransparent perovskite module, while the Figure S5 displays the losses related to the geometric fill factor, resistance and efficiency resulting from an increasing organic cell width. The additional degree of freedom demonstrated herein at the module level, i.e. photocurrent matching via the cell adjustment, will alleviate the design of mechanically stacked tandems that do not impose the necessity to deposit an energy- and time-consuming recombination layer. Furthermore, this strategy enables the matching of modules with non-complementary semiconductors, being solely based on a geometrical optimization related to module patterning without varying the delicate equilibrium of the cell stack composition, sequence and thickness as performed in a conventional 2T tandem design. Based on our optical simulations, in the following we provide experimental evidence that validates the strategy proposed in this work. 2.2. Perovskite/organic tandem solar modules 2.2.1. Individual module design In order to prove the concept described above, different tandem modules were fabricated, consisting of a 6-cell semitransparent wide-bandgap FAPbBr3 perovskite module and PM6:Y6:PCBM organic solar modules with different cell widths corresponding to 12 and 13 cells connected in series. The FAPbBr3 modules have high average visible transmittance (AVT ~60%) and high geometric fill factor (>97%). Likewise, the PM6:Y6:PCBM modules show outstanding FF values above 73% and GFF above 96%. Table 1 summarizes the geometrical characteristics of the perovskite and organic modules and Figure 3 displays photographs of a perovskite module and the tandem stack during the measurements. Further experimental details are provided in the Supporting Information. The bandgaps of the perovskite and organic active layers were calculated from their respective EQE spectra as reported by Almora et al. and organic solar modules used for the fabrication of tandems. Module Eg ncells Aac,cell wac,cell wIC AT, active AT, inactive Atotal GFF (eV) (cm2) (mm) (μm) (cm2) (cm2) (cm2) (%) ST-Perovskite 2.28 6 3.32 7.38 160 0.44 PM6:Y6:PCBM 1.39 12 1.63 3.63 150 0.64 13 1.43 3.19 150 1.60 Aac,cell and wac,cell- active area and width of each cell, wIC- width of the interconnects, AT,active- total active area, AT,inactive- total inactive area, Atotal- total module (or aperture) area, GFF- Geometric Fill Factor. (a) (b) (c) perovskite/organic tandem solar module with the interconnect lines arranged in a perpendicular orientation, and (c) measurement set up under 100 mW/cm2 illumination and continuous N2 flow. 2.2.2. Cell width of the organic solar modules fabricated with organic solar modules having 12 and 13 cells. The experimental results of the tandems connected in series are compared to the parameters expected for infinitely high shunt resistances, namely the lowest Isc between the perovskite and filtered organic module, the sum of the individual Voc and the average FF. The power conversion efficiency shown in Table 2 refers to the total aperture area, i.e. 20.25 cm2, instead of the total active area. Figure 4 displays the current-voltage characteristics of the individual modules as well as those of the tandems connected in series and parallel. The first aspects to notice are the difference in the Isc of the semitransparent perovskite and filtered organic modules as well as the effect of the relative current mismatch on the tandem efficiency. As depicted in Figure 4a and in Table 2, the Isc of the organic module with 3.63 mm-wide (twelve) cells is larger than the Isc of the perovskite module by a percentual mismatch (% ΔIsc) of 8.92% with respect to the perovskite device. That is, the Isc of the top perovskite module limits the Isc of the tandem connected in series, although the latter (21.51 mA) is higher than the expected value of 20.40 mA. On the other hand, in accordance with Figure 4b, the Isc of the organic module containing 3.19 mm-wide (thirteen) solar cells is only ΔIsc= 2.61% lower than the Isc of the perovskite module. That is, there is a 3.42-fold improvement of the Isc matching by reducing the cell width from 3.63 mm to 3.19 mm, which has the advantage of having one more cell to improve the tandem Voc and also a higher FF due to a smaller current flowing through the ITO electrode. The fine tuning of the sub-module Isc attainable with this strategy is unique to the mechanically stacked 2T architecture, since for a monolithic tandem only the layer thicknesses of the active layers can be adjusted to get the photocurrent matching. cell width or number of cells in the organic module. The numbers on blue and light orange backgrounds are relevant to the series and parallel interconnection, respectively. Module Jsc Isc Voc Impp Vmpp Pmpp FF PCEmod (mA/cm2) (mA) (V) (mA) (V) (mW) (%) (%) OPV with 12 cells (3.63 mm) ST-Perovskite 6.15 9.17 7.16 6.11 Organic (filtered) 8.87 6.78 6.45 Organic 9.57 7.06 Tandem Series Experimental 1.06 Expected 1.01 Parallel Experimental 2.12 9.01 6.87 Expected 2.10 9.01 OPV with 13 cells (3.19 mm) ST-Perovskite 6.46 9.20 7.16 6.36 Organic (filtered) 8.57 7.53 Organic 8.88 Tandem Series Experimental 1.04 Expected 1.03 Parallel Experimental 2.11 7.80 Expected 2.09 9.93 Noteworthy, we observed that the tandem Isc and FF are very close to the average of both modules. This effect is due to a relatively low shunt resistance of the module with the highest Isc, which leads to current leakage that increases the current that can be delivered by the tandem module. To demonstrate this observation, we simulated the behavior of a perovskite/organic tandem module connected in series in LTspice, whose equivalent electric circuit is displayed in individual sub-modules, a one-diode model was employed including elements corresponding to series (Rs) and shunt resistances (Rsh). When Rsh is relatively low for both sub-modules, the tandem Isc tends to locate in between the individual Isc, which fully supports our experimental results. However, for infinitely high (or high enough) Rsh, the tandem Isc equals the lowest Isc, as expected from Kirchhoff’s law (see Figure S6b). The latter effect on the short circuit current has been observed in previous reports, as shown in Table S3. Additionally, in our perovskite/organic tandem configuration we noticed a negligible contribution in the Isc of the perovskite module from the light reflected at the surface of the substrate of the organic module and its silver electrodes. As observed in Table S4, the Jsc,cell of a semitransparent FAPbBr3 module had a minor increase from 6.45 mA/cm2 to 6.66 mA/cm2, which precludes any significant contribution of the back reflection from the organic module. (a) (b) connected in series and parallel. The organic solar modules have cell widths of (a) 3.63 mm (12 cells) and (b) 3.19 mm (13 cells). For the two types of organic modules, the Voc of the tandem in series is slightly higher than the expected value, pointing to small (e.g. temperature-induced) variations in the individual Voc values during the measurements. Nevertheless, the high tandem Voc attained during our measurements proves the excellent interconnection in series without the need to employ a recombination layer, which is required in 2T monolithic tandems to keep the electric neutrality within the device. As seen in Figure 3c, our mechanically stacked modules were simply connected with electrical clamps, a straightforward strategy that would facilitate the fabrication of tandems at a large scale. These results support the known fact that the photocurrent from devices forming a tandem in series connection must have a mismatch as small as possible, which then as a consequence maximizes the tandem Voc and the FF, as seen in the Table 2. We demonstrate herein that this is readily doable by making the appropriate modifications in the module layout. The efficiency of the tandems employing 12 cell- and 13 cell-organic solar modules are equal to 12.75% and 14.34%, respectively, which is a noticeable improvement with respect to the standalone perovskite and organic modules that is in line with our optical simulations. The device performance of a tandem fabricated with the 13-cell module was further raised to 14.82% when a FAPbBr3 module with slightly higher Voc and FF was employed, as seen in recorded when the voltage step size of the I-V scan increased from 50 mV to 176 mV, hence making it possible to deliver a power slightly higher than 300 mW, as shown in the Figure S8. In an attempt to increase the FF of the perovskite/organic tandems, we connected the 13-cell organic module to a perovskite module deposited on an FTO substrate with lower sheet resistance (Tec 7), which effectively led to a tandem FF of 71.16% as shown in Figure S9, that resulted from a higher parasitic light absorption from the thicker FTO film. Regarding the connection in parallel, we observed that it is also possible to match the Voc of the individual modules by adjusting their cell width. The Voc of the tandem (9.01 V) with a 12- cell organic module was almost exactly the average of the perovskite and filtered organic modules, while its Isc and FF were equal to 43.02 mA (0.96% higher than the sum of the individual perovskite and filtered organic Isc) and 65.96%, respectively, leading to an efficiency of 12.63%. Although the tandem with the 13-cell module has a larger Voc mismatch, its higher efficiency of 13.96% is largely the result of an additional cell that overcompensates the slightly lower Isc and FF compared to those of the tandem with the 12-cell organic module. In the case of the 13-cell module, the tandem Voc of 10.10 V is closer to the highest Voc, which is delivered by the filtered organic module. This is due to the series resistance of the individual modules and can be rationalized by analyzing their I-V curves in the vicinity of their respective Voc, as shown in Figure S10. Our results regarding the parallel interconnection provide experimental evidence that would help in the design of efficient 2T-mechanically stacked tandem modules with reduced sensitivity to sudden changes in the radiation intensity or temperature, which in turn drive away the Isc matching. This is one of the known shortcomings of the series connection in the unpredictable conditions inherent in real-world applications. Although we observe that the tandems connected in series tend to have a higher power conversion efficiency than the parallel configuration in the static, controlled illumination and temperature in the laboratory, it would be necessary to conduct a similar study outdoors to evaluate with certainty which configuration is the best for a determined application. For example, a parallel configuration could be preferred in partial shading conditions or in climates where non-uniform illumination is prevalent, which would allow the current generated by the illuminated cells to bypass the shaded cells. Further studies may also consider the implementation of encapsulating materials to compare the performance of protected and unprotected tandem modules against multiple environmental factors such as moisture, oxygen, heat, and light. 3. Conclusion Based on simulations and experiments, we have proven that it is possible to fabricate perovskite/organic tandem modules with matched photocurrents and voltages via the adjustment of their cell width. This concept allows the independent fabrication of each sub- module, which avoids the risk of damaging the bottom module during the deposition of the top module, eliminates the requirement to deposit a recombination layer and adds a degree of freedom to the adjustment of the film thickness or optical density. To experimentally demonstrate this strategy, we combined a semitransparent, wide-bandgap FAPbBr3 module with a narrow-bandgap PM6:Y6:PCBM module having efficiencies of 6.69% and 12.46%, respectively, to obtain a tandem module with efficiency of 14.94% on an aperture area of 20.25 cm2. The focus of this contribution has been placed on the successful proof-of-concept of matching the Isc and Voc of thin film photovoltaic modules rather than the attainment of high efficiencies, which is commonplace for tandem solar cells with small active areas (≤ 1.0 cm2) and complementary bandgaps. In contrast to the geometrically fixed monolithic structure, our findings show that adjusting the cell width for the development of mechanically-stacked tandem modules lead to higher efficiencies if non-complementary semiconductors are at hand. The enhanced design flexibility and independent fabrication enabled by this concept opens new opportunities in the design of semitransparent tandem modules for application in windows or greenhouses, whose visual transmittance can be conveniently adjusted by using a wider range of semiconductors. Experimental Section Semitransparent wide-bandgap perovskite modules Materials Anhydrous dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) (99.9%), Ethyl acetate (99%, anhydrous), Titanium diisopropoxide (bis-acetylacetonate), Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide salt (Li- TFSI) (99.95%), 4-tert-butyl pyridine (tBP, 96%), Niobium ethoxide was purchased from Sigma Aldrich. PbBr2 (99.99%) was purchased by TCI Chemical. Formamidinium bromide (FABr, 99.98%), neo-Pentylammonium chloride, iso-Pentylammonium chloride were purchased from Great Cell Materials. PTAA (10kDa) was purchased from Solaris Chem. Tin(IV) oxide, 15% in H2O colloidal dispersion was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Device Fabrication Transparent perovskite solar modules have been fabricated using patterned FTO substrates (2.2 mm-thick TEC15 Pilkington, 15 Ω/square) on 60x60 mm2 substrate area by using picosecond pulsed laser (Wophotonics, Yb:KGW, λ = 355 nm, 5 ps, pulsed at 2000 kHz with a fluence per pulse for P1 lines equal to 40.85 mJ cm-2). The patterned substrates were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath, using de-ionized water and soap and finally IPA (10 min for each cleaning step). The 40 nm-thick TiO2 compact layer (c-TiO2) is deposited by spray pyrolysis at 460°C starting from a precursor solution made up of titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate), acetylacetone and ethanol in a 3:2:45 volume ratio. 2% Nb doping is made by adding Niobium Ethoxide in the precursor solution. SnO2 nanoparticle-based ink at 1:20 v/v in deionized water is deposited on Nb:TiO2 coated substrate using spin coating at 3000 rpm for 20s. Then, the substrates are annealed at 120°C for 20 minutes. After the annealing, the substrates are transferred to a nitrogen filled glovebox for the perovskite deposition. A stoichiometric perovskite solution (FAPbBr3) is prepared by mixing 1 M PbBr2 and 1 M FaBr in DMSO solvent. An ionic liquid precursor is added to the FAPbBr3 solution before use. Then, the FAPbBr3 perovskite films are deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 20s using the solvent quenching method on warm substrates (60°C). Ethyl acetate (200 μl) is dropped after 10 seconds. The samples are then annealed at 80°C for 10 minutes. Neo-Pentylammonium chloride (NEO) and iso-Pentylammonium chloride (ISO) solutions are prepared at a 1 mg/ml concentration in 2-propanol and then mixed 1:1 v/v for 2D surface passivation. The mixed solution is deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 20 s. The PTAA solution was prepared by dissolving 10 mg of the PTAA powder in 1 ml of toluene solvent and doped using TBP (10 μl/ml) and Li-TFSI (5 μl/ml, stock solution: 170 mg/ml in acetonitrile). The PTAA films are deposited by spin coating at 4000 rpm for 20 seconds. P2 ablation is performed by placing 6 lines beside different fluences of ~1 mJ cm-2 difference, with an average fluence per pulse of 29.06 mJ cm-2. Low temperature ITO deposition was performed by using an industrial in-line magnetron sputtering (KENOSISTEC S.R.L., KS 400 In-Line) at 1.1x10-3 mbar and 90 W RF power. Inert Ar gas is purged in the chamber (40 sccm) during the ITO deposition to activate the Ar+ plasma. The sample holder is moved below the ITO cathode at a 120 cm/min speed for 200 cycles to achieve 220 nm as thickness. The P3 ablation is performed by a single line with fluence per pulse of 21.23 mJ cm-2. The module layout was scribed on a 60x60 mm2 substrate, formed by 6 series-connected cells with 7.38 mm*45 mm cell width and height, 160 μm-wide P1-P2-P3 interconnection, 19.926 cm2 active area and 97.83% geometrical fill factor. An antireflection coating of porous Al2O3 was deposited by spin coating a 5 wt% dispersion of Al2O3 nanoparticles in 2-propanol at 3000 rpm for 30s. After spin coating, the film was dried at 80°C for 2 minutes. The porosity of the film reduces the refractive index compared to bulk Al2O3 and provide a facile method to reduce the reflections at the ITO/air interface. Organic solar modules Materials The inverted structure was chosen for the OPV modules in this work. The layer stack was glass/ITO/ZnO/PM6:Y6:PC61BM/MoOx/Ag. 6 cm x 6 cm glass substrates coated with indium tin oxide (ITO) with a sheet resistance of 15 Ω/□ were purchased form VisionTek. Zinc Oxide (ZnO) nanoparticle dispersion (N-10;2.5 wt.-% in isopropanol) was purchased from Avantama. Derthon OPV. -phnyl-C61-butytic acid methyl ester (PC61BM) was purchased from Nano- C. Silver (Ag) was purchased from Evochem. Device fabrication The laser patterning of the solar modules, “P1”, “P2” and “P3”, was conducted by means of a Spirit 1040-8 SHG laser from Spectra Physics (Pmax= 6 W, λ =520 nm) with a femtosecond pulse width in combination with a galvanometer scanner with f-theta lens and a focal length of 506 mm. The module fabrication process was carried out as follows: The glass/ITO substrates were “P1” laser patterned with the fs-laser, followed by a cleaning step with a microfiber tissue and toluene. N-10 was coated with a doctor blade and annealed for 30 minutes at 200 °C in ambient atmosphere. PM6:Y6:PC61BM (1:1,1:0.1, 20 mg/ml in chloroform) was stirred at room temperature for 2 hours in a nitrogen-filled glovebox before being coated in air with a doctor blade using the following processing parameters: 120 μl of solution are injected into a 400 μm gap between substrate and blade (both heated to 30 °C). Coating with 5-10 mm/s formed a fast-drying wet film, that covered the substrate completely. The resulting dry films had a maximum optical density between 0.50 and 0.60. The devices were subsequently annealed at 110 °C for 10 minutes under inert atmosphere. Subsequently, 10-nm MoOx were thermally evaporated, followed by the “P2” laser patterning step. Finally, 50-nm Ag were thermally evaporated, followed by the “P3” laser patterning step. The current–voltage characteristics of all the modules were recorded with a precision source measurement unit (B2901A by Keysight) under illumination by a class AAA solar simulator (LOT) providing an AM1.5G spectrum with an intensity of 100 mW/cm2, which was calibrated by employing a silicon reference cell. The tandem configuration of the perovskite and organic modules was realized by placing the organic solar module underneath the perovskite module, which was mounted on a glass cover by using stripes of sticky tape on the edges of the substrate far from the active area. The constituting cells of the semitransparent, top mini-module based on the wide band gap perovskite FAPbBr3 were oriented perpendicularly with respect to those of the bottom organic module, as observed in the Figure 4b of the main text. In contrast to the parallel orientation, in this geometrical arrangement the light shining through the almost fully transparent interconnecting regions of the top perovskite module is equally distributed over the serially connected cells of the organic bottom sub-module. During the I-V measurements, the performance of the individual as well as the tandem solar modules was recorded while keeping both devices inside a closed metallic box, in which a constant N2 flow was maintained throughout the complete procedure. Sticky bus bars were attached to the module terminals to extract the photocurrent via wiring with electric clips, as seen in the Figure 4c. The average and standard deviation of the photovoltaic parameters of the tandems were calculated over three consecutive I-V scans in reverse bias, whereas the measurements for the individual organic modules were performed in forward bias. The latter were exposed to light soaking for about 30 s before the beginning of the measurements. To decrease the hysteresis and enhance the performance of the semitransparent wide bandgap perovskite modules, I-V scans in forward and reverse bias were recorded, followed by maximum power point tracking for 2 min and finally another round of I-V measurements in the same sequence were performed. When analyzed individually, a piece of black cardboard was placed at the bottom of the perovskite module (on the sputtered ITO electrode) to isolate its Isc from any light reflection coming from the metallic box. We observed a negligible impact on its Isc when the black cardboard was replaced by an organic module, as shown below. Supporting Information Supporting Information is available from the author. Author contributions J. G. C., A. D. and F. M. contributed equally. H.-J. E., C. J. B., and A. D. C. conceived the idea, supervised the project, revised and corrected the manuscript. J.G.C. made the filtering experiments, the preliminary module design for tandems, the tandem interconnection, the simulations in LTspice and wrote the manuscript. A. D. and R. B. fabricated the organic solar modules. A.D. performed the electrical simulations in COMSOL Multiphysics. F. M. fabricated the semitransparent perovskite modules. K. F. performed the optical simulations. L. A. C. optimized the lasering conditions for the perovskite modules. F. J. measured the optical properties of the films comprising the perovskite modules. M. W., F. B., F. Y., N. L., and A. N. C. M., revised and corrected the manuscript. Acknowledgments J.G.C. gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (DAAD) through a doctoral scholarship. The authors acknowledge the “Solar Factory of the Future” as part of the Energy Campus Nürnberg (EnCN), which is supported by the Bavarian State Government (FKZ 20.2-3410.5-4-5). We acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the grant agreement No. 101007084 (CITYSOLAR). H.-J. E. and C. J. B. acknowledge funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 INFRAIA program under Grant Agreement No. 101008701 (‘EMERGE’). Part of this work has been supported by the Helmholtz Association in the framework of the innovation platform “Solar TAP”. Conflicts of Interest The authors declare no conflict of interest. Data Availability Statement The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request.