Multiband strong-coupling superconductors with spontaneously broken time-reversal symmetry Niels Henrik Aase, Kristian MГҰland, and Asle SudbГёвҲ— Center for Quantum Spintronics, Department of Physics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway We study superconducting three-band systems within strong-coupling Eliashberg theory. In particular, we search for phase-frustrated superconducting systems with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB) states. The emergence of TRSB states in multiband systems has so far been studied using micro- scopic weak-coupling BCS theory or more phenomenological effective field theories such as multi-component Ginzburg-Landau theories. For systems with three disjoint Fermi surfaces whose electrons experience inter- actions mediated by phonons, we present a microscopic analysis showing that TRSB states also exist within a strong-coupling microscopic theory. The systems we consider have sizable electron-phonon couplings, putting them into the strong-coupling regime. They are thus a fitting description for strong-coupling materials such as some of the iron pnictides. Moreover, as the TRSB states are challenging to find numerically, we calculate the free energy of multiband systems within strong-coupling theory and make explicit use of it to pin down the TRSB statesвҖҷ elusive nature. Since Eliashberg theory is well incorporated with first-principles calculations, our strong-coupling approach might help facilitate a more efficient search for candidate materials that can exhibit TRSB. I. INTRODUCTION Superconductors represent a remarkable quantum state of matter where photons acquire a mass through the Higgs mech- anism (the Meissner effect) when metals are cooled below their critical temperature. When combined with spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking (TRSB), this extraordinary quantum state exhibits even more fascinating features due to the interplay between multiple broken symmetries. TRSB may occur in multiband superconductors where several bands (more than two) cross the Fermi surface. Many multiband superconductors exist [1вҖ“5], including several relatively high- temperature superconductors [6вҖ“9], indicative of some strong pairing glue between electrons being operative. So far, the- oretical studies of TRSB in multiband superconductors have been carried out using either Ginzburg-Landau theory [10вҖ“ 16] or a more microscopic weak-coupling BCS theory [17вҖ“ 19]. Given that many of the TRSB systems of interest are sus- pected to be strong-coupling superconductors, this motivates similar studies within the framework of a strong-coupling ap- proach to superconductivity. An elegant approach to strong-coupling Eliashberg theory was recently realized . It utilizes the imaginary-time functional integral formalism , typically employed to derive effective field theories of interacting condensed mat- ter systems. The original microscopic theory for supercon- ductivity is easily derived using these field-theory tech- niques. Such a treatment sets the stage for systematic stud- ies of higher-order corrections within the BCS paradigm and has been extensively used. However, the retardation effects required to obtain the physical picture of electrons with at- tractive interactions mediated by lattice vibrations necessitate a dynamical interaction which is absent in BCS theory. This is remedied in Eliashberg theory [24вҖ“26], with the additional benefit that the strong-coupling regimes can be probed. While MigdalвҖҷs theorem may pose some limitations on strong-coupling Eliashberg theory, recent studies have found вҲ— Corresponding author: asle.sudbo@ntnu.no ways of accounting for it by means of vertex corrections . Moreover, there is also a case to be made that sur- passing the Migdal limit is not necessarily a hindrance to cap- turing the relevant physics at play . Regardless of the precise nature of the breakdown of Eliashberg theory, the practice of pushing it far into the strong-coupling regime is widespread, and the results obtained often corroborate exper- imental findings in materials with a sizable electron-phonon coupling. So with the advantages of Eliashberg theory and especially its applicability to strong-coupling systems, Ref. represents a significant step forward as it derives Eliash- berg theory using a functional-integral approach, thus opening the door to more sophisticated field-theoretic treatments pre- viously reserved mainly for BCS theory. The novel functional-integral approach to Eliashberg theory has already been employed in several models, e.g. graphene multilayers , quantum-critical models , systems that are superconducting despite experiencing instantaneous repulsion and systems of coexisting antiferromagnetism and superconductivity . In this approach, the Eliashberg equations for the various systems are derived as stationary point conditions in the action. At a stationary point, the action can be used to determine the free energy of the system, so in systems with more than one solution to the Eliashberg equa- tions, the free-energy perspective provides a simple selection criterion for such cases, namely that the stationary point with the lowest free energy should be chosen. This selection crite- rion is particularly useful in systems where several states may solve the Eliashberg equations. Such an analysis has already been put forth to understand the breakdown of Eliashberg the- ory , but other avenues remain unexplored. An uncharted area of interest in this regard is the field of multiband superconductors. Since the discovery of supercon- ductivity in MgB2 with a pronounced multigap character , as well as the superconducting iron pnictides , multiband superconductors have been intensely researched theoretically [5, 19, 41вҖ“47]. In many cases, the theoretical treatments are based on the extension of BCS theory to multi- band systems . Applying these to a two-band model for LaFeAsO1вҲ’xFx , it was found that repulsive, rather arXiv:2309.15894v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 7 Dec 2023 2 than attractive, interactions may drive the system into a su- perconducting sВұ-wave phase, where both gaps have s-wave symmetry and are of opposite sign. Despite its simplicity, the sВұ-phase explains quite well the anomalous experimental findings in multiband systems . However, in three-band systems, a novel superconducting phase may emerge, where the phase differences of the vari- ous order-parameter components are not necessarily multiples of ПҖ . These states break time-reversal symme- try (TRS) and have been shown to exhibit a number of exotic phenomena, including unconventional vortex physics and anomalous metallic states above Tc . The latter has been suggested as a possible explanation for the magnetic memory observed in TaS2 above Tc . One of the con- sequences of breaking TRS is the emergence of local sponta- neous magnetic fields , which has been experimentally measured using the muon spin relaxation technique . As previously mentioned, in most studies, multiband states with broken TRS are treated using BCS theory or by effective field theories (e.g., Ginzburg-Landau theories) derived from BCS theory following the original calculation of GorвҖҷkov . Monte Carlo simulations have been used to per- form computations using such effective theories beyond the mean-field level . However, as mentioned earlier, these multiband systems have so far not been studied in the strong-coupling regime even though the archetypical systems one might expect TRSB in, namely the superconducting iron pnictides, often involve strong coupling . It is thus of in- terest to examine the fate of TRSB states in strong coupling, and we will do so using a strong-coupling functional-integral approach, which has a saddle point equivalent to the Eliash- berg theory of superconductivity. Moreover, the ease with which first-principles calculations can be incorporated into such a strong-coupling theory can help facilitate the search for candidate materials that may host TRSB states. The structure of the paper is as follows. In Sec. II, by us- ing the functional-integral formalism, we derive the multiband Eliashberg equations and the free energy of superconducting multiband systems. In light of this, we discuss the prerequi- sites for having spontaneous TRSB states in strong coupling in Sec. III. While these two sections are general and may apply to several models, we then consider a microscopic model in IV and derive the Eliashberg equations specific to this model. In Sec. V, we first demonstrate the spontaneous breaking of TRS in strong coupling and subsequently elucidate its origin. We discuss the experimental consequences of our results and some of the advantages of employing a strong-coupling the- ory. The conclusions are finally presented in Sec. VI. II. THE FUNCTIONAL-INTEGRAL FORMALISM AND MULTIBAND ELIASHBERG THEORY The purpose of this section is to derive the free energy for multiband systems with dynamic interactions as well as the as- sociated Eliashberg equations. The latter has been carried out in the single-band case Ref. , and we will generalize these results to multiband systems. Since the derivation (and the notation) will be similar to that of Ref. , we mainly fo- cus on the parts that are different in this paper and refer to the original work for some of the more technical details. Further- more, we stress that multiband systems have been studied us- ing Eliashberg theory [60вҖ“63], so while our derivation of the Eliashberg equations using the functional integral-formalism is novel, the end result is not. With this approach, we also de- rive the free energy, which will subsequently be used to dis- cover TRSB states. Within the imaginary time functional-integral formalism, the dynamics of a multiband system of fermions is governed by the action S. If the interactions in the system are density- density interactions, one can perform Hubbard-Stratonovich (HS) decoupling in three different channels - Cooper, density, and exchange . In the interest of studying superconduc- tivity and renormalization effects, we will decompose the in- teraction into the Cooper and density channels and neglect the exchange channel. Thus, when we write down the action, we write the interacting part in a suggestive form, preparing for the HS decouplings to come. Assuming that the interactions only depend on relative coordinates (and thus only on relative momentum), the action is S[ М„ПҲ, ПҲ] = пҝҪ k пҝҪ Пғ,i + 1 2 пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ Пғ,i,j вҲ’ пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j (1) where we introduced the shorthand notation k = (Пүn, k) with Пүn being the fermionic Matsubara frequency Пүn = ПҖ(2n + 1)/ОІ and ОІ = 1/T being inverse temperature, where we use mann field representing the annihilation (creation) operator of an electron with spin Пғ belonging to band i. Оҫi(k) is the dis- persion relation Оөi(k) of band i, relative to the chemical po- tential Оҫi(k) = Оөi(k) вҲ’ Ој. We have also assumed the Cooper channel to only have pairings with opposite momentum. For the interaction Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) to be separable in the band indices as in Eq. (1), we implicitly assume that the Fermi sur- faces are disjoint. Multiple disjoint Fermi surfaces may orig- inate with having several bands crossing the Fermi energy or having a band crossing it several times, creating disjoint Fermi pockets. Several superconducting systems of current inter- est fit this description, for example, the superconducting iron pnictides and transition metal (di)chalcogenides [5, 59, 64вҖ“ 66]. In all these cases, hybridization effects stemming from the self-energy are absent, supposing that the Fermi surfaces are sufficiently well separated. With the path integral measure DПҲD М„ПҲ, the grand canon- ical partition function Z at fixed chemical potential is given by Z = пҝҪ DПҲD М„ПҲeвҲ’S[ М„ ПҲ,ПҲ] = eвҲ’ОІF , where F is the free en- ergy (or more precisely, F is the grand potential, which we take to be equal to the free energy when fixing the chemical potential) of the system. So, in keeping with conventional HS 3 decoupling, we may write 1 = пҝҪ D М„ОҰDОҰDОЈвҶ‘DОЈвҶ“ eвҲ’ пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (kвҲ’kвҖІ)[ М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ)+ 1 2 ОЈПғ i (k)ОЈПғ j (kвҖІ)], (2) where a summation over repeated spin indices is implied. The inverse interaction V вҲ’1 il (k1 вҲ’k) is a function which obeys the relation пҝҪ k пҝҪ l V вҲ’1 il (k1 вҲ’ k)Vlj(k вҲ’ k2) = Оҙk1k2Оҙij. (3) We discuss the inverse interaction in detail later. М„ОҰ, ОҰ and ОЈПғ are shifted to get rid of the quartic terms in Eq. (1), however the shifts are slightly more complicated than those of Ref. ОҰi(k) вҶ’ ОҰi(k) вҲ’ пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)ПҲjвҶ“(вҲ’kвҖІ)ПҲjвҶ‘(kвҖІ) (4a) М„ОҰi(k) вҶ’ М„ОҰi(k) вҲ’ пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vji(kвҖІ вҲ’ k) М„ПҲjвҶ‘(kвҖІ) М„ПҲjвҶ“(вҲ’kвҖІ) (4b) ОЈПғ i (k) вҶ’ ОЈПғ i (k) + i пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ) М„ПҲjПғ(kвҖІ)ПҲjПғ(kвҖІ). (4c) The imaginary shift of ОЈПғ i (k) is due to the fact that in the den- sity channel, the interaction is repulsive. Inserting Eq. (2) into Eq. (1), and subsequently employing the linear shifts in Eq. (4) while making repeated use of Eq. (3), straightforwardly yields S[ М„ПҲ, ПҲ, М„ОҰ, ОҰ, ОЈ] = пҝҪ k пҝҪ Пғ,i М„ПҲПғi(k)[вҲ’iПүn + Оөi(k) + iОЈПғ i (k)]ПҲПғi(k) вҲ’ пҝҪ k,i + пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ)[ М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ) + 1 2ОЈПғ i (k)ОЈПғ j (kвҖІ)]. (5) The action in Eq. (5) is diagonal in the electron bands and bilinear in the fermionic fields, such that we can employ the Nambu S[ М„ОЁ, ОЁ, М„ОҰ, ОҰ, ОЈ] = пҝҪ k пҝҪ i М„ОЁi(k)[вҲ’GвҲ’1 i пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ)[ М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ) + 1 2ОЈПғ i (k)ОЈПғ j (kвҖІ)], (6) where the inverse GreenвҖҷs function GвҲ’1 i is band dependent and given by GвҲ’1 i = пҝҪGвҲ’1 i,вҶ‘(k) ОҰi(k) М„ОҰi(k) вҲ’GвҲ’1 i,вҶ“(вҲ’k) пҝҪ (7) with GвҲ’1 i,Пғ(k) = GвҲ’1 0,i (k)вҲ’iОЈПғ i (k) and GвҲ’1 0,i (k) = iПүnвҲ’Оҫi(k). The first term in Eq. (6) is block-diagonal in the bands and can thus be treated in the same manner as in Ref. . The two HS terms contain the coupling between the bands and are thus responsible for the emergent multiband physics. To proceed, we integrate out the fermionic sector such that the effective action becomes S[ М„ОҰ, ОҰ, ОЈ] = вҲ’Tr ln(вҲ’ОІGвҲ’1) + пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ)[ М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ) + 1 2ОЈПғ i (k)ОЈПғ j (kвҖІ)], (8) where the trace is over momentum, frequency and band in- dices. To find the mean-field values of the HS fields, we im- pose stationary point conditions on the action and make use of the identity Оҙ ОҙПҮTr ln(f(ПҮ) = Tr[f вҲ’1(ПҮ) Оҙ ОҙПҮf(ПҮ)] to obtain (see Ref. for more details) 0 = ОҙS[ М„ОҰ, ОҰ, ОЈ] Оҙ М„ОҰi = пҝҪ kвҖІ,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ)ОҰj(kвҖІ) вҲ’ ОҰi(k) GвҲ’1 вҶ‘,i(k)GвҲ’1 вҶ“,i(вҲ’k) + М„ОҰi(k)ОҰi(k), (9) which can be inverted by summing over пҝҪ k пҝҪ i Vli(kвҖІ вҲ’ k) on both sides and using Eq. (3). After a suitable relabeling of variables, the gap equation is given as ОҰi(k) = пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(kвҲ’kвҖІ) ОҰj(kвҖІ) GвҲ’1 вҶ‘,j(kвҖІ)GвҲ’1 вҶ“,j(вҲ’kвҖІ) + М„ОҰj(kвҖІ)ОҰj(kвҖІ). (10) Since the system described by Eq. (1) has spin-rotational symmetry, ОЈвҶ‘ i (k) = ОЈвҶ“ i (k) = ОЈi(k). The spin index in GвҲ’1 i,Пғ(k) = GвҲ’1 i (k) can then be omitted. This simplifies the stationary point conditions 0 = ОҙS[ М„ОҰ,ОҰ,ОЈ] ОҙОЈПғ i , which are found analogously to those of ОҰi(k) iОЈi(k) = пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(kвҲ’kвҖІ) Gj(вҲ’kвҖІ) GвҲ’1 j (kвҖІ)GвҲ’1 j (вҲ’kвҖІ) + М„ОҰj(kвҖІ)ОҰj(kвҖІ). (11) 4 Equations. (10) and (11) are the Eliashberg equations for the HS fields ОҰ and ОЈ. They can be rewritten to elucidate their connection with the original Eliashberg fields, namely the in- verse quasiparticle residue Z, the shift of the energy spectrum ПҮ, and the superconducting gap appearing in the electron spec- trum вҲҶ. To do so, we use that М„ОҰi(k) = ОҰвҲ— i (k) such that the denominator in Eqs. (10) and (11) is even. Hence we can ob- tain distinct equations for the odd and even part of ОЈi(k). In- troducing the aforementioned Eliashberg fields by (12) вҲҶi(k) = ОҰi(k) Zi(k), (13) it follows that Оҳi(k) вүЎGвҲ’1 вҶ‘,i(k)GвҲ’1 вҶ“,i(вҲ’k) + |ОҰi(k)|2 (14) Inserting Eq. (12) into Eq. (11) and taking the even (odd) part, we get the Eliashberg equation for ПҮi(k) (Zi(k)) ПҮi(k) = вҲ’ пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)Оҫj(kвҖІ) + ПҮj(kвҖІ) Оҳj(kвҖІ) (15) Zi(k) = 1 + 1 Пүn пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)ПүnвҖІZj(kвҖІ) Оҳj(kвҖІ) , (16) whereas the gap equation becomes вҲҶi(k) = 1 Zi(k) пҝҪ kвҖІ,j Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ)Zj(k)вҲҶj(kвҖІ) Оҳj(kвҖІ) . (17) In the case of only one band, Eqs. (15), (16), and (17) reduce to the conventional Eliashberg equations . We note that we will continue to make use of the HS fields (ОҰ and ОЈПғ) in the analytical calculations as needed, but when stating results we will use the Eliashberg fields as they relate to quantities that are experimentally measurable. After integrating out the fermions, the free energy of the system is most easily expressed using the HS fields eвҲ’ОІF = пҝҪ D М„ОҰDОҰDОЈeвҲ’S[ М„ОҰ,ОҰ,ОЈ]. (18) By expanding S around its saddle point and neglecting higher- order contributions, one obtains ОІF = вҲ’ пҝҪ k пҝҪ i ln(ОІ2Оҳi(k)) + пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ)[ М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ) + 1 2ОЈПғ i (k)ОЈПғ j (kвҖІ)], (19) where we used that Tr ln(GвҲ’1) = ln det(GвҲ’1). To make use of the free energy in Eq. (19) we need to calcu- late the inverse interaction V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ). This is not required when deriving the mean-field equations, since one can elimi- nate V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ), as was done in going from Eq. (9) to Eq. (10). The inverse interaction has only been calculated and used in the free energy for a limited class of systems. One such interaction is the multiband BCS interaction, where the inverse interaction enters as the matrix inverse of the matrix containing the couplings between different bands . Only recently, starting with Ref. and subsequently used in, e.g., Refs. , has a feasible way of calculating V вҲ’1 for k- dependent potentials emerged. The method is conceptually simple and it is instructive to consider a one-band system. Denoting the operation of taking both the spatial and tem- poral Fourier transform as F, the inverse interaction can be expressed as V вҲ’1(k) = F пҝҪ 1 FвҲ’1(V (k)) пҝҪ . (20) In writing down Eq. (20), we have glossed over some finer details relating to the differences in the temporal and spatial Fourier transforms, but we show in detail in Sec. IV that this definition of V вҲ’1(k) satisfies Eq. (3). For systems with more than one band, one must also take the matrix inverse, as we will see in Sec. IV. III. SUPERCONDUCTING GAPS WITH GLOBAL PHASES AND SPONTANEOUSLY BROKEN TIME-REVERSAL SYMMETRY The complex phases of ОҰi(k) in the free energy in Eq. (19) are only present in the second term. Determining these phases can be carried out directly by solving the gap equa- tion in Eq. (10), but since this generally requires numerics, some insight is lost. In one-band systems, however, we may do some simple analytical considerations. For example, it follows immediately that if ОҰ(k) has only a global phase ОҰ(k) = |ОҰ(k)|eiОё вҲҖ k, the phases cancel, and one is left with solving the gap equation for the amplitudes |ОҰ(k)|, where the existence of a nontrivial solution is decided by V (k вҲ’ kвҖІ). This global U(1) symmetry is spontaneously broken at the on- set of superconductivity. One might also consider states with a k-dependent phase that solve the complex gap equations. However, as proved in Ref. by using a spin chain repre- sentation, for systems with phonon-mediated interactions, the global minimum of the free energy does indeed only have a global phase. This property for single-band systems motivates the global phase ansatz (GPA) for multiband systems, namely that at the global energy minimum, the gaps belonging to each band only have a global phase ОҰi(k) = |ОҰi(k)|eiОёi вҲҖ k (21) Note that the global phase of each gap need not be the same, Оёi Мё= Оёj. We will often employ the shorthand notation Оёij вүЎ Оёi вҲ’ Оёj. The GPA is further supported by the fact that in systems with phonon-mediated interactions we have considered, we have not observed any numerical solutions to the multiband 5 Eliashberg equations that do not obey this symmetry. Using the GPA allows us to make significant headway analytically. Although we cannot ascertain that the states we find are the only states satisfying the Eliashberg equations, the states we do find using the GPA clearly do. Another property of the gap presented in Ref. is that |ОҰ(Пүn)| is even in frequency. This is supported by the fact that renormalization effects seem to preclude odd-frequency superconductivity mediated by phonons , except in the presence of a magnetic field . Hence, assuming sin- glet pairing, the spatial symmetry of the gap must be even to satisfy the overall symmetry restrictions posed on the Cooper pairs . The only spatial symmetry satisfying Eq. (21) is s-wave symmetry, thus also satisfying the overall symmetry of the Cooper pairs. s-wave symmetry is the appropriate spa- tial symmetry in many systems, especially when phonons are mediating the interactions. If neither the phonon energies nor the electron-phonon coupling depends on momentum, it fol- lows directly (also for multiband systems) from Eq. (10) that ОҰi(k) = ОҰi(Пүn), since the right-hand side does not depend on k, showing the s-wave symmetry of ОҰi. ОҰ(k) = ОҰ(Пүn) also holds when dispersive phonons are mediating the inter- actions as long as the Fermi energy is the dominant energy in the system . The symmetry considerations above leave ОҰi(Пүn) with al- most the same characteristics as the gaps used in multiband BCS theory; spin-singlet s-wave gaps with global phases, but with an additional frequency dependence accounting for re- tardation effects. The similarity allows us to study multiband phenomena previously found in BCS theory, only now in the strong-coupling regime. One of these phenomena is the TRSB states arising in systems where the coupling between the gaps causes phase frustration that, in some cases, spontaneously breaks TRS. In BCS theory, the microscopic conditions under which TRSB occur have been outlined in detail . We will now spend the remainder of this section outlining the equivalent conditions in Eliashberg theory, and in the follow- ing two sections, we consider a specific model where they are satisfied. An alternative way of understanding the criteria for TRSB to occur in multiband BCS theory is to consider the free energy. This approach is used in Ref. . Denoting the matrix containing the k-independent interactions between bands i and j as V BCS ij (where we will continuously add the superscript when needed to distinguish from the strong- coupling case), the phases of the gaps only appear in one term in the free energy, namely пҝҪ i,j М„вҲҶBCS i [V BCS]вҲ’1 ij вҲҶBCS j . Splitting the BCS gaps into their amplitude and phase, this term becomes пҝҪ i,j aBCS ij cos ОёBCS ij with aBCS ij = [V BCS]вҲ’1 ij |вҲҶBCS i ||вҲҶBCS j |. Note that aBCS ij is symmetric, so the distinct off-diagonal elements are aBCS 12 , aBCS 13 , and aBCS 23 . Now, to have phase frustration in the three-band case, either one or all three of the off-diagonal elements in aBCS ij must be positive, akin to how a spin system on a triangular lattice is frustrated if all couplings are antiferromagnetic or if two are ferromagnetic and one is antiferromagnetic. The signs of the couplings are decided by [V BCS]вҲ’1 ij . For the phase frustration to give TRSB, the amplitude of the couplings must be such that the phases that minimize the free energy are not multiples of ПҖ. If this is the case, the ground state is twofold degenerate and related by time- reversal symmetry (complex conjugation). As the system en- ters one of these two distinct states, it breaks a Z2 symme- try, which, in this case, corresponds to spontaneously break- ing time-reversal symmetry. By inserting Eq. (21) into the cross terms in the second term in Eq. (19) and assuming s-wave spatial symmetry, one ob- tains пҝҪ k,kвҖІ пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ) М„ОҰi(k)ОҰj(kвҖІ) = пҝҪ i,j aij cos Оёij, (22) with aij = пҝҪ k,kвҖІ ij (k вҲ’ kвҖІ), (23) where we used that Zi(Пүn) is positive for all Пүn . In Eq. (23), we employed the Eliashberg fields, rather than the orig- inal HS fields, to elucidate the connection between aij and aBCS ij . The most apparent differences between the two are the double sum over k, kвҖІ in aij and the frequency dependency of the fields. Moreover, renormalization effects are accounted for in Zi(Пүn) and Zj(Пүm). However, the pivotal role in de- ciding the fate of TRSB is, akin to BCS theory, played by the inverse interaction. It determines the sign of aij and, as mentioned previously, either one or all three aij must be pos- itive for TRSB to occur. Additionally, the mean-field values of the fields enter in aij. These are decided by the Eliash- berg equations and thus by the interaction Vij(k вҲ’ kвҖІ). This creates a complex interplay between the interaction and its in- verse, where both are needed to calculate aij. A numerical scheme for solving the Eliashberg equations that exploits this interplay is explained in Appendix A, and we will return to it later. IV. THE MICROSCOPIC MODEL AND ITS INVERSE INTERACTION Having kept the discussion rather general until now, we will in this section introduce the microscopic model that adheres to the action in Eq. (1). Moreover, we will calculate the in- verse interaction of the model we employ and substantiate the claim we made in Eq. (20). As mentioned in relation to Eq. (1), we assume that the system has three disjoint Fermi sur- faces and enumerate the electrons belonging to each Fermi surface i = 1, 2, 3. These Fermi surfaces may result from a band crossing the Fermi energy several times, resulting in multiple Fermi pockets, or from multiple bands, each cross- ing the Fermi energy once. Both cases are well-described by the multi-patch method , and in the following, we will use the terms band and pocket interchangeably. We consider interactions between the electrons that are me- diated by phonons. A complete derivation of the effective interaction in such systems using functional-integral formal- ism can be found in Ref. . Referring to this for details, 6 вҲ’300 вҲ’200 вҲ’100 0 100 200 300 ПҖn (meV) вҲ’2 вҲ’1 0 1 2 p(ПҖn) Г—107 The frequency-dependent part of the inverse interaction p(ПҖn) as a function of the bosonic Matsubara frequencies ПҖn. The Einstein frequency is ПүE = 40 meV and the temperature is T = 1 meV. we state the result, as the potential for one-band systems is V (k) = вҲ’ОІвҲ’1|gk|2D0(k), where gk is the electron-phonon coupling, depending, in general, on momentum, and D0(k) is the phonon propagator, defined as D0(k) = 2Пүk (iПҖn)2 вҲ’ Пү2 k , (24) where ПҖn is a bosonic Matsubara frequency and Пүk is the phonon frequency at momentum k. We also inserted ОІвҲ’1 in the interaction to ensure that it carries units of energy squared in real and momentum space with our Fourier transform con- ventions. To obtain a multiband interaction, we will make some changes to the interaction above. Firstly, to account for the different geometries of the Fermi pockets and how the elec- trons belonging to a pocket couple to phonons, we take the electron-phonon coupling to depend on which bands are in- volved in the scattering. For example, one can imagine that pockets i = 1 and i = 2 are spherical but the radius of the i = 1 Fermi pocket is larger. The average momentum transferred is then larger in scattering processes for electrons belonging to pocket i = 1. So when we approximate the electron-coupling to be momentum independent, we account for this by including band indices in |gk|2 вҶ’ |gij|2. Note that |gij| is symmetric. We make a second simplification in assuming that all phonons have frequency ПүE, similar to an Einstein solid. As we will see later, this is not an essential simplification, but we note that it has been used in similar works on strong cou- pling . With it, ПүE replaces Пүq in Eq. (24) and the multiband interaction becomes Vij(Пүn вҲ’ Пүm) = 1 ОІ |gij|2 2ПүE (Пүn вҲ’ Пүm)2 + Пү2 E , (25) which is the interaction we will use in the following. It is convenient to split the interaction into a band part and a frequency part. To denote the former, we introduce the symmetric matrix Bij = |gij|2, such that all elements in B are nonnegative. The frequency dependence comes from the phonon propagator D0(Пүn вҲ’ Пүm = ПҖn), always evaluated at the difference between two fermionic Matsubara frequencies which is itself a bosonic one. We now carry out the steps re- quired to calculate the inverse interaction, as outlined in Eq. (20). The temporal Fourier transform of Vij(ПҖn) is straight- forward to calculate, see e.g. Vij(П„) = Bij ОІ пҝҪ ПҖn 2ПүEeвҲ’iПҖnП„ ПҖ2n + Пү2 E = Bij eПүE(ОІвҲ’П„) + eПүEП„ eОІПүE вҲ’ 1 . (26) The matrix inverse of Eq. (26) is simply V вҲ’1 ij (П„) = BвҲ’1 ij eОІПүE вҲ’ 1 eПүE(ОІвҲ’П„) + eПүEП„ . (27) To complete the derivation of the inverse interaction, we re- turn to Fourier space V вҲ’1 ij (ПҖn) = BвҲ’1 ij eОІПүE вҲ’ 1 ОІ пҝҪ ОІ 0 dП„ e(iПҖn+ПүE)П„ eОІПүE + e2ПүEП„ = BвҲ’1 ij p(ПҖn), (28) with p(ПҖn) = eОІПүE вҲ’ 1 ОІ пҝҪF(1, iПҖn+ПүE 2ПүE ; iПҖn+3ПүE 2ПүE ; вҲ’eвҲ’ОІПүE) iПҖn + ПүE вҲ’ F(1, iПҖn+ПүE 2ПүE ; iПҖn+3ПүE 2ПүE ; вҲ’eвҲ’ОІПүE) eОІПүE(iПҖn + ПүE) пҝҪ . (29) F(a, b; c; z) is the hypergeometric function . In Fig. 1, p(ПҖn) is plotted as a function of ПҖn with T = 1 meV and ПүE = 40 meV. p(ПҖn) is real, even in ПҖn, and changes sign between every adjacent ПҖn. For the expression in Eq. (28) to be the inverse interaction it has to satisfy the relation in Eq. (3). This is straightforward to demonstrate when expressing Vij(ПҖn) and V вҲ’1 ij (ПҖn) in their imaginary time representation 1 v(П„), respectively, пҝҪ Пүn пҝҪ l V вҲ’1 il (Пүn1 вҲ’ Пүn)Vlj(Пүn вҲ’ Пүn2) = пҝҪ l BвҲ’1 il Blj 1 ОІ пҝҪ ОІ 0 dП„1dП„2 v(П„1) v(П„2)eвҲ’iПүn1П„1eiПүn2П„2 Г— 1 ОІ пҝҪ Пүn eiПүn(П„1вҲ’П„2) = Оҙij 1 ОІ пҝҪ ОІ 0 dП„1dП„2 v(П„1) v(П„2)eвҲ’iПүn1П„1eiПүn2П„2Оҙ(П„1 вҲ’ П„2) = ОҙijОҙПүn1Пүn2 . (30) Now, with the inverse interaction at hand, we reiterate one of the main messages from Sec. III: While it is the interac- tion that determines the solutions to the Eliashberg equations (requiring numerics), the conditions under which TRSB may occur can be gleaned directly from the inverse interaction. In 7 particular, the signs of aij are the same as BвҲ’1 ij in all the sys- tems we have considered, meaning that the double frequency sum in aij, aij = BвҲ’1 ij пҝҪ Пүn,Пүm (31) converges to a positive number. We again note that aij is sym- metric. Thus, a necessary condition for spontaneously break- ing TRS is that one or all three of the off-diagonal elements in BвҲ’1 ij are positive. If not, there is no phase frustration and consequently no TRSB. An intriguing way of generalizing the interaction consid- ered here is outlined in Appendix B in Ref. . For disper- sive phonons where the frequency Пүq is only dependent on the magnitude of q, denoted q, one finds spatially isotropic solutions to the Eliashberg equations by exploiting the sym- metries of the Fermi surface, which in Ref. is taken to be spherical. The momentum dependence then renormalizes the interaction in the form МғV (ПҖn) = |g|2 2kFОІ пҝҪ 2kF 0 dq f(q)Пүq ПҖ2n + Пү2q , (32) where kF is the Fermi momentum, МғV (ПҖn) is the renormalized potential, and f(q) is a dimensionless function determined by the dimensionality of the system. To generalize Eq. (32) to a multiband system, one must consider the different geometries of the Fermi surfaces, which would affect both f(q) and the integration limits. |g|2 would be replaced by Bij. The steps of calculating МғV вҲ’1 ij (ПҖn) are then the same as the ones lead- ing up to Eq. (28). While Vij(ПҖn) has the advantage of only having a few free parameters in ПүE and gij, МғVij(ПҖn) would be able to utilize first-principles calculations for the electron band structure and associated Fermi surface, the full phonon spectrum, and the electron-phonon coupling , thus facil- itating a more effective search for candidate materials where TRSB might arise. We leave this for future work, and keep to the simpler interaction in Eq. (25) going forward. To close this section, we simplify the Eliashberg equations and the free energy in Sec. II. The momentum sums can be carried out analytically since the Eliashberg fields only de- pend on frequency. As the momentum dependence is only in Оҫi(k), the sums can be transformed into energy integrals in standard fashion . Approximating the density of states of each band by its value at the Fermi surface, denoted NF,i, the energy integrals may be carried out. In the case of ПҮi(Пүn) in Eq. (15), the energy integral, and thus also ПҮi(Пүn) itself, is zero. This simplifies the expression for Оҳi(k) in Eq. (14), which contains the only energy dependence in the remaining two Eliashberg equations. After integrating over energy, these become Zi(Пүn) = 1 + ПҖ Пүn пҝҪ Пүm,j Vij(Пүn вҲ’ Пүm)NF,jПүm пҝҪ Пү2m + |вҲҶj(Пүm)|2 (33) вҲҶi(Пүn) = ПҖ Zi(Пүn) пҝҪ Пүm,j Vij(Пүn вҲ’ Пүm)NF,jвҲҶj(Пүm) пҝҪ Пү2m + |вҲҶj(Пүm)|2 . (34) Similarly, following the procedure of Ref. , by sending the Fermi energy to infinity and discarding constant terms, we integrate the logarithm in the free energy in Eq. (19) and obtain ОІf = вҲ’2ПҖ пҝҪ Пүn пҝҪ i NF,iZi(Пүn) пҝҪ Пү2n + |вҲҶi(Пүn)|2 + пҝҪ Пүn,Пүm пҝҪ i,j V вҲ’1 ij (Пүn вҲ’ Пүm) (35) Here, we introduced the free energy density f вүЎ F/N, where N is the number of unit cells. The Eliashberg equations above coincide with the multi- band Eliashberg equations used in previous works . However, equipped with the global phase ansatz and the ex- pression for aij in Eq. (31), we are in a position to investigate possible TRSB states not seen before in strong-coupling mod- els. V. RESULTS In this section, we will showcase a system that sponta- neously breaks TRS in strong coupling, manifesting in non- analytical behavior in both the phases and amplitudes of the gaps due to a Z2-breaking Ising phase transition at T = T вҲ—. We will discuss other systems that might exhibit TRSB later. The system under consideration here consists of three cou- pled bands. Two of the bands have strong intraband inter- actions of different magnitudes. The remaining interactions are weaker, g11 вүҲ g22 вү« gij. In units of g = 85 meV, the electron-phonon couplings between the different bands are g22 = 1.4g, g33 = 0.005g, g12 = 0.0001g, g13 = g23 = 0.003g, while the intraband coupling in the first band g11 can vary but is, in general, of the same order as g. For simplic- ity, we set the density of states at the Fermi level equal for all three bands NF,i = 0.5 В· 10вҲ’2 meVвҲ’1, and the Einstein frequency and temperature are 20 meV and 1 meV, respec- tively. With these values for gij, one obtains BвҲ’1 BвҲ’1 13 вүҲ вҲ’5 В· 10вҲ’5 and, BвҲ’1 23 вүҲ вҲ’3 В· 10вҲ’5, all in units of meVвҲ’2. Before showing results from this system, it is worth con- sidering the type of physical systems where TRSB may be re- alized. Firstly, we consider two intraband couplings approx- imately equal to g = 85 meV, putting the system into the strong-coupling regime. The system is also one where the interband electron-phonon coupling is severely suppressed. This is the case in iron pnictides , some of which are believed to be strong-coupling superconductors . 8 Lastly, a possible realization of the small intraband interaction in the third band is the following: As explained in Sec. IV, the electron-phonon coupling depends on the momentum trans- ferred in the scattering. Moreover, for the case of Einstein phonons, gk вҲқ |k| . Therefore, if bands 1 and 2 (band 3) have large (small) Fermi surfaces, the average momentum transfer, and thus also the electron-phonon coupling, will be bigger (smaller). This can be finetuned by tuning the chemi- cal potential such that both the Fermi surface and the electron- phonon coupling of the third band become small. We discuss our specific choice of parameters in more detail in Appendix B. It is instructive to see how and why this causes TRSB, which follows directly from the expression for aij in Eq. (31). Since the signs of aij are determined by BвҲ’1 ij , the system will experience some phase frustration, as discussed in Sec. IV. Moreover, because g11 вүҲ g22 вү« g33, it follows that вҲҶ1 вүҲ вҲҶ2 вү« вҲҶ3 below Tc. Therefore, again from Eq. (31), we expect similar magnitudes of a12, a13, and a23, thus pos- sibly setting the stage for the phase frustration to result in TRSB. Following the numerical scheme in Appendix A, we solve the multiband Eliashberg equations in Eqs. (33) and (34) with the parameters above. The results are illustrated in Fig. 2, where we have studied two similar systems with different g11. Because g33 вүӘ g11, g22, the fields of the third bands are sig- nificantly smaller than their counterparts in bands 1 and 2. For this reason, we have included insets to show the behavior of Z3(Пүn) and вҲҶ3(Пүn) more clearly. All fields are even in Пүn. Zi(Пүn) decays as a function of |Пүn| in all bands, both in the case of g11 = 0.8g and g11 = g, as shown in Figs. 2 (a) and (c), respectively. As g11 grows from Fig. 2 (a) to (c), so does Z1(Пүn), which is explained by stronger renormaliza- tion effects, induced by the increase of the intraband electron- phonon coupling. Z2(Пүn) and Z3(Пүn) remain largely unaf- fected by changing g11. Moreover, we observe that Zi(Пүn) have larger values in the normal state, which is explained by the factor пҝҪ Пү2m + |вҲҶj(Пүn)|2 in the denominator in Eq. (33). In Fig. 2 (b), вҲҶi(Пүn) is plotted as a function of frequency with g11 = 0.8g. All gaps are purely real, where the phase differences Оё12 and Оё13 are ПҖ. We note that the realvaluedness of all gaps is not guaranteed in general since the global U(1) symmetry can only be chosen such that one of the gaps is real and positive. We take this gap to be вҲҶ1(Пүn) in the following. Moreover, because g22 > g11, it follows that |вҲҶ2| > |вҲҶ1|. Both gaps display the same monotonic decreasing behav- ior with |Пүn|. This is not the case for the smallest gap, as |вҲҶ3(Пүn)| increases slightly with |Пүn|, quickly reaching its peak before it becomes monotonically decaying as well. To elucidate the behavior of the third gap, it is useful to consider the mechanisms sustaining the different gaps. The bands with strong electron-phonon coupling are superconducting in their own right; both вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) survive if the interband couplings vanish. Their amplitude would barely change. For вҲҶ3(Пүn), however, g33 is far too weak to drive the supercon- ductivity by itself. Instead, вҲҶ3(Пүn) is sustained by the other two gaps, from j = 1 and j = 2 on the right-hand side in Eq. (34). The mechanism of a weak gap being supported by larger ones has long been recognized in multiband supercon- j = 2 term is larger in magnitude than the j = 1 term, causing вҲҶ3(Пүn) to have the same sign as вҲҶ2(Пүn). The gaps, unlike Zi(Пүn), exhibit a more abrupt change when g11 increases in Fig. 2 (d). The most apparent effect is that Оёij are no longer multiples of ПҖ, as вҲҶ2(Пүn) and вҲҶ3(Пүn) both have real and imaginary parts, while вҲҶ1(Пүn) is still purely real. Therefore the system in Fig. 2 (d) spontaneously breaks TRS since the state is not invariant under complex con- jugation. The slight increase in g11 also affects the magni- As expected, increasing g11 causes |вҲҶ1(0)| to be larger, while |вҲҶ2(0)| remains the same. It is more surprising that the small change in g11 also increases |вҲҶ3(0)| by a factor of 4. This can be understood from the fact that вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) are now less antagonistic in their support of вҲҶ3(Пүn). In Fig. 2 (b), Оё12 was ПҖ, and thus the contributions to вҲҶ3(Пүn) in Eq. (34) from j = 1 and j = 2 had opposite sign, as discussed previously. This is not the case in the system in Fig. 2 (d), where вҲҶ1(Пүn) (вҲҶ2(Пүn)) can boost the real (imaginary) part of вҲҶ3(Пүn) without being counteracted to the same degree as before. The antagonistic mechanism can also explain the small bump in вҲҶ3(Пүn) in Fig. 2 (b), as вҲҶ1(Пүn) decreases faster than вҲҶ2(Пүn), resulting in a small increase in вҲҶ3(Пүn) at low frequencies even though both вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) decay with |Пүn|. Conversely, in the system in Fig. 2 (d), the magnitude of |вҲҶ3(Пүn)| decays with |Пүn| such that all three gaps decay monotonically with |Пүn|. To elucidate the transition between the TRS and TRSB states, we have solved the Eliashberg equations as a function of g11, where the results are shown in Fig. 3. With the ex- ception of g11, we employ the same system parameters as in Fig. 2. In Fig. 3 (b), |вҲҶi(0)| is plotted as a function of g11/g. that it increases (remains the same) with g11. |вҲҶ3(0)|, how- ever, exhibit nonanalytical behavior at g11 = 0.87g вүЎ gc. It is instructive to view these results in light of Fig. 3 (a), which showcases Оёij for the same values of g11. For g11 вүӨ gc, Оё12 = ПҖ and thus, due to the antagonistic mechanisms sus- taining вҲҶ3(Пүn) mentioned previously, |вҲҶ3| decreases when |вҲҶ1(0)| increases. This changes when TRS is broken at g11 = gc such that Оё12 falls off when g11 > gc, allowing вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) to boost the real and imaginary parts of вҲҶ3(Пүn), respectively. The maximum of вҲҶ3(0) thus coincides with the minimum of Оё12 at g11 вүҲ 0.98g, where вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) are at their most cooperative in sustaining вҲҶ3(Пүn). We emphasize that while вҲҶ3(Пүn) is orders of magnitudes smaller than вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn), it still plays a pivotal role in breaking TRS. If вҲҶ3(Пүn) = 0, it follows immediately from Eq. (31) that a12 is the only surviving term, such that Оё12 is always zero or ПҖ. In the case of the latter, the resulting state is sВұ. To obtain the s+is state, all three aij must be nonzero, in turn requiring all gaps to be nonzero. In this sense, the TRSB will be robust, as Оёij obtains values far away from zero or ПҖ even though the third gap is small. Moreover we expect the phenomena associated with TRSB to persist even if the third 9 2 4 6 8 Zi(Пүn) (a) g11 = 0.8g Normal state SC state (c) g11 = g Normal state SC state вҲ’500 0 500 1000 Пүn (meV) вҲ’20 0 20 вҲҶi(Пүn) (meV) (b) g11 = 0.8g Re вҲҶi Im вҲҶi вҲ’500 0 500 1000 Пүn (meV) (d) g11 = g Re вҲҶi Im вҲҶi вҲ’200 0 200 1 вҲ’200 0 200 вҲ’2 В· 10вҲ’4 0 i = 1 i = 2 i = 3 вҲ’200 0 200 1 вҲ’200 0 200 0 10вҲ’3 with band index i. In the two left panels, the intraband electron-phonon coupling in the first band is g11 = 0.8g with g = 85 meV, and it is g11 = g in the right panels. Otherwise, the system parameters are the same, where the interaction parameters are constant and equal to g22 = 1.4g, g33 = 0.005g, g12 = 0.0001g, g13 = g23 = 0.003g and the other system parameters are T = 1 meV, ПүE = 20 meV, and state, while in panels (b) and (d), the real (imaginary) part of the gaps is plotted with solid (dashed) lines. The insets in all panels show the fields associated with band index i = 3. gap is small for the following reasons: In three-band micro- scopic models with TRSB, one can map such models to an ef- fective Ginzburg-Landau functional with only two gaps where the TRSB is explicitly imposed . The mapping does not affect the emergent physics such as spontaneous supercur- rents near defects and topological invariants . For the system considered here, the natural choice would then be to include the two large gaps into such an effective TRSB two- band model, but keeping in mind that the imposed TRSB is a consequence of the smaller gap. We leave this effective model for future consideration and keep exploring the properties of the ground state in the microscopic model going forward. While Figs. 2 and 3 explain many of the mechanisms at play in causing TRSB, it is also instructive to consider the effects of externally controllable parameters. In Figs. 4 (a) and (b), we plot |вҲҶi(0)| as a function of T at two different energy scales to capture the behavior of both the large and small gaps. In the same temperature regime, we plot Оёij in Fig. 4 (c). The critical temperature of the system is Tc вүҲ 9.2 meV, where all gaps are zero for larger temperatures. |вҲҶ1(0)| onsets to larger values at T1 вүҲ 6.2 meV, but as shown in Fig. 4 (b), it retains nonzero values for larger values of T as well. This is, again, a result of a stronger gap sustaining smaller ones through interband coupling . Another onset is shown in Fig. 4 (c), namely that of Оёij at T = T вҲ— = 4.85 meV. T вҲ— is thus the temperature at which TRS is spontaneously broken. T вҲ— and T1 are the two temperatures lower than Tc where |вҲҶ3(0)| is nonanalytic. In the case of the latter, the sudden decrease in |вҲҶ3(0)| is due to the drop of вҲҶ1(Пүn) at T1, meaning that вҲҶ3(Пүn) loses one of the sources maintaining it. To understand the phase transition at T вҲ—, we repeat that there are two criteria for TRSB to occur: aij must have the ap- propriate sign combinations, and aij must be of similar mag- nitudes. The first criterion is satisfied since the BвҲ’1 ij decide the sign of aij. BвҲ’1 13 and BвҲ’1 23 are negative while BвҲ’1 12 is posi- tive, and thus aij has a sign combination that allow for TRSB. We explain the second criterion in more detail in Appendix A, but from the fact that Оё13 and Оё23 are zero above T вҲ— in Fig. 4, we can infer the relative magnitudes of aij. Above T вҲ—, a23 and a13 are larger than a12 since it is energetically favorable to have Оё13 = Оё23 = 0, leaving the a12 cos Оё12-term frustrated. As we approach T вҲ— from above, both вҲҶ1(Пүn) and вҲҶ2(Пүn) increase, in turn boosting a12, as can be seen from Eq. (31). Importantly, a12 then grows relative to a13 and a23 since вҲҶ3(Пүn) does not change much below T1. So at T вҲ—, a12 becomes large enough for the phase frustration to manifest in TRSB, as all three phase differences start deviating from zero. This can be observed in detail in Fig. 5, where |aij| is plotted as a function of temperature for the same system as in Fig. 4. Moreover, in Appendix A, we derive that for a system with equal a13 = a23 = a, TRSB occurs at a12 > a/2. From Fig. 5 we find that a similar relation holds also for a13 Мё= a23, namely that TRSB occurs at a12 вүҲ (a13 + a23)/4. 10 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Оёij/ПҖ (a) Оё12 Оё13 вҲ’Оё23 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 g11/g 15 20 25 30 (b) of the intraband strength in the first band g11 divided by g = 85 meV. In panel (a), the global phase differences Оёij are plotted as a function of g11/g. In panel (b), the lowest frequency gap in each band вҲҶi(0) is plotted as a function of g11/g. Note the different energy scales for вҲҶ1 and вҲҶ2 (left axis) and вҲҶ3 (right axis). The other parameters are the same as in Fig. 2. All three phase differences onsets similarly at T вҲ— with crit- ical exponents ОІ вүҲ 0.5, with different prefactors. This is a manifestation of the nature of the phase transition, namely that a Z2 symmetry is spontaneously broken along with TRS, re- sulting in an Ising transition. Any of the three Оёij can be taken to be the associated order parameter. The Ising critical expo- nents are well-known in mean-field theory. Relevant to our system is ОІ = 1/2, thus corroborating the critical exponents we have found. In superconductors with an additional phase transition be- low Tc, one of its signatures is a jump in the heat capacity, which is most often associated with spontaneous TRSB . For multiband systems, the jump results from a kink in the derivative of the gaps at T вҲ— . вҲҶ3(0) in Fig. 4 (b) clearly features such a kink, and with the mean-field Ising transition at T вҲ—, we expect a logarithmic anomaly in the specific heat. However, for the system considered here, the amplitude of the anomaly is minuscule due to the different magnitudes in the diagonal and off-diagonal elements in aij. a11 and a22 are five orders of magnitude larger than the remaining matrix elements, so although the off-diagonal elements in aij deter- mine Оёij and thus play consequential roles in the emergent 0 20 (a) i = 1 i = 2 i = 3 (b) 2 4 6 8 10 T (meV) 0.00 0.25 0.50 Оёij/ПҖ T вҲ— (c) Оё12 Оё13 вҲ’Оё23 |вҲҶi(0)| in each band i is plotted as a function of temperature T, where the panels have different scales on the y-axis to capture both the low and high-energy behavior. The phase differences between the bands Оёij are plotted in panel (c). The system parameters are the same as in Fig. 2 with g11 = g = 85 meV. TRS is broken at T < T вҲ— = 4.85 meV, and black vertical lines at T = T вҲ— are included to help guide the eye. 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 T (meV) |aij| T вҲ— T1 Tc a12 a13 a23 perature T. The system parameters and quantities are the same as in Fig. 4. The black lines at T = T вҲ—, T = T1 and T = Tc are included to help guide the eye. physics, their contribution to the free energy is insignificant. The dominant contributions from the gaps to the free energy are from a11, a22, and the tracelog contributions. None of these terms contain Оёij, so when calculating the specific heat c = Td2f/d2T, the onset of Оёij at T вҲ— does not contribute to any of the larger terms. The absence of a kink at T = T вҲ— can be observed in Fig. 6, where we have plotted dвҲҶf/dT as a function of T with the same system parameters as in Fig. 4. We calculate the difference between the superconducting and normal state вҲҶf = fSC вҲ’ fN from Eq. (35). Kinks in dвҲҶf/dT corre- 11 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 T (meV) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 dвҲҶf/dT T вҲ— Tc T1 the superconducting and normal state вҲҶf = fSC вҲ’ fN with respect to temperature. The parameters and quantities are the same as in Fig. 4. The black lines at T = T вҲ—, T = T1 and T = Tc are included to help guide the eye. spond to jumps in the heat capacity. In Fig. 6, we observe that dвҲҶf/dT, and thus also c, is mainly influenced by the temperature dependence of |вҲҶ1(Пүn)| and |вҲҶ2(Пүn)|, resulting in two jumps in c at T1 and Tc, associated with the onsets of |вҲҶ1(Пүn)| and |вҲҶ2(Пүn)|, respectively. To obtain a noticeable kink at T вҲ—, the off-diagonal elements in aij, and thus also the interband interactions, need to play a more prominent role. We consider such systems in the next paragraphs. TRSB states are well understood in weak coupling. Hence, some comparisons to our results are in order. The conven- tional starting point for obtaining such states in BCS theory is systems with attractive intraband and repulsive interband in- teractions . It then follows straightforwardly from the expression for aBCS ij that they are all positive, see Appendix B, setting the stage for TRSB. However, from the interaction in Eq. (25), it is obvious that the interaction we have em- ployed is exclusively attractive, so such a sign change in the interband interactions must come from some other mechanism than electron-phonon coupling. Two potential candidates in this regard are the Coulomb in- teractions between the electrons or interactions mediated by spin fluctuations, where the latter are believed to be relevant in the superconducting iron pnictides . These two can be incorporated into Eliashberg theory . Their relative magnitudes, and thus also the overall sign in each interaction channel, are a matter of microscopic details. However, in the iron pnictides, the electron-phonon coupling is typically small in the interband channels , such that the other two inter- actions dominate the interband channels. With the interband interactions playing a more prominent role, we also expect the anomaly in the specific heat at T = T вҲ— to be more no- table, as discussed previously. Moreover, when only includ- ing phonon-mediated interactions, the restrictions posed on the electron-phonon couplings leave some room for variations in gij (See Appendix B for details), but with additional scatter- ing mechanisms, the parameter space resulting in TRSB will grow. Therefore, studying unconventional superconductors where mechanisms other than electron-phonon coupling may induce superconductivity constitutes another path that might lead to TRSB in strong coupling. We leave this for future in- vestigations. We lastly note that the different interactions considered in the previous paragraph are all easily integrated into Eliashberg theory using modern first-principles calculations . Such a strong-coupling treatment, grounded in first-principles cal- culations, would be interesting to apply to doped BaFe2As2 as it might shed some more light on the mechanisms causing the TRSB observed experimentally or to search for other candidate materials. VI. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we have studied multiband superconduct- ing states that spontaneously break time-reversal symmetry. These states have been intensely researched in the previous decade following their initial theoretical discovery , but also in the last few years with experimental realiza- tions of TRSB states. So far, most theoretical de- scriptions have employed either weak-coupling BCS theory or effective Ginzburg-Landau theories derived thereof. In this work, on the other hand, we have presented a strong-coupling analysis of such systems. Our most important finding is that the TRSB states may indeed emerge in strong-coupling models. They are more elusive than in weak coupling, as the time-reversal symmet- ric states also satisfy the Eliashberg equations that fixed-point schemes tend to favor. To compensate for this, we have de- rived the free energy of the system and used it to guide the numerical solver towards TRSB states when they were more energetically favorable than their TRS counterparts. In partic- ular, we have considered a system where two large gaps are weakly coupled to each other and a significantly smaller third gap. Although the third gap is small, the phase frustration in the system still drives the spontaneous breaking of TRS ei- ther at a critical electron-phonon coupling or at T = T вҲ—. We have discussed how one expects the emergent physics to be similar to that of TRSB three-band systems with equal gap amplitudes, namely spontaneous currents and magnetization arising near defects . The strong-coupling approach we have used is a general- ization of the recent work of Ref. to multiband systems. Here, the Eliashberg equations emerge as stationary point con- ditions on the action in the imaginary-time functional-integral formalism. Moreover, this approach admitted a calculation of the free energy of the system in strong coupling,which is a quantity that plays a pivotal role in several aspects. As men- tioned, we have used it to evaluate whether the TRSB and TRS states had the lowest free energy, as they both satisfy the stationary point conditions. Thus, the free energy provides a necessary selection criterion for choosing between the states. Furthermore, from the free energy, we have found that the en- ergy associated with the phase frustration was small. Hence we neither expect nor observe an anomaly in the specific heat at T = T вҲ—. We have also discussed other systems and scat- 12 tering mechanisms that we expect to amplify the amplitude of the logarithmic anomaly in the specific heat. In particular, we have suggested that unconventional multiband superconduc- tors may constitute a class of systems where TRSB states may emerge. Finally, we have compared our results for TRSB in strong coupling with BCS theory. Although the gap equation is more numerically demanding in the former, the resulting TRSB states are still similar; the spatial symmetries of the gaps are the same (s-wave), and there is no frequency dependence in their phases, only in their magnitude. However, there are sev- eral benefits of employing strong coupling. The renormal- ization effects of the electrons are accounted for, and materi- als with large electron-phonon couplings can be investigated. Moreover, Eliashberg theory has the advantage of being well incorporated with first-principles calculations. So, the frame- work for studying TRSB in strong coupling presented here may apply these directly, thus facilitating a more effective search for candidate materials. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Christian Svingen Johnsen and Sondre Duna Lundemo for useful discussions. This work was supported by the Research Council of Norway (RCN) through its Centres of Excellence funding scheme, Project No. 262633, вҖңQuSpinвҖқ, as well as RCN Project No. 323766. Appendix A: Numerical details on solving the Eliashberg equations In this appendix, we will briefly cover how we solve the three-band Eliashberg equations in Eqs. (33) and (34). They consist of a set of coupled equations with 3NM complex vari- ables (or, equivalently, 6NM real variables) for вҲҶi(Пүn), and 3NM real variables for Zi(Пүn), where NM is the number of Matsubara frequencies we include. In producing our re- sults, we employed a Matsubara cutoff M = 1100 meV large enough to capture the physics at play. We checked that the results did not change when increasing M further. NM is given by the number of Matsubara frequencies that satisfy |Пүn| вүӨ M. With the global phase ansatz, the number of variables in вҲҶi(Пүn) is reduced to 3NM + 3. Moreover, since only the phase differences Оёij are present in Eq. (34), we can reduce the number of variables to 3NM + 2 since Оё23 = Оё13 вҲ’ Оё12. We will now demonstrate how the remaining phase differences Оё12 and Оё13 are determined. To accomplish this, as alluded to in the main text, we use the insight offered by the free energy. Specifically, the only term in the free energy dependent on Оё12 and Оё13 is given by a12 cos Оё12 + a13 cos Оё13 + a23 cos(Оё13 вҲ’ Оё12), (A1) where the expression for aij is in Eq. (31). Because the solu- tions to the Eliashberg equations must satisfy stationary point conditions in the free energy, only values for Оё12 and Оё13 that extremize the free energy are admissible solutions. This is equivalent to extremizing Eq. (A1) above. There are, at maximum, six solutions to extremizing Eq. (A1) for Оёij вҲҲ [0, 2ПҖ). Four are TRS, namely The remaining two break TRS, and are time-reversal counterparts. Denoting one as ОёTRSB ij , the other is equal to 2ПҖ вҲ’ ОёTRSB ij . For ОёTRSB ij to exist, the quantity b вүЎ вҲ’a4 12a4 13 вҲ’ a4 12a4 23 вҲ’ a4 13a4 23 + 2a2 12a2 13a2 12 + a2 13 + a2 23) (A2) must be larger than zero. As a simple example, if a12 = a13 вүЎ a (which is physically realized if g11 = g22 and g13 = g23), b > 0 corresponds to a23 > a/2. If b > 0, ОёTRSB ij can be written in the form ОёTRSB 12 = atan2 пҝҪ вҲҡ b 2a2 , a2 13a2 23 вҲ’ a2 12a2 13 + a2 12a2 23 2a2 пҝҪ (A3) ОёTRSB 13 = atan2 пҝҪ вҲҡ b , a2 12a2 23 вҲ’ a2 12a2 13 вҲ’ a2 13a2 23 пҝҪ , (A4) where atan2(x, y) is the two-argument inverse tangent. With the six solutions for Оё12 and Оё13, we can insert them into Eq. (A1) to determine which of them yields the lowest energy, thus offering an unambiguous method of determining the en- ergetically favored phase configuration. Now, we can use the procedure above to solve the Eliash- berg equations for the remaining 3NM variables in both Zi(Пүn) variables and |вҲҶi(Пүn)|. Since we have in total 6NM variables to solve for, it suffices to consider Eq. (33) and the real part of Eq. (34). Collecting the 6NM variables in the vec- tor x, solving these equations is equivalent to fixed-point iter- ation in the form xm+1 = g(xm), (A5) where the function g(xm) constitutes the right-hand sides of Eqs. (33) and (34). However, before g(xn) is computed, based on the values for Zi(Пүn) and |вҲҶi(Пүn)| in xm, we cal- culate aij and subsequently determine the values of Оё12 and Оё13 in accordance with the procedure above. In this way, we ensure that we use the most energetically favorable Оёij each time we evaluate the real part of Eq. (34) during the fixed- point scheme. Finally, we terminate the iteration in Eq. (A5) once convergence (i.e. a prescribed tolerance level) has been reached. Appendix B: Electron-phonon parameters The purpose of this appendix is to elucidate some of the re- strictions posed by the simple interaction we employ in Eq. (25) for the system to have TRSB and to motivate our choice of parameters in light of this. As stated in the main text, a necessary condition for TRSB is that either one or all of a12, 13 a13, and a23 must be positive. Since the sign of aij is deter- mined by BвҲ’1 ij , it suffices to look at the general expression for off-diagonal elements for a 3 Г— 3 matrix A AвҲ’1 ij = 1 det A(AilAjl вҲ’ AijAll), (B1) where l Мё= i Мё= j. Since Bij = |gij|2, all its elements are non- negative, causing severe restrictions on the possible choices of BвҲ’1 ij that can cause phase frustration, as we will now see. As discussed in Sec. V, in BCS theory, the conventional choice is to have attractive intraband and repulsive inter- band interactions, which straightforwardly yields all positive [V BCS]вҲ’1 ij from Eq. (B1), supposing that the determinant of V BCS is positive. In the model we employ, there is no way of having negative coupling constants in Bij unless one includes additional scattering mechanisms such as Coulomb repulsion and interactions mediated by spin fluctuations, as discussed in the main text. However, positive values in Bij may still result in emergent TRSB, as demonstrated in e.g., Fig. 2 (d). Since g11, g22 are much larger than the other gij, the same holds for B11 and B22. It then follows immediately from Eq. (B1) that BвҲ’1 13 and BвҲ’1 23 are negative. To obtain a positive BвҲ’1 12 = (det B)вҲ’1(B13B23 вҲ’ B12B33) while keeping det B positive, one possible choice is to have a minuscule value for B12, which is the choice made in the main text. If it is zero, we checked that the results did not change qualitatively. Interband electron-phonon couplings are small in iron pnic- tides , motivating our choice of using small values for gij, i Мё= j. Moreover, with our main interest lying in the strong-coupling regime, we choose large values for g11 and g22. However, while there is a physical mechanism for the third intraband coupling g33 to be small (see main text), the motivation for this is not immediately obvious. It is a choice made to satisfy b > 0, where b is given in Eq. (A2). If b < 0, TRS cannot be spontaneously broken. To understand why b > 0 requires a small g33, one must consult the expression for aij in Eq. (31): Since BвҲ’1 12 is orders of magnitudes smaller than BвҲ’1 13 and BвҲ’1 imately the same number of orders of magnitudes larger than |вҲҶ3(Пүn)| for the amplitudes of a12, a13, and a23 to satisfy b > 0. Since the gaps grow with their respective intraband couplings, this is accomplished by having g33 вүӘ g11, g22. J. Nagamatsu, N. Nakagawa, T. Muranaka, Y. Zenitani, and J. Akimitsu, Superconductivity at 39 K in magnesium diboride, Nature 410, 63 (2001). Y. Kamihara, H. Hiramatsu, M. Hirano, R. Kawamura, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya, and H. Hosono, Iron-Based Layered Su- perconductor: LaOFeP, Journal of the American Chemical So- ciety 128, 10012 (2006). Y. Kamihara, T. Watanabe, M. Hirano, and H. Hosono, Iron-Based Layered Superconductor La[O1вҲ’xFx]FeAs (x = 0.05 вҲ’ 0.12) with Tc = 26 K, Journal of the American Chemi- cal Society 130, 3296 (2008). T. Dvir, F. Massee, L. Attias, M. Khodas, M. Aprili, C. H. L. Quay, and H. Steinberg, Spectroscopy of bulk and few-layer superconducting NbSe2 with van der Waals tunnel junctions, Nature Communications 9, 598 (2018). R. M. Fernandes, A. I. Coldea, H. Ding, I. R. Fisher, P. J. Hirschfeld, and G. Kotliar, Iron pnictides and chalcogenides: a new paradigm for superconductivity, Nature 601, 35 (2022). M. Rotter, M. Tegel, and D. Johrendt, Superconductivity at 38 K in the Iron Arsenide (Ba1вҲ’xKx)Fe2As2, Phys. Rev. Lett. Z.-A. Ren, G.-C. Che, X.-L. Dong, J. Yang, W. Lu, W. Yi, X.-L. Shen, Z.-C. Li, L.-L. Sun, F. Zhou, and Z.-X. Zhao, Su- perconductivity and phase diagram in iron-based arsenic-oxides ReFeAsO1вҲ’Оҙ (Re = rare-earth metal) without fluorine doping, Europhysics Letters 83, 17002 (2008). T. Shibauchi, K. Hashimoto, R. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuda, Pen- etration depth, lower critical fields, and quasiparticle conductiv- ity in Fe-arsenide superconductors, Physica C: Superconductiv- ity 469, 590 (2009), superconductivity in Iron-Pnictides. K. Nakayama, T. Sato, P. Richard, Y.-M. Xu, Y. Sek- iba, S. Souma, G. F. Chen, J. L. Luo, N. L. Wang, H. Ding, and T. Takahashi, Superconducting gap symmetry of Ba0.6K0.4Fe2As2 studied by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Europhysics Letters 85, 67002 (2009). T. K. Ng and N. Nagaosa, Broken time-reversal symmetry in Josephson junction involving two-band superconductors, Euro- physics Letters 87, 17003 (2009). J. Carlstr МҲom, J. Garaud, and E. Babaev, Length scales, collec- tive modes, and type-1.5 regimes in three-band superconduc- tors, Phys. Rev. B 84, 134518 (2011). T. A. Bojesen, E. Babaev, and A. SudbГё, Time reversal sym- metry breakdown in normal and superconducting states in frus- trated three-band systems, Phys. Rev. B 88, 220511 (2013). J. Garaud, J. Carlstr МҲom, E. Babaev, and M. Speight, Chiral CP 2 skyrmions in three-band superconductors, Phys. Rev. B T. A. Bojesen, E. Babaev, and A. SudbГё, Phase transitions and anomalous normal state in superconductors with broken time- reversal symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 89, 104509 (2014). S.-Z. Lin, S. Maiti, and A. Chubukov, Distinguishing between s + id and s + is pairing symmetries in multiband supercon- ductors through spontaneous magnetization pattern induced by a defect, Phys. Rev. B 94, 064519 (2016). J. Garaud, M. Silaev, and E. Babaev, Microscopically derived multi-component GinzburgвҖ“Landau theories for s + is super- conducting state, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Appli- cations 533, 63 (2017). V. Stanev and Z. TeЛҮsanovi МҒc, Three-band superconductivity and the order parameter that breaks time-reversal symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 81, 134522 (2010). Y. Tanaka and T. Yanagisawa, Chiral state in three-gap super- conductors, Solid State Communications 150, 1980 (2010). B. J. Wilson and M. P. Das, Time-reversal-symmetry-broken state in the BCS formalism for a multi-band superconductor, Journal of Physics Condensed Matter 25, 0 (2013). M. Protter, R. Boyack, and F. Marsiglio, Functional-integral ap- proach to Gaussian fluctuations in Eliashberg theory, Phys. Rev. J. W. Negele and H. Orland, Quantum Many-Particle Systems 14 (Addison-Wesley, 1988). A. Altland and B. Simons, Condensed Matter Field Theory (Cambridge University Press, 2010). J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, Theory of Super- conductivity, Physical Review 108, 1175 (1957). G. M. Eliashberg, Interactions between electrons and lattice vi- brations in a superconductor, Sov. Phys. JETP 11, 696 (1960). G. M. Eliashberg, Temperature GreenвҖҷs function for electrons in a superconductor, Sov. Phys. JETP 12, 1000 (1961). F. Marsiglio, Eliashberg theory: A short review, Annals of Physics 417, 168102 (2020). D. J. Scalapino, J. R. Schrieffer, and J. W. Wilkins, Strong- Coupling Superconductivity. I, Phys. Rev. 148, 263 (1966). A. B. Migdal, Interaction between electrons and lattice vibra- tions in a normal metal, Sov. Phys. JETP 34, 996 (1958). F. Schrodi, P. M. Oppeneer, and A. Aperis, Full-bandwidth Eliashberg theory of superconductivity beyond MigdalвҖҷs ap- proximation, Phys. Rev. B 102, 024503 (2020). F. Schrodi, P. M. Oppeneer, and A. Aperis, Unconventional su- perconductivity mediated solely by isotropic electron-phonon interaction, Phys. Rev. B 104, L140506 (2021). J. Bauer, J. E. Han, and O. Gunnarsson, Quantitative reliabil- ity study of the Migdal-Eliashberg theory for strong electron- phonon coupling in superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 84, 184531 A. V. Chubukov, A. Abanov, I. Esterlis, and S. A. Kivelson, Eliashberg theory of phonon-mediated superconductivity вҖ” When it is valid and how it breaks down, Annals of Physics Y.-Z. Chou, F. Wu, J. D. Sau, and S. Das Sarma, Acoustic- phonon-mediated superconductivity in moir МҒeless graphene multilayers, Phys. Rev. B 106, 024507 (2022). S.-S. Zhang, Y.-M. Wu, A. Abanov, and A. V. Chubukov, Su- perconductivity out of a non-Fermi liquid: Free energy analysis, Physical Review B 106, 1 (2022). E. A. Yuzbashyan, M. K.-H. Kiessling, and B. L. Altshuler, Su- perconductivity near a quantum critical point in the extreme re- tardation regime, Phys. Rev. B 106, 064502 (2022). A. Dalal, J. Ruhman, and V. Kozii, The field theory of a super- conductor with repulsion (2023), arXiv:2308.05150. S. D. Lundemo, The Effective U(1)Г—O(3) Theory of Supercon- ductivity and Antiferromagnetism, Master thesis, NTNU, 2023. E. A. Yuzbashyan and B. L. Altshuler, Breakdown of the Migdal-Eliashberg theory and a theory of lattice-fermionic su- perfluidity, Phys. Rev. B 106, 054518 (2022). P. Szab МҒo, P. Samuely, J. KaЛҮcmarЛҮc МҒДұk, T. Klein, J. Marcus, D. Fruchart, S. Miraglia, C. Marcenat, and A. G. M. Jansen, Evidence for Two Superconducting Energy Gaps in MgB2 by Point-Contact Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 137005 S. Tsuda, T. Yokoya, T. Kiss, Y. Takano, K. Togano, H. Kito, H. Ihara, and S. Shin, Evidence for a Multiple Superconduct- ing Gap in MgB2 from High-Resolution Photoemission Spec- troscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 177006 (2001). K. Kuroki, S. Onari, R. Arita, H. Usui, Y. Tanaka, H. Kontani, and H. Aoki, Unconventional Pairing Originat- ing from the Disconnected Fermi Surfaces of Superconducting LaFeAsO1вҲ’xFx, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 087004 (2008). I. I. Mazin, D. J. Singh, M. D. Johannes, and M. H. Du, Uncon- ventional Superconductivity with a Sign Reversal in the Order Parameter of LaFeAsO1вҲ’xFx, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 057003 M. Silaev and E. Babaev, Microscopic theory of type-1.5 su- perconductivity in multiband systems, Phys. Rev. B 84, 094515 P. J. Hirschfeld, M. M. Korshunov, and I. I. Mazin, Gap sym- metry and structure of Fe-based superconductors, Reports on Progress in Physics 74, 124508 (2011). N. F. Q. Yuan, K. F. Mak, and K. T. Law, Possible Topological Superconducting Phases of MoS2, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 097001 P. N. Galteland and A. SudbГё, Current loops, phase transitions, and the Higgs mechanism in Josephson-coupled multicompo- nent superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 94, 054518 (2016). A. Maiani, A. Benfenati, and E. Babaev, Vortex nucleation bar- riers and stable fractional vortices near boundaries in multicom- ponent superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 105, 224507 (2022). H. Suhl, B. Matthias, and L. Walker, Bardeen-Cooper- Schrieffer theory in the case of overlapping bands, Phys. Rev. Lett. 3, 552 (1959). J. Kondo, Superconductivity in Transition Metals, Progress of Theoretical Physics 29, 1 (1963). Y. Bang and G. R. Stewart, Superconducting properties of the sВұ-wave state: Fe-based superconductors, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 123003 (2017). S. Gillis, J. J МҲaykk МҲa, and M. V. MiloЛҮsevi МҒc, Vortex states in meso- scopic three-band superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 89, 024512 V. Grinenko, D. Weston, F. Caglieris, C. Wuttke, C. Hess, T. Gottschall, I. Maccari, D. Gorbunov, S. Zherlitsyn, J. Wos- nitza, A. Rydh, K. Kihou, C.-H. Lee, R. Sarkar, S. Dengre, J. Garaud, A. Charnukha, R. H МҲuhne, K. Nielsch, B. B МҲuchner, H.-H. Klauss, and E. Babaev, State with spontaneously broken time-reversal symmetry above the superconducting phase tran- sition, Nature Physics 17, 1254 (2021). E. Persky, A. V. BjГёrlig, I. Feldman, A. Almoalem, E. Altman, E. Berg, I. Kimchi, J. Ruhman, A. Kanigel, and B. Kalisky, Magnetic memory and spontaneous vortices in a van der Waals superconductor, Nature 607, 692 (2022). J. Garaud and E. Babaev, Domain Walls and Their Experimen- tal Signatures in s + is Superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, V. Grinenko, R. Sarkar, K. Kihou, C. H. Lee, I. Moro- zov, S. Aswartham, B. B МҲuchner, P. Chekhonin, W. Skrotzki, K. Nenkov, R. H МҲuhne, K. Nielsch, S.-L. Drechsler, V. L. Vadi- mov, M. A. Silaev, P. A. Volkov, I. Eremin, H. Luetkens, and H.- H. Klauss, Superconductivity with broken time-reversal sym- metry inside a superconducting s-wave state, Nature Physics 16, L. P. GorвҖҷkov, Microscopic derivation of the Ginzburg-Landau equations in the theory of superconductivity, Sov. Phys. JETP M. E. Zhitomirsky and V.-H. Dao, Ginzburg-Landau theory of vortices in a multigap superconductor, Phys. Rev. B 69, 054508 T. A. Bojesen and A. SudbГё, Fluctuation Effects in Phase- Frustrated Multiband Superconductors, Journal of Supercon- ductivity and Novel Magnetism 28, 3193 (2015). G. R. Stewart, Superconductivity in iron compounds, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1589 (2011). S. V. Shulga, S.-L. Drechsler, G. Fuchs, K.-H. M МҲuller, K. Winzer, M. Heinecke, and K. Krug, Upper Critical Field Peculiarities of Superconducting YNi2B2C and LuNi2B2C, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1730 (1998). E. J. Nicol and J. P. Carbotte, Properties of the superconducting state in a two-band model, Phys. Rev. B 71, 054501 (2005). G. A. Ummarino, M. Tortello, D. Daghero, and R. S. Gonnelli, Three-band sВұ Eliashberg theory and the superconducting gaps 15 of iron pnictides, Phys. Rev. B 80, 172503 (2009). G. A. Ummarino, S. Galasso, and A. Sanna, A phenomenologi- cal multiband Eliashberg model for LiFeAs, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 25, 205701 (2013). A. V. Chubukov, M. G. Vavilov, and A. B. Vorontsov, Momen- tum dependence and nodes of the superconducting gap in the iron pnictides, Phys. Rev. B 80, 140515 (2009). S. C. de la Barrera, M. R. Sinko, D. P. Gopalan, N. Sivadas, K. L. Seyler, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. W. Tsen, X. Xu, D. Xiao, and B. M. Hunt, Tuning Ising superconductiv- ity with layer and spinвҖ“orbit coupling in two-dimensional transition-metal dichalcogenides, Nature Communications 9, D. Wickramaratne, S. Khmelevskyi, D. F. Agterberg, and I. I. Mazin, Ising Superconductivity and Magnetism in NbSe2, Phys. Rev. X 10, 041003 (2020). A. Benfenati, M. Barkman, and E. Babaev, Demonstration of CP 2 skyrmions in three-band superconductors by self- consistent solutions of a BogoliubovвҖ“de Gennes model, Phys. Rev. B 107, 094503 (2023). E. A. Yuzbashyan and B. L. Altshuler, Migdal-Eliashberg the- ory as a classical spin chain, Phys. Rev. B 106, 014512 (2022). E. Abrahams, A. Balatsky, J. R. Schrieffer, and P. B. Allen, In- teractions for odd-Пү-gap singlet superconductors, Phys. Rev. B J. Linder and A. V. Balatsky, Odd-frequency superconductivity, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91, 045005 (2019). A. Aperis, P. Maldonado, and P. M. Oppeneer, Ab initio theory of magnetic-field-induced odd-frequency two-band supercon- ductivity in MgB2, Phys. Rev. B 92, 054516 (2015). K. MГҰland and A. SudbГё, Exceeding the chandrasekhar- clogston limit in flat-band superconductors: A multiband strong-coupling approach, Phys. Rev. B 108, 214511 (2023). Y. Takahashi, Z. Huang, and X. Hu, H-T phase diagram of multi-component superconductors with frustrated inter- component couplings, Journal of the Physical Society of Japan C. S. Johnsen, Elements of the Microscopic Origins of Time- Reversal Symmetry Breaking in Phase-Frustrated Multiband Superconductors, Master thesis, NTNU, 2021. N. H. Aase, C. S. Johnsen, and A. SudbГё, Constrained weak-coupling superconductivity in multiband superconduc- tors, Phys. Rev. B 108, 024509 (2023). A. Perali, M. Sindel, and G. Kotliar, Multi-patch model for transport properties of cuprate superconductors, The European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products (Academic Press, 1980). F. Giustino, Electron-phonon interactions from first principles, Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015003 (2017). I. Mazin and J. Schmalian, Pairing symmetry and pairing state in ferropnictides: Theoretical overview, Physica C: Supercon- ductivity 469, 614 (2009), superconductivity in Iron-Pnictides. Y. Jo, J. Jaroszynski, A. Yamamoto, A. Gurevich, S. Riggs, G. Boebinger, D. Larbalestier, H. Wen, N. Zhigadlo, S. Ka- trych, Z. Bukowski, J. Karpinski, R. Liu, H. Chen, X. Chen, and L. Balicas, High-field phase-diagram of Fe arsenide super- conductors, Physica C: Superconductivity 469, 566 (2009), su- perconductivity in Iron-Pnictides. Z. Xing, S. Saha, J. Paglione, and M. M. Qazilbash, Strong electron-boson coupling in the iron-based superconductor BaFe1.9Pt0.1As2 revealed by infrared spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B 98, 224505 (2018). H. Bruus and K. Flensberg, Many-Body Quantum Theory in Condensed Matter Physics An Introduction (OUP Oxford, H. S. RГёising, G. Wagner, M. Roig, A. T. RГёmer, and B. M. Andersen, Heat capacity double transitions in time-reversal symmetry broken superconductors, Phys. Rev. B 106, 174518 S. Das, H. Paudyal, E. R. Margine, D. F. Agterberg, and I. I. Mazin, Electron-phonon coupling and spin fluctuations in the Ising superconductor NbSe2, npj Computational Materials 9,