GaAs nano-ridge laser diodes fully fabricated in a 300 mm CMOS pilot line Yannick De Koninck1,a, Charles Caer1,*, Didit Yudistira1,*, Marina Baryshnikova1, Huseyin Sar1, Ping-Yi Hsieh1,2, Saroj Kanta Patra1,b, Nadezda Kuznetsova1,c, Davide Colucci1,3, Alexey Milenin1, Andualem Ali Yimam3, Geert Morthier3, Dries Van Thourhout3, Peter Verheyen1, Marianna Pantouvaki1,d, Bernardette Kunert1,*, Joris Van Campenhout1,* 1imec, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium. 2KU Leuven, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium. 3Photonics Research Group, Ghent University-imec, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 126, Gent, 9052, Belgium. aPresent address: NVidia Corporation, Roskilde, 4000, Denmark. bPresent address: AMS-OSRAM International GmbH, Regensburg, 93055, Germany. cPresent address: Micro- Nano Systems, KU Leuven, Kapeldreef 75, Leuven, 3001, Belgium. dPresent address: Microsoft Corporation, Cambridge, CB1 2FB, United Kingdom. *Corresponding authors: Charles Caer (charles.caer@imec.be), Didit Yudistira (didit.yudistira@imec.be), Bernardette Kunert (bernardette.kunert@imec.be), Joris Van Campenhout (joris.vancampenhout@imec.be) Silicon photonics is a rapidly developing technology that promises to revolutionize the way we communicate, compute, and sense the world . However, the lack of highly scalable, native CMOS-integrated light sources is one of the main factors hampering its widespread adoption. Despite significant progress in hybrid and heterogeneous integration of III-V light sources on silicon , monolithic integration by direct epitaxial growth of III-V materials remains the pinnacle in realizing cost-effective on-chip light sources. Here, we report the first electrically driven GaAs-based multi-quantum-well laser diodes fully fabricated on 300 mm Si wafers in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. GaAs nano-ridge waveguides with embedded p-i-n diodes, InGaAs quantum wells and InGaP passivation layers are grown with high quality at wafer scale, leveraging selective-area epitaxy with aspect-ratio trapping. After III-V facet patterning and standard CMOS contact metallization, room-temperature continuous-wave lasing is demonstrated at wavelengths around 1020 nm in more than three hundred devices across a wafer, with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, output powers beyond 1 mW, laser linewidths down to 46 MHz, and laser operation up to 55 °C. These results illustrate the potential of the III-V/Si nano-ridge engineering concept for the monolithic integration of laser diodes in a Si photonics platform, enabling future cost-sensitive high-volume applications in optical sensing, interconnects and beyond. Silicon photonics enables the miniaturization and mass manufacturing of optical systems for a growing set of applications . However, the lack of native, low-cost coherent light sources is a major roadblock for ubiquitous adoption of the technology, especially for future high- volume cost-sensitive applications, such as chip-to-chip optical interconnects in machine-learning systems , fibre-to-the-X applications , or optical sensors for consumer devices . In many of today’s datacom products, the light sources are manufactured and tested separately on their native III-V substrates, and subsequently hybrid integrated on the silicon photonics wafers in the form of micro-assembled laser packages or through high-precision flip-chip assembly . Owing to the sequential nature and high-precision requirement of such assembly processes, the manufacturing throughput of these integration solutions may not scale to meet the aggressive density, cost and volume targets for future products. To address these challenges, a variety of hybrid and heterogeneous III-V integration techniques with better scaling potential are currently being developed and commercialized. Micro-transfer printing enables parallel, back-end-of-line integration of pre-fabricated III-V components with higher throughput and integration density . A front-end-of-line alternative is heterogeneous III-V integration, involving the die-to- wafer bonding of non-patterned III-V device layer stacks directly on the silicon photonics wafer with subsequent III-V device patterning and CMOS-based back-end-of-line metal interconnect formation. This approach has been thoroughly developed over the past several years and is now available in at least two commercial manufacturing lines . However, deep cost reductions and wide adoption of this technology in mainstream CMOS fabs may be hampered by the remaining need for die-to-wafer bonding and expensive III-V donor substrates used for epitaxial III-V growth, much of which are disposed as waste during the manufacturing process, raising additional concerns around health, safety and environmental sustainability. For these reasons, the direct epitaxial growth of high-quality III-V optical gain materials selectively on the desired device locations on large-size silicon photonics wafers remains a highly sought-after objective. Unfortunately, the large mismatch in crystal lattice parameters and thermal expansion coefficients between III-V and Si materials inevitably initiates the formation of crystal misfit defects, which are known to deteriorate laser performance and reliability. To reduce the defectivity in the III-V layers, multiple research groups have developed thick buffer layers and strained superlattice layers with great success [27–29]. In particular, GaAs-based laser stacks featuring InAs quantum-dot (QD) optical gain regions have unlocked tremendous progress in the performance and reliability of monolithically integrated lasers on Si, leveraging the improved tolerance of QDs against residual crystal defects, as compared to conventional quantum-well laser designs . However, these results have been limited to die-level demonstrations only. Thick buffer layers are difficult to implement on large-diameter wafers, as they are prone to formation of cracks and other defects arising from thermally induced stress. Recently, encouraging extensions of this work have been reported, featuring epitaxial growth in deep pockets etched in a silicon- oxide masking layer on 300 mm and 200 mm silicon photonics wafers . However, the molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE) employed for the deposition of the QD gain stack is intrinsically non-selective, resulting in the deposition of a polycrystalline III-V film outside of the targeted trenches, potentially hampering subsequent wafer-scale integration processes. Selective-area growth (SAG) of III-V materials on patterned Si wafers by metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) represents a compelling integration approach, arguably with better scalability potential than MBE. Selectivity can be easily achieved in vapor-phase epitaxy, and as such, the III-V material can be deposited only where it is needed. The confinement of misfit defects is achieved by starting the growth of the III-V layers in deep and narrow trenches, etched in a dielectric masking layer on the Si wafer, a technique referred to as ”aspect-ratio trapping” (ART) [33–35]. Various ART architectures are currently being explored and efficient defect reduction has been reported without the need for thick buffer layers [36–38]. Consequently, issues with wafer warpage and crack formation in the wafer-scale deposited III-V layers are much less pronounced. Over the past several years, we have developed the concept of nano-ridge (NR) engineering, a SAG-based integration approach applying ART for defect reduction, followed by the growth of low- defectivity III-V nano-ridges outside of the trenches. By careful tuning of the MOVPE process parameters, the nano-ridge dimensions, shapes and composition can be accurately engineered, independent from the starting trench dimensions. Optimized nano-ridge structures typically feature threading dislocation densities well below 105 cm-2, up to 100x lower than for optimized blanket buffer layers (see Methods and Supplementary Information Epitaxy and crystal defects). Previously, we successfully applied the nano-ridge engineering concept to realize a variety of heterostructures, in-situ doping profiles and surface passivation layers in various III-V material systems such as GaAs, InAs, GaSb and InGaAs [39–45], leading to first device demonstrations including optically pumped lasers , heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBTs) and wafer- scale GaAs-based p-i-n photodetectors with record-low dark currents on Si . In this paper, we exploit the III-V nano-ridge engineering concept to demonstrate, to the best of our knowledge, the first full wafer-scale growth and fabrication of electrically pumped GaAs- based lasers on standard 300 mm (001) Si wafers, entirely in a CMOS pilot manufacturing line. Leveraging the low defectivity in GaAs nano-ridge structures, the lasers employ an optical gain region based on InGaAs multiple quantum wells (MQW), embedded in an in-situ doped p-i-n diode and effectively passivated with an InGaP capping layer, all monolithically grown on 300 mm Si wafers. Using on-wafer GaAs nano-ridge p-i-n monitor photodetectors for wafer-scale measurements, more than 300 nano-ridge devices were found to lase around 1020 nm wavelength in continuous-wave operation at room temperature, with threshold currents as low as 5 mA, slope efficiencies as high as 0.5 W/A, and up to 1.75 mW total emitted optical power. Furthermore, an early reliability test revealed continuous lasing during at least 500 h of room-temperature operation, with only a mild increase in threshold current and constant slope efficiency. We believe that these results represent a significant milestone towards the manufacturing of scalable and energy efficient light sources for low-cost optical interconnects, optical sensors and beyond. Results Laser structure and fabrication Leveraging wafer-scale processes, several thousands of GaAs nano-ridge devices including lasers, photodetectors and test structures are fabricated on a standard 300 mm silicon wafer, as shown in Fig. 1a-c. Each GaAs nano-ridge structure is formed by selective-area epitaxy, initiated with the growth of n-type doped GaAs in a high aspect-ratio trench patterned in the n-type doped silicon substrate (see fig. 1c). The epitaxy process conditions are tuned to form box-shaped structures outside of the trench, with embedded p-i-n heterojunction. The optical gain region consists of three compressively strained InGaAs quantum wells (QW) with 20% In content in the non-intentionally- doped (nid) GaAs layer (fig. 1d), and the nano-ridge is capped by an InGaP passivation layer. The n-type contacts of the GaAs p-i-n diodes are formed by standard Cu metallization and W plugs landing on the heavily n-type doped top surface of the silicon wafer, which is in turn electrically connected to the n-type GaAs epitaxial layer. The p-type contact is formed by a second row of W plugs, punching through the InGaP passivation layer and landing in the p-type doped GaAs top contact layer (see Extended Data Fig. 1 and Methods for fabrication details). To minimize loading effects and improve uniformity during the epitaxy process, the nano-ridge structures are grown in regular arrays with a pitch of 1 micrometer (fig. 1c). A cross-sectional high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF-) scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) of a fabricated device is shown in fig 1e, and highlights the In-containing layers, the full passivation of the nano-ridges outside the trenches by the InGaP layer, as well as the embedded InGaAs quantum wells. The HAADF-STEM image in fig. 1f shows the full extent of the nano-ridge cross-section, revealing a well-controlled nano-ridge geometry from the Si-substrate to the top Cu electrode, as well as the top W contact plug piercing through the InGaP layer and landing in the p+-GaAs contact layer. A close-up view of the active region (dark-field (DF-)STEM in fig. 1g shows defect-free InGaAs QWs and GaAs barriers, while a close-up view of the high aspect-ratio trench (DF-STEM, fig. 1h) shows efficient trapping of threading dislocations (TDs) at the bottom of the n-GaAs region near the silicon interface. Finally, the longitudinal HAADF-STEM image in fig. 1i further illustrates the effective trapping of threading dislocations, which remain confined to the bottom of the ART trench. As part of the wafer-scale fabrication process, laser cavities are formed in the GaAs nano- ridges by dry etching two facets with an angle of 12°, yielding approximately 5 % facet reflectivity (fig. 2a). On one side of the laser cavities, on-chip monitor photodetectors are implemented in the same epitaxial layers as the nano-ridge lasers, while the other facet adjoins a larger etched area enabling out-of-plane optical emission. A key aspect to achieve lasing in the GaAs nano-ridges resides in optimizing the pitch of the W plugs contacting the p-GaAs layer. For dense contact pitch designs, the strong spatial overlap between the optical mode propagating in the GaAs nano-ridge waveguide and the W plugs induces very large optical losses that prohibit lasing. Yet, efficient lasing operation is obtained for laser designs with a relatively large W plug pitch (pCON35=4.8 μm). In these designs, mode beating of the fundamental TE00 and the higher-order TE02 mode results in a periodic interference pattern that minimizes the optical intensity locally underneath the W plugs, as illustrated by the simulated mode profiles shown in fig. 2c-d. This mode-beating behaviour enables low-loss optical propagation through the NR laser structure (fig. 2c), while in the case of a tighter W pitch (fig. 2e) (pCON35=0.3 μm), the optical field decays quickly due to the strong absorption from the W contacts (see Methods and Supplementary Information for further discussion regarding p-contact plug pitch optimization, calculated mirror reflectivity and simulated internal losses). In addition, the strong optical confinement in the NR, inferred from the 2D finite difference (2D FD) calculations, yields a confinement factor  between the 3 QWs and the optical mode as large as 8 %, which is instrumental for compensating the large intracavity total optical loss at threshold: Γgth = αi + αm (1) where gth is threshold gain, i is the laser internal and m is the total mirror loss. The test configuration used for the wafer-scale characterization of the devices is shown in fig. 2b: three electrical probes are deployed to simultaneously drive the nano-ridge lasers and probe the photodetectors, while a multi-mode fibre (MMF) optical probe is used to collect part of the upwards radiated laser emission, for subsequent power and spectral analysis. Alternatively, as depicted in fig. 2f, one laser facet can be cleaved to form a mirror with approximately 40 % reflectivity, while the other facet remains facing the nano-ridge photodiode. This configuration enables more efficient collection of the laser emission, using a butt-coupled single-mode lensed fibre, allowing for in-depth analysis of the laser performance at the die level. Die-level laser results First, we discuss die-level laser measurements to unambiguously demonstrate laser operation in the cleaved-facet GaAs nano-ridge devices. In a first measurement, we drive the nano-ridge laser with a continuous-wave current at room temperature and collect the laser output from the cleaved facet by a large-area photodetector. Fig. 3a shows the measured optical output power and diode voltage as a function of laser drive current, i.e. the L-I-V plot for a cleaved device with a cavity length of 1.16 mm. The L-I curve reveals a threshold current as low as 4.5 mA, and a single-facet output power of up to 0.7 mW at a bias current of 20 mA. The dashed line represents the calculated L-I response, obtained by solving the laser rate equations (see Methods and Supplementary Information). The model accurately predicts the measured threshold current and is in reasonable agreement with the measured slope efficiency. The V-I curve shows a diode characteristic with turn-on voltage of 1.4 V. Above the turn-on voltage, a non-linear V-I response can be observed, originating from the non-ohmic and relatively high contact resistance in the widely spaced contact plugs to the p-type GaAs layer (see Supplementary Information). To gain additional insights into the nano-ridge laser properties, we measured a similar, 1.4mm long laser in a different test configuration (fig 2f), where the large-area photodetector is replaced by a lensed single-mode fibre (SMF) connected to an optical spectrum analyser (OSA). The optical spectra recorded as a function of laser current are displayed in fig. 3b, showing single- mode laser emission around 1023 nm across a wavelength span of 50 nm. A zoom-in of the same spectra (see fig. 3c) shows a threshold current Ith of 6 mA and a redshift of the laser wavelength up to 0.4 nm without any mode hopping with increasing drive current. To confirm that the device is indeed operating as a laser, we also carried out a linewidth measurement using a self-homodyne setup (see Methods and Supplementary Information for further reading). From the measured radiofrequency (RF) beat note depicted in fig. 3d, we infer a linewidth of 46 MHz at a current bias Ibias of 15 mA (Ibias>2Ith). Finally, the inset in fig. 3d illustrates a side mode suppression ratio (SMSR) exceeding 30 dB at this drive current, ensuring that the RF beat note originates from a single longitudinal mode of the nano-ridge laser. Wafer-level laser results Next, we discuss the fully wafer-scale fabricated lasers with two etched facets. As a first example, a nano-ridge laser with a 2 mm long cavity was probed on the wafer and the optical emission was measured using the on-chip photodetector (PD) on one side and a MMF on the other side. The I-I plot depicted in fig. 4a shows a threshold current of 7.5 mA and a maximum photocurrent of 71.5 μA at a bias of 17.5 mA. By considering the measured PD responsivity of 0.65 A/W and the simulated LD-to-PD coupling efficiency of 12.5% (see methods), we infer a total emitted power of up to 1.76 mW, and a 1.33 % wall-plug efficiency, which agrees well with the laser model. Subsequently, we carried out full 300 mm wafer-scale measurements to assess the reproducibility of our nano-ridge laser results, using the on-wafer photodetectors. As depicted in figure 5, we measured three sets of nano-ridge lasers with different lengths (fig. 5a: L=1 mm, fig. 5b: L=1.5 mm and fig. 5c: L=2 mm) across a full wafer, gathering statistics regarding process variability and length dependence of the laser threshold, output power and slope efficiency. The performance metrics of more than 300 functional nano-ridge lasers were extracted and are displayed in fig. 5a-c. The calibration previously performed on single nano-ridge devices is used to estimate the total optical power radiated by the two facets of the lasers. Mean threshold current values of 5.9 mA, 8.1 mA and 9.3 mA were measured for 1 mm, 1.5 mm and 2 mm long lasers, respectively. The mean slope efficiencies are 8.3 μA/mA, 6.1 μA/mA and 4.9 μA/mA, or 0.33 W/A, 0.22 W/A and 0.19 W/A, respectively. These measured values are in good agreement with predicted values using the laser model. For L=1 mm, the minimum threshold current is smaller than 6 mA for a large fraction of lasers and as low as 4.5 mA (1.2 kA/cm2), while the estimated maximum total output power exceeds 1.25 mW at a bias current lower than 10 mA, reaching a wall-plug efficiency of 3.3%. For L=1.5 mm, the minimum measured threshold current is 5.5 mA while the maximum total output power exceeds 1.5 mW at a bias current lower than 15 mA. Finally, for L=2 mm, the minimum measured threshold current is 7.1 mA (0.93 kA/cm2) while the maximum total output power exceeds 1.75 mW at a bias current of 18 mA. The relatively large spread in measured threshold current, slope efficiency and output power across the wafer originates from variability of the wafer-scale processes, which have not yet been optimized for uniformity: first, variations in GaAs NR width and height across the 300 mm wafer originating from the MOVPE process variability induce changes in the confinement factor  within the InGaAs quantum wells, as well as in the mode-beating periodicity, which in turn increases the absorption loss from the metal contact. Second, wafer-scale variation of the InGaP/GaAs etch process needed to land the W vias on the p-GaAs layer and residual topography after the planarization steps required for the back-end-of-line (BEOL) processing may lead to shorted or open-circuit electrodes. The wafer-scale variability is further illustrated in fig. 5f, which depicts the distribution of the mean threshold current per die for 1-mm long lasers (see also Extended Data Fig. 3). The lowest threshold current values are found mostly in a ring-like shape at half the diameter of the 300 mm wafer. We note that this wafer map is made after binning of the tested devices, resulting in the removal of the dies at the edge of the wafer that contained only light-emitting diodes or short circuits, due to the failure modes described above. The temperature dependence of the nano-ridge lasers was investigated by mounting the tested wafer on a stage with a temperature controller and recording the L-I curves (fig. 4b). For a 2 mm long NR laser, single-mode lasing was observed at a temperature up to 55 °C, with a threshold current of 30 mA at 55 °C, compared to 7.5 mA at 25 °C. A fit of the temperature dependent threshold current and slope efficiency yields characteristic temperatures T1=29 K and T2=94.9 K, respectively (See Extended Data Fig. 2). As an early investigation into the reliability of the nano-ridge lasers, we carried out an on- wafer stress test on one of the best performing, 2-mm long nano-ridge lasers. We biased the laser at 1.5 Ith at room temperature and monitored the output power, slope efficiency and threshold current (fig. 4c, see Methods for additional information regarding the stress conditions). While the threshold current increased from 6.1 to 7.3 mA, the degradation showed a decelerating trend and the slope efficiency stayed largely constant. The NR laser remained operational during at least 500 h of stress time, exceeding the previously reported record lifetime of 200 hours for GaAs-based QW lasers directly grown on silicon . Discussion To the best of our knowledge, the presented work marks the first monolithic III-V laser diode integration on 300 mm Si wafers entirely carried out in a CMOS manufacturing pilot line, without the need for any III-V substrates or bonding steps. High-quality active GaAs waveguides are grown by MOVPE applying nano-ridge engineering, mitigating any major issues related to wafer bow or crack formation as typically encountered in blanket III-V layers epitaxially grown on silicon. Despite their sub-micrometre-scale cross-sectional dimensions, the GaAs/Si nano-ridge structures feature efficient carrier injection and generate strong optical gain at 1-micrometre wavelengths, enabled by the record-low crystal defectivity in epitaxially grown GaAs on Si and effective passivation by the InGaP capping layer. These attributes are instrumental for robust steady-state laser operation at room temperature and above, as demonstrated in this paper with threshold current densities comparable with conventional laser designs and below 1 kA/cm2. In the demonstrated nano-ridge lasers, an optical multi-mode beating effect mitigates part of the optical losses induced by the top metal contacts, which is equally essential to achieving the low threshold currents and slope efficiencies as high as 0.5 A/W. Furthermore, the grating structure formed by the periodic metal plugs enables single-mode laser operation, with linewidths comparable or smaller than those realized in typical vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs). A key remaining challenge is to demonstrate the long-term reliability of the monolithic GaAs-on-silicon nano-ridge lasers. It is well known that quantum-well based lasers on silicon are particularly sensitive to the presence of threading dislocations, and a reliable quantum-well laser essentially needs to have a dislocation-free active region . As shown in the supplementary materials, we estimate the threading-dislocation density in our GaAs nano-ridges to be below 6x104 cm−2, or equivalently, on average one dislocation per 4 mm of nano-ridge length. As such, many of the tested lasers are expected to be dislocation free, providing a positive outlook for achieving long reliability lifetimes. Several devices have indeed shown encouraging room- temperature operating lifetimes beyond 100 h, and the dominant failure mode observed so far is related to the high current density (> 150kA/cm2) in the top metal plugs, which need to be sparsely populated to realize low optical loss in the current laser designs. An in-depth reliability analysis is ongoing and will be reported elsewhere. We see multiple opportunities to go beyond the current demonstration. First, the nano- ridge cross section can be improved to decouple the optical modes from the metal contacts, enabling a much higher density of p-type contact plugs while retaining low internal optical loss. This will lower the operating voltage and improve wall-plug efficiencies, while also reducing current density and electrical resistance in the top metal contacts, leading to improved reliability. Next, the laser operating wavelength can be extended towards the O-band by growing nano-ridges with higher In-content or alternatively using InAs quantum dots as the optical gain material. Last, the nano-ridge lasers can be optically coupled with (amorphous) silicon waveguides . Coupling the GaAs nano-ridge to silicon and silicon nitride waveguides enables the implementation of external-cavity diode lasers, with better controlled laser wavelengths and reduced laser noise. Such GaAs-Si-SiN integrated photonics platform is expected to enable future cost-sensitive applications in optical interconnects, optical sensing and beyond.