Interfacial and thickness effects in La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7 superlattices V. A. M. Lima,1 M. C. O. Aguiar,1 N. C. Plumb,2 M. Radovic,2 and W. H. Brito1 1Departamento de F ́ısica, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, C.P. 702, 30123-970 Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil 2Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen, Switzerland (Dated: October 2, 2023) Superlattices of correlated oxides have been used to explore interfacial effects and to achieve additional control over the physical properties of individual constituents. In this work, we present a first-principles perspective of the strain and thickness effects in La2/3Sr1/3MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7 (LSMO/YBCO) superlattices. Our findings indicate that the presence of epitaxial strain and LSMO leads to a reduction of buckling parameters of the interfacial CuO2 planes, as well as the transfer of electrons from LSMO to YBCO. In addition, the change in Cu-3d valence is slightly dependent on the LSMO layer thickness. More interestingly, the in-plane ferromagnetic ground state within the CuO2 planes near the interface is induced due to the local moments centered at the copper atoms. These local moments are decoupled from the charge transfer and, according to our calculations, appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridization being restricted to the interfacial region. The induced net magnetic ordering in interfacial copper atoms may have implications in the control of the superconducting state in the LSMO/YBCO superlattices. I. INTRODUCTION Atomic precision growth methods and advanced char- acterization techniques have paved the way for the study of transition metal oxides (TMO’s) heterostructures and superlattices. In 2004, most of the scientific interest in TMO’s heterostructures was triggered by the dis- covery of a two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) at SrTiO3/LaAlO3 interface . Since then, numerous stud- ies have been carried out to elucidate the physical mech- anisms underlying the properties of the 2DEG, its super- conducting phase , and interfacial ferromagnetism . Moreover, interfacial and proximity effects have also been used to explore the emergent properties of cuprate high- temperature superconductors, where a complex interplay among competing orders takes place. The intriguing balance between the competing orders in the cuprates can be affected by the hole density, the number of CuO2 layers in the structure, epitaxial strain, interfacial coupling, and proximity effects. According to the early work of Chakhalian and coworkers , the interfacial coupling between La2/3Ca1/3MnO3 (LCMO) and YBa2Cu3O7 (YBCO) gives rise to small uncompen- sated magnetic moments at Cu atoms near the inter- face, mainly due to the interactions with underneath Mn atoms. Later on, the same group also found an orbital reconstruction in LCMO/YBCO heterostructures, where the Cu-3dz2 states near the interface become partially oc- cupied due to the hybridization with Mn-3dz2 orbitals. The unusual magnetic profile of the LCMO/YBCO inter- face was also addressed by neutron experiments and density functional theory (DFT) calculations , which pointed out the formation of a magnetic ”dead layer”, associated with the antiferromagnetic coupling between MnO2 layers close to the interface. More recently, x- ray scattering measurements indicated that the coupling between Cu and Mn atoms is sensitive to the interfacial terminations, where antiferromagnetic and ferromagnetic couplings can be realized . To understand the complex physics that takes place at interfaces between superconductors and ferromagnetic oxides, it is also important to clarify how the charge transfer evolves across the interface. Overall, previous theoretical and experimental works have indi- cated that electrons are transferred from the manganite to the cuprate in LCMO/YBCO and La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO)/YBCO interfaces, leading to a reduction of Mn- eg occupancy. Further experimental studies have indi- cated that in LCMO/YBCO heterostructures, the charge transfer occurs only within a few atomic planes from the interface . More interestingly, XAS experiments have shown that the superconducting and magnetic prop- erties of LCMO/YBCO heterostructures are sensitive to the manganite termination, which also affects the charge transfer between the two oxides. This intriguing proxim- ity effect and charge transfer can also lead to supercon- ductor to Mott insulator transitions in LCMO/YBCO superlattices, where the transition is controlled by the LCMO thickness . More recently, these heterostruc- tures have been used to study the interplay of charge- density wave (CDW) and superconductivity , to dis- close a new type of CDW ordering associated with Cu- 3dz2 orbitals , to induce spin-triplet superconductiv- ity , and to investigate the Josephson coupling in LSMO/YBCO/LSMO trilayer junctions . Motivated by the experimental and theoretical find- ings mentioned above, we have performed an extensive theoretical investigation of LSMO/YBCO superlattices by means of first-principles calculations. Since LSMO and LCMO are ferromagnetic half-metallic manganese oxides and the studies report a similar qualitative behavior for both LSMO/YBCO and LCMO/YBCO su- perlattices and heterostructures, we expect that our re- sults can be extended to LCMO interfaces. We emphasize that the details of structural distortions, charge trans- fer, interfacial magnetism, and confinement presented in arXiv:2309.16013v2 [cond-mat.str-el] 29 Sep 2023 2 LSMO/YBCO superlattices remain unclear and are of great importance for a better understanding of the inter- face physics associated with strongly correlated oxides. Our goal is to better understand how the change in these parameters affects the cuprate and the manganite proper- ties. In addition, our work is complementary to previous first principles studies of manganite/cuprate heterostruc- tures, which were able to reproduce some of the physical features observed experimentally . Our findings indicate that epitaxial strain and the pres- ence of LSMO suppresses the buckling distances and an- gles of the interfacial CuO2 layers. These structural dis- tortions are accompanied by a transfer of electrons from LSMO to YBCO, which can be explained in terms of electronegativity difference. We also find induced local moments centered at the interfacial Cu atoms, which, in turn, are decoupled from the charge transfer. These local moments lead to an in-plane ferromagnetic ordering and appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridiza- tion. The paper is organized in four sections. In Sec. II, we present our proposed structural models as well as the employed theoretical approximations. The relaxed structures and structural parameters are discussed in Sec. III A, while the calculated interfacial charge trans- fer and magnetism are discussed in Secs. III B and III C, respectively. The hybridization between the interfacial Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d states is discussed in Sec. III D. Our conclusions are summarized in Sec. IV. II. MODELS AND METHODS To study the physical properties of oriented LSMO/YBCO superlattices we constructed La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (m u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (n u.c.) struc- tural models, with m = 3, 6 and n = 2, 4, using tetragonal supercells with MnO2-BaO interface termi- nation (plane terminated) (see Fig. 1(a)). The LSMO thicknesses were chosen to allow the use of more homo- geneous Sr doping. Regarding the YBCO, we model the two YBCO layers with different numbers of unit cells to understand the effects of changing the thickness. We also used √ 2a × √ 2a in-plane rotated supercells to take into account the MnO6 octahedra distortions, which are essential for describing the LSMO properties . To reduce complexity, Sr-doping was considered by replacing La atoms with Sr atoms in the inner layers (away from the interface) of LaMnO3 (LMO). The structural parameters addressed in our work are illustrated in Figs. 1 (b) and (c). The buckling distance b measures how distant the oxygen atoms are from a per- fectly flat TMO2 plane (TM for transition metal), φ cor- responds to the in-plane TM-O-TM (TM =Cu, Mn) bond angle, and ∆ represents the TM-O (planar) distance. From now on, the LSMO/YBCO superlattices will be labeled as (LSMO)m/(YBCO)n for simplicity. We also constructed LaMnO3 (2 u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (2 u.c.) and LaMnO3 (3 u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (2 u.c.) superlattices, la- spectively, to compare with (LSMO)m/(YBCO)n struc- tures and analyze the Sr-doping effects. To investigate the effects of periodicity in z-axis direction, we also built a LaMnO3 (2 u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (2 u.c.) heterostructure model (see Appendix A). In all the structures considered, there are two types of Cu atoms: the ones belonging to the CuO2 planes, labeled as Cu(pi), and the ones belong- ing to the CuO chains, labeled as Cu(cj). The i and j indexes mark the z-axis position counting from the in- terface. For all the configurations, we imposed an epi- taxial strain induced by SrTiO3 (STO)(001), a common substrate used when experimentally growing oxide het- erostructures, by fixing the in-plane lattice parameters to aST O = 3.905 ̊A. We performed spin-polarized DFT+U calculations within the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) generalized gradient approximation as implemented in the Vi- enna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) [22–24]. We used projector augmented waves (PAW) pseudopoten- tials and a plane-wave energy cutoff of 450 eV. PAW-PBE pseudopotentials in VASP have great relia- bility for a significant group of materials and were exten- sively tested . Additional electronic interactions, at the static mean-field level, were considered using a local electronic interaction U = 5 eV and a Hund’s coupling J = 1 eV for the Mn-3d orbitals. The atomic positions, as well as the superlattices sizes in z-axis direction, were relaxed using a 4 × 4 × 1 k-point mesh until the forces on each atom were less than 0.01 eV/ ̊A. In all structures, the density of states (DOS) was calculated using a 12 × 12 × 3 k-point mesh. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS A. Structural distortions and buckling suppression In Figs. 2(a) and (b), we display the relaxed structures lattices, respectively. In addition, we show the calculated (in red) and buckling distances (b) (in blue). We observe that atoms near the interface present different distortion patterns compared to our relaxed bulk (isolated) YBCO and LSMO. In particular, we find that b is slightly re- duced for the CuO2 planes at the interface for both su- perlattices. In (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2, we find a reduction of b of around 0.11 ̊A, in comparison with bulk YBCO (bbulk = 0.35 ̊A), for the interfacial CuO2 planes. The same feature is observed in (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 (Fig. 2(b)), where the b is reduced by 0.15 ̊A at the interface. On the LSMO side, one can notice a stronger suppression of the Mn-O buckling distance for (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2, in comparison with bulk LSMO, and an increase of the Mn2-O-Mn1 bond angle in both structures (in red). We mention that, according to early studies of Kambee 3 structure of the out-of-plane TM-O-TM (TM = Cu, Mn) bond angle θ. and Ishii , the buckling distances are connected with the superconducting critical temperature (Tc): higher transition temperatures were found for cuprates with smaller buckling distances b. This can be understood within a magnetic mechanism for Cooper pairing where the superexchange coupling Jx ∝ cos2φ, where φ is the buckling angle (see Fig. 1(b)). According to our re- sults, the reduction of b is accompanied by an average reduction of φ of around 1.56◦ in the superlattices with respect to bulk values. Therefore, according to our find- ings, the epitaxial strain and interface structural distor- tions would enhance the superconducting phase of CuO2 planes near the interface. As pointed out in , the magnetic ordering in LSMO is directly connected to the change in the Mn- O-Mn bond angle θ upon doping, going from an AFM out-of-plane coupling (θ ∼ 155◦ in LaMnO3) to a FM coupling (θ ∼ 160◦ in La2/3Sr1/3MnO3), followed by an AFM coupling (θ ∼ 170◦ in La1/10Sr9/10MnO3). As can be seen in Fig. 2 (red lines), near the interface θ approaches values corresponding to large doping, sug- gesting an AFM coupling of MnO2 layers (correspond- ing to a magnetic ”dead layer”). On the YBCO side, θ is only affected at the interface, where the Mn-O- Cu angle is 176.28◦ for (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 and 177.19◦ for (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4. For (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (see now Fig. 2(c)), we find θ = 177.03◦, indicating that the m/n ratio is one of the control parameters on the in- terfacial distortions. It is important to note that the angle θ would be smaller in YBCO ultrathin films on thicker LSMO substrates. We mention that the Cu-O- Mn out-of-plane interface bond length remains almost and (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (∼ 4.20 ̊A). The results for the heterostructure (see Appendix A) suggests that the buckling distance b is slightly reduced for the CuO2 planes at the interface, in comparison with the bulk values, accompanied by an average reduction of the buckling angle φ and that the behavior of θ near the interface also suggests the formation of a magnetic “dead layer”. Finally, we investigate how the Sr-doping affects the key structural distortions by comparing the relaxed struc- (Figs. 2(c) and (d)). We observe that the YBCO struc- ture is more affected when using LMO instead of LSMO, which can be connected to bulk LMO exhibiting larger Mn-O-Mn bond angle distortions than LSMO. This re- 4 (a) (b) (c) (d) In Mni i indicates the z-axis position counting from the interface, whose location is given by the black dashed lines. sults in θ along the whole structure becoming smaller also find that the Cu-O bond length of the chain is larger in (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 ̊A) than in (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (1.953 ̊A), with the latter being the same as in bulk YBCO. Together with the increase of these out-of-plane distortions, the bond length ∆ also in- creases in the CuO2 planes when using LMO (not shown), indicating a larger tilting on the CuO2 tetrahedral than in (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2. However, the Cu-O-Mn out- of-plane interface bond length for (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 is ∼ 2% larger than for (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2. We emphasize that when the CuO2 plane is flat (small b), Tc is enhanced, the large buckling values tend to local- ize the conducting holes in underdoped cuprates, while decreasing the superconducting strength . By looking only at the structural distortions, our findings suggest an enhancement of Tc in all structures, which is indeed in disagreement with the experimental findings . This shows that the structural distortions can not explain the suppression of superconductivity in the superlattices and heterostructures . On the other hand, previous works have reported a reduction in Tc for bulk YBCO induced by z-axis compressive strain effects. We display the key structural parameters in Appendix B. B. Charge transfer Another important feature of oxide interfaces is the charge transfer between the constituents, which can give rise to different d shell occupancies from those observed in the bulk counterparts. The charge transfer driv- ing mechanisms have been addressed in several previ- ous works [32–34], where the band alignment of O-2p and TM-3d states between the oxides forming the super- lattice and the electronegativity difference play a cen- tral role. According to Chen and Millis , the en- ergy separation between the TM-3d and O-2p states is larger in bulk LSMO than in bulk YBCO. Therefore, the electronegativity difference of our system indicates that LSMO would transfer electrons to YBCO. To investigate this hypothesis, we study the charge transfer within our models and how the 3d occupancies change across the in- terfaces. In particular, we evaluate integrals of the pro- jected density of states up to the Fermi energy for the distinct Cu and Mn atoms presented in our structures and compare them with the occupation values of bulk YBCO and LSMO. In Fig. 3 we show the variation of 3d occupancies (in blue), ∆nd = nSL − nbulk, for Mn and Cu atoms for 5 (a) (b) (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 3d-orbital charge difference ∆nd (blue) and magnetic moments μ (red) for the TM along the structure for (a) The dashed black lines indicate the interfaces. For better visualization, the Mn moments were reduced by a factor of 70. ∆nd was calculated using the difference between the interface and bulk occupations. the relaxed superlattices (SL’s) in comparison with the bulk YBCO occupation values. For (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 (Fig. 3(a)), we find an increase of Cu-3d occupancies for the CuO2 planes and the CuO chain, accompanied by a reduction of Mn-3d occupancies. In particular, we find that Cu-3d occupancy of interfacial CuO2 planes in- creases by 0.072 electrons, in agreement with previous experimental studies . The 3d occupancy of the in- ner CuO chain, in turn, increases by around 0.011 elec- trons. Similar charge transfer profiles are observed for (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 (Fig. 3(b)), where the Cu-3d in- terfacial occupancy increases by 0.055 electrons. This increase of Cu-3d occupancies should drive the CuO2 planes away from the optimal regime towards the anti- ferromagnetic phase. For the heterostructure (see Ap- pendix A), the Cu-3d interfacial occupancies also in- crease. The effects of Sr-doping on the charge transfer can be analyzed by comparing (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 and (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 average planar charge densities, as shown in Fig. 4. In the inner MnO2 layers of (LMO)3/(YBCO)2, the charge average is smaller than in (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2, but at the interface, the charge profiles are similar (purple lines in Figs. 4(a) and (b)). We find the highest peak intensity for the LMO interface. In LSMO, the Sr has a 2+ valence rather than a 3+ va- lence, which is associated with La . This reduces the Mn occupation, changing it from 3d4 to 3d3 in a propor- tion of # La atoms # Sr atoms = x. In addition, one can see in Fig. 4 that the charge of the LaO and BaO semiconducting layers is also affected by the interface, with a reduction of the maximum charge for the ones close to the interface; it can explain the electron doping in the first MnO2 plane present in both figures. As a result, the charge imbalance at the interface, caused by the MnO2-BaO-CuO2 termi- nation, makes a ”bridge” for the electrons in MnO2 and BaO to go to the CuO2 layer. The Cu-3dz2−r2 + O-2pz charge difference regarding the interfacial charge transfer is illustrated in Appendix C. C. Magnetism Having established the structural distortions and charge transfer between YBCO and LSMO, we now explore the obtained DFT+U magnetic ground states for each superlattice. In Fig. 5 we display the spin density ∆ρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓ for (a) (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2, perlattices, respectively. First, one can notice that the magnetization profile of LSMO in all these struc- 6 (a) (b) (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 black lines indicate the interface; the purple lines indicate the bulk LSMO (in (a)) and LMO (in (b)) average planar charge density corresponding to the first and the second maxima as well as the minimum value, while the blue lines indicate the same for YBCO. tures corresponds to in-plane FM coupled Mn-local mo- ments with AFM ordering between planes, giving rise to the so-called magnetic “dead layer”. More impor- tantly, we observe the formation of tiny Cu-centered lo- cal magnetic moments up to the second CuO2 plane for and (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 the induced local moments only appear in the interfacial CuO2 plane. For the interfacial Cu atoms, we find tiny local moments of 0.04 μB/Cu for (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 and 0.03 μB/Cu for (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4, as indicated in Fig. 3. For the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 superlattice the calculated local moments are the same as in (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 (not shown). This is in reasonable agreement with the lo- cal moments reported experimentally , where a value of 0.06 μB/Cu was found. The AFM coupling between Cu and Mn atoms that we observe at the interfaces can be explained using the Goodenough-Kanamori-Anderson (GKA) rules for the superexchange interaction . As schematically depicted in Fig. 5(d), our calculations indicate that there is a net antiferromagnetic coupling due to the Cu2+(3d9)-Mn3+(3d4) hybridization, and a sizable orbital polarization concerning the 3dx2−y2 or- bital. For the undoped (LMO)2/(YBCO)2 superlattice (Fig. 6), the induced magnetic moments appear in the Cu-chain atoms near the interface, with values of 0.04 μB/Cu. We see the formation of local magnetic mo- ments up to the second Cu plane, indicating that without Sr-doping, the interfacial magnetic effect is stronger for smaller manganite thickness (not shown). In the case of the heterostructure (see Appendix A) the local moments are induced only in the first layer of Cu atoms, and we find tiny local moments of 0.04 μB/Cu. We also analyzed interfaces forced to be fully ferro- magnetic, i.e. without the presence of the “dead layer”. These results are presented in Appendix D. We see that the charge transfer decreases, while the magnetic mo- ments induced in the interfacial CuO2 layers have a small increase of 0.02μB/Cu when LSMO is completely ferro- magnetic. On the right axes of Fig. 3 one can see the magnetization profile for the (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 and (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 superlattices. Due to the charge transfer, the Mn atoms close to the interface exhibit smaller values than most intern ones, reaching 3.30μB in (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (not shown). By increasing the YBCO layer thickness, we observe a reduction of 0.11μB in the magnitude of the first Mn local mo- ment and of 0.04μB in the second Mn atom for the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 superlattice. On the other hand, the increase in the number of LSMO unit cells leads to the 7 superlattices. The surfaces in yellow represent ∆ρ > 0, and the ones in blue represent ∆ρ < 0. Dotted lines indicate the interface position. In (d) we depicted the Cu (Mn) 3d occupancies and the hybridization responsible for the AFM coupling. Spin-up (spin-down) electrons are indicated by yellow (red) arrows. Dashed arrows indicate fractional orbital occupations. Cu Cu Cu Cu Cu Cu Mn O O Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn O O O O O O O O ẑ (LMO)2/(YBCO)2 Spin densities ∆ρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓ isosurfaces for the (LMO)2/(YBCO)2 superlattice. The surfaces in yellow repre- sent ∆ρ > 0, and the ones in blue represent ∆ρ < 0. Dotted lines indicate the interface position. opposite effect, where we find an increase of 0.04μB in the first Mn magnetic moment and of 0.05μB in the sec- ond Mn atom for the (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 superlattice. The inner LSMO layers have a bulk-like magnetism. It is noteworthy to emphasize that our calculations indi- cate a decoupling between the induced charge transfers and the local moments in the cuprate, as we explain in the following. For instance, one can notice that in the case of (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4, the induced local moments appear only in the interfacial CuO2 planes, whereas in (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 it extends to the second CuO2 layer. For the former, the charge transfer occurs up to the Cu5 plane near the bulk-like Cu-chain layer. Another inter- esting fact is that the interfacial MnO2 plane, even with a larger occupation than in bulk, has a smaller magnetic moment, which can indicate a change in the in-plane magnetic coupling that leads the system closer to an AFM configuration, reducing the strength of the Hund’s coupling. To summarize, our results indicate that the penetra- tion depth of interfacial local moments is controlled by the manganite thickness and Sr concentration. More importantly, these local moments give rise to an in- plane ferromagnetic ordering within the interfacial CuO2 planes, which competes against the formation of singlet Cooper pairs and may explain the attenuation of Tc in heterostructures of manganites/cuprates. It is also im- portant to mention that strain-induced deoxygenation plays an important role in the suppression of the super- conducting phase of YBCO in other heterostructures . 8 D. Mn-O-Cu Hybridization To study the hybridization between the interfacial Mn- O-Cu states, we calculated the projected density of states (PDOS) for the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 superlattice. In par- ticular, we focused on the Cu-3dz2−r2, Mn-3dz2−r2 and O-2pz contributions for the electronic states around the Fermi energy. Due to the charge transfer, we observe that the Cu-3dz2−r2 states in the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 super- lattice downshift (not shown) by around 0.5 eV in com- parison to the same states in the isolated bulk YBCO. To disentangle the effects of the hybridization from the induced band shift due to charge transfer, we show in Fig. 7 the calculated PDOS for the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 superlattice and the ones calculated for electron-doped (hole-doped) bulk YBCO (LSMO). The doping values were chosen in order to simulate the same amount of charge transfer observed in the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 su- perlattice. In addition, we calculate the electronic struc- ture of (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 under a compressive strain of 5% in the z-axis parameter to reduce the distance be- tween the interfacial Mn-Cu atoms. In this case, our un- strained structure indicates a distance of 4.15 ̊A between the interfacial Mn and Cu atoms, while the strained structure indicates a distance of 3.89 ̊A. For compari- son, in the doped structures of bulk YBCO (LSMO), the Cu-Cu (Mn-Mn) distance in z-axis direction is 4.32 ̊A (3.88 ̊A). As can be noticed in Fig. 7, the electronic states of interfacial atoms in the unstrained (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 superlattice (Mn-O-Cu distance of 4.15 ̊A) exhibit an en- ergy alignment around -1 eV, indicating an out-of-plane orbital hybridization. The same feature is observed be- tween 1 and 2 eV due to the hybridization of Mn-3dz2 and O-2pz. Despite this sizable hybridization, we do not observe a substantial orbital reconstruction concerning the interfacial Cu-3dz2−r2 states in this case. On the other hand, under compressive strain in the z direction, we induce an increase of the Mn-O-Cu hybridization and an upshift of the Cu-3dz2−r2 states towards the Fermi energy. As a result, the number of holes in the Cu-3d states would be redistributed between the Cu-3dx2−y2 and 3dz2−r2, leading to a sizable orbital reconstruction. IV. CONCLUSIONS In summary, we performed DFT+U calculations to in- vestigate the interfacial effects in LSMO/YBCO super- lattices. We find that the presence of epitaxial strain and the interface leads to the reduction of buckling pa- rameters (b and φ) in the YBCO layer, compared with bulk values, which is beneficial to stabilizing the su- perconducting phase. We also observe that the inter- facial MnO2 layers in LSMO transfer electrons to the first CuO2 planes in YBCO, which increases the Cu-3d occupancy. However, the change in Cu-3d valence only slightly depends on the LSMO thickness. Additionally, (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 Cu1 dz2-r2 O pz Mn1 dz2-r2 PDOS in the orbitals associated to the Mn-O-Cu bond for the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 superlattice with (dashed lines) and without (continuous lines) z-axis strain, compared to the respective bulk-doped values (in black). Positive (neg- ative) values signify spin-up (spin-down) contributions. The orbitals chosen were 3dz2−r2 for Cu (in blue) and Mn (in pur- ple) and 2pz for O (in red). The inset in the first panel is a zoom in the -0.5 eV to 0.5 eV energy window. The values in ̊A in the legends indicate the Mn-O-Cu distances for the two superstructures considered by us, as well as the bulk-doped YBCO (LSMO) Cu-Cu (Mn-Mn) distance in z-axis direction. we find induced local moments in the interfacial CuO2 planes, which order in an in-plane ferromagnetic state that competes against superconductivity. These local moments are decoupled from the charge transfer and, ac- cording to our calculations, appear mainly due to the Mn 3d-O 2p-Cu 3d hybridization, which can give rise to an orbital reconstruction for the interfacial Cu-3d states. From the manganite side, we observe a reduction in the magnetic moment of the interfacial Mn atoms, which can be connected to a decrease in the FM coupling strength caused by the Mn electron doping, driving the system in the direction of an AFM phase. The formation of a mag- netic ”dead layer” can be seen as an AFM out-of-plane coupling in the first LSMO layers caused by the struc- tural distortions near the interface, which gives rise to a vanishing magnetization around 3 ̊A from the interface. Our findings provide the essential ingredients to under- stand complex phenomena, including suppression of the 9 8. Structural model of the LaMnO3 (2 u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (2 u.c.) heterostructure. The dashed lines indicate the interface position. superconductivity, in YBCO/LSMO superlattices. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors acknowledge the financial support from the Brazilian agencies CNPq (in particular Grants 402919/2021-1 and INCT-IQ 465469/2014-0), CAPES, FAPEMIG, and the computational centers: National Laboratory for Scientific Computing (LNCC/MCTI, Brazil), for providing HPC resources of the SDu- mont supercomputer (URL: http://sdumont.lncc.br), CENAPAD-SP, and CESUP-UFRGS. Appendix A: LMO/YBCO heterostructure For the LaMnO3 (2 u.c.)/YBa2Cu3O7 (2 u.c.) het- erostructure, we considered realistic thin-film geometries using similar supercells with BaO termination and vac- uum separation of 20 ̊A (see Fig. 8). In this case, we only used LMO. The relaxed heterostructure is shown in Fig. 9. We find that the buckling distance b is slightly reduced for the CuO2 planes at the interface (0.061 ̊A). According to our results, the reduction of b is accompa- nied by an average reduction of the buckling angle φ of around 2.88◦ in the heterostructure. As can be seen in Fig. 9 (red lines), θ near the interface approaches values corresponding to large doping, suggesting an AFM cou- pling of MnO2 layers (magnetic “dead layer”) close to the interface. In Fig. 10 we show the variation of 3d occupancies (in blue), ∆nd = nHetero − nbulk, for Mn and Cu atoms for Out-of-plane transition metal-oxygen-transition metal bond angles θ and in-plane buckling b for the het- erostructure. The dashed lines indicate the interface’s loca- tion. moments μ (red) for the TM along the heterostructure. The dashed black lines indicates the interfaces. For better visual- ization, the Mn moments were reduced by a factor of 70. ∆n was calculated using the difference between the interface and bulk TM occupations. the heterostructure. In this structure, the Cu-3d interfa- cial occupancies increase by 0.014, which should drive the CuO2 planes away from the optimal regime (towards the antiferromagnetic phase). On the right panels of Fig. 10 one can see the magnetization profile for the heterostruc- ture, with a decay of the magnetic moment of the Mn atoms close to the interface and a small magnetic mo- ment induced in the first layer Cu atoms, with the same order as reported in XAS experiments. In Fig. 11 we display the spin density ∆ρ = ρ↑ −ρ↓ for the heterostructure, which exhibits local moments only in the interfacial CuO2 plane. For the interfacial Cu atoms, we find tiny local moments of 0.04 μB/Cu, in reasonable agreement with the local moments reported experimen- 10 Heterostructure Mn Cu O O O Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn O O O Cu Cu O ẑ O O O Spin densities ∆ρ = ρ↑ − ρ↓ isosurfaces for the heterostructure. Dotted lines indicate the interface position, the surfaces in yellow represents ∆ρ > 0 and the ones in blue represents ∆ρ < 0. tally. Appendix B: Strain effects in Tc Structure εz (%) Cu1-Cu2 ( ̊A) Cu-AO ( ̊A) Ba-AO ( ̊A) YBCO +0.0 4.14 2.25 0.24 (LMO)2/(YBCO)2 +1.9 3.31 2.25 0.22 (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 +0.9 3.30 2.30 0.23 Heterostructure +0.7 3.34 2.35 0.33 (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 -0.2 3.34 2.36 0.26 (LSMO)3/(YBCO)4 -0.6 3.34 2.38 0.27 (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 -0.8 3.34 2.45 0.38 Cu-Cu spacing (second column), copper to apical oxygen (AO) distance (third column), and vertical component of Ba to AO distance (fourth column) for the interfaces. We also report distances for the pristine material (first row) confined in the STO parameters. In Table I we show the z-axis strain εz values and some interatomic distances across the interfaces. A re- cent theoretical study reported a connection between εz and these distances with the superconducting critical temperature Tc for bulk YBCO. The authors find a re- duction of Tc up to 50% when strain goes from 0.0% to 4.0%, with a reduction in Cu(p1)-Cu(p2), Cu-apical oxygen (AO) and Ba-AO distances. Our results for pos- itive strain (compressive) agree qualitatively with the tendencies for YBCO, with the (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 su- perstructure having distance values close to the 4.0% strained YBCO, indicating a possible reduction in Tc. It is worth mentioning this is the same m/n ratio in which the superconducting-to-insulator transition occurs for LCMO/YBCO interfaces. The heterostructure dis- tances are somewhere between 0.0% and 4.0% YBCO bulk values, indicating a possible reduction in Tc. The interfaces with negative strain cannot be compared be- cause of a lack of comparative data. Appendix C: Interfacial charge transfer Fig. 12 indicates the Cu-3dz2−r2 + O-2pz charge difference ∆n (in blue), together with the (# MnO2)/(# CuO2) ratio (in red), for all the super- structures. We observe that (LSMO)6/(YBCO)2 and (LMO)3/(YBCO)2 have the largest occupa- tion values and that increasing the YBCO thickness decreases the total charge transferred. Increasing the LSMO thick- ness has the opposite effect, increasing the charge in Cu-3dz2−r2 and O-2pz orbitals. This behavior is the same for the (# indicating that the proportion between Mn and Cu atoms can be used to control the doping level of the CuO2 planes close to the interface and affect their electronic structure. and (# MnO2)/(# CuO2) ratio (in red) for the interfaces. ∆n was calculated using the difference between the interface and bulk occupation values. “Hetero” is associated to the LMO (2 u.c)/YBCO (2 u.c.) heterostructure. Appendix D: Magnetic “Dead layer” versus Ferromagnetism In Fig. 13 we show a comparison between the charge and magnetic profiles of (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 with “dead layer” and with full ferromagnetic (FM) LSMO. We ob- serve that the charge transfer across the interface is re- duced when LSMO is FM, and the local magnetic mo- ment is finite only for the first plane, but with a larger 11 (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 (c) (d) O Mn Cu (a) Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn (b) Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn Mn O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O Cu Cu Cu Cu Cu (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 FM (LSMO)3/(YBCO)2 and (d) are the respective charge difference ∆n (in blue) and magnetic moment μ (in red). Dotted lines indicate the interface position, the surfaces in yellow represents ∆ρ > 0 and the ones in blue represents ∆ρ < 0. For better visualization, the Mn moments were reduced by a factor of 70. value compared to the “dead layer”. A. Ohtomo and H. Y. Hwang, A high-mobility electron gas at the LaAlo3/SrTiO3 heterointerface, Nature 427, S. Gariglio, N. Reyren, A. D. Caviglia, and J.-M. Triscone, Superconductivity at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 in- terface, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 21, J.-S. Lee, Y. W. Xie, H. K. Sato, C. Bell, Y. Hikita, H. Y. Hwang, and C.-C. Kao, Titanium dxy ferromagnetism at the LaAlO3/SrTiO3 interface, Nature Materials 12, 703 J. Chakhalian, J. W. Freeland, G. Srajer, J. Strempfer, G. Khaliullin, J. C. Cezar, T. Charlton, R. Dal- gliesh, C. Bernhard, G. Cristiani, H.-U. Habermeier, and B. Keimer, Magnetism at the interface between ferromag- netic and superconducting oxides, Nature Physics 2, 244 J. Chakhalian, J. W. Freeland, H.-U. Habermeier, G. Cristiani, G. Khaliullin, M. van Veenendaal, and B. Keimer, Orbital Reconstruction and Covalent Bonding at an Oxide Interface, Science 318, 1114 (2007), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1149338. J. Stahn, J. Chakhalian, C. Niedermayer, J. Hop- pler, T. Gutberlet, J. Voigt, F. Treubel, H.-U. Haber- meier, G. Cristiani, B. Keimer, and C. Bernhard, Magnetic proximity effect in perovskite superconduc- tor/ferromagnet multilayers, Phys. Rev. B 71, 140509(R) W. Luo, S. J. Pennycook, and S. T. Pantelides, Magnetic “Dead” Layer at a Complex Oxide Interface, Phys. Rev. X. Yang, A. N. Yaresko, V. N. Antonov, and O. K. An- dersen, Electronic structure and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism of yba2cu3o7/lamno3 superlattices from first- principles calculations (2009), arXiv:0911.4349 [cond- mat.str-el]. S. W. Huang, L. A. Wray, H.-T. Jeng, V. T. Tra, J. M. Lee, M. C. Langner, J. M. Chen, S. Roy, Y. H. Chu, R. W. Schoenlein, Y.-D. Chuang, and J.-Y. Lin, Selective interlayer ferromagnetic coupling between the Cu spins in YBa2Cu3O7−x grown on top of La0.7Ca0.3MnO3, Sci- entific Reports 5, 16690 (2015). S. Yunoki, A. Moreo, E. Dagotto, S. Okamoto, S. S. Kancharla, and A. Fujimori, Electron doping of cuprates via interfaces with manganites, Phys. Rev. B 76, 064532 I. Gonz ́alez, S. Okamoto, S. Yunoki, A. Moreo, and E. Dagotto, Charge transfer in heterostructures of strongly correlated materials, Journal of Physics: Con- densed Matter 20, 264002 (2008). T. Y. Chien, L. F. Kourkoutis, J. Chakhalian, B. Gray, M. Kareev, N. P. Guisinger, D. A. Muller, and J. W. Free- land, Visualizing short-range charge transfer at the inter- faces between ferromagnetic and superconducting oxides, Nature Communications 4, 2336 (2013). V. T. Tra, R. Huang, X. Gao, Y.-J. Chen, Y. T. Liu, W. C. Kuo, Y. Y. Chin, H. J. Lin, J. M. Chen, J. M. Lee, J. F. Lee, P. S. Shi, M. G. Jiang, C. G. Duan, J. Y. Juang, C. T. Chen, H. T. Jeng, Q. He, Y.-D. Chuang, J.-Y. Lin, and Y.-H. Chu, The unconven- tional doping in YBa2Cu3O7−x/La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 heterostructures by termination control, Ap- plied Physics Letters 110, 12 https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apl/article- B. A. Gray, S. Middey, G. Conti, A. X. Gray, C.-T. Kuo, A. M. Kaiser, S. Ueda, K. Kobayashi, D. Meyers, M. Ka- reev, I. C. Tung, J. Liu, C. S. Fadley, J. Chakhalian, and J. W. Freeland, Superconductor to Mott insulator transition in YBa2Cu3O7/LaCaMnO3 heterostructures, Scientific Reports 6, 33184 (2016). A. Frano, S. Blanco-Canosa, E. Schierle, Y. Lu, M. Wu, M. Bluschke, M. Minola, G. Christiani, H. U. Habermeier, G. Logvenov, Y. Wang, P. A. van Aken, E. Benckiser, E. Weschke, M. Le Tacon, and B. Keimer, Long-range charge-density-wave proximity ef- fect at cuprate/manganate interfaces, Nature Materials R. Gaina, C. W. Nicholson, M. Rumo, S. Sarkar, J. Khmaladze, E. Paris, Y. Tseng, W. Zhang, T. C. Asmara, D. McNally, C. Piamonteze, E. Weschke, T. Schmitt, C. Monney, and C. Bernhard, Long- ranged Cu-based order with dz2 orbital character at a YBa2Cu3O7/ manganite interface, npj Quantum Mate- rials 6, 12 (2021). S. M. Kumawat, G. D. Dwivedi, P. F. Su, W. S. Shyu, Y. H. Chien, P. W. Su, C. M. Chung, N. D. B. Fernan- dez, S. J. Sun, C.-H. Hsu, S. Yang, and H. Chou, Mag- netic Field Enhancement in Critical Current and Possible Triplet Superconductivity in LSMO/YBCO/LSMO Het- erostructures, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 127, D. Sanchez-Manzano, S. Mesoraca, F. A. Cuellar, M. Cabero, V. Rouco, G. Orfila, X. Palermo, A. Balan, L. Marcano, A. Sander, M. Rocci, J. Garcia-Barriocanal, F. Gallego, J. Tornos, A. Rivera, F. Mompean, M. Garcia-Hernandez, J. M. Gonzalez-Calbet, C. Leon, S. Valencia, C. Feuillet-Palma, N. Bergeal, A. I. Buzdin, J. Lesueur, J. E. Villegas, and J. Santamaria, Extremely long-range, high-temperature Josephson coupling across a half-metallic ferromagnet, Nature Materials 21, 188 J. M. D. Coey, M. Viret, and S. von Moln ́ar, Mixed- valence manganites, Advances in Physics 48, 167 (1999), A. I. Liechtenstein, V. I. Anisimov, and J. Zaanen, Density-functional theory and strong interactions: Or- bital ordering in Mott-Hubbard insulators, Phys. Rev. B J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett. G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B 47, 558 (1993). G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Computational Materials Science G. Kresse and J. Furthm ̈uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54, 11169 (1996). G. Kresse and D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopoten- tials to the projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 59, 1758 (1999). G. Prandini, A. Marrazzo, I. E. Castelli, N. Mounet, and N. Marzari, Precision and efficiency in solid-state pseu- dopotential calculations, npj Computational Materials 4, S. Kambe and O. Ishii, Correlation between Tc, in-plane Cu-O-Cu bond length, and buckling of the CuO2 plane in cuprate superconductors, Physica C: Superconductivity 341-348, 555 (2000), materials and Mechanisms of Su- perconductivity High Temperature Superconductors VI. A. Keren, Evidence of magnetic mechanism for cuprate superconductivity, New Journal of Physics 11, 065006 Z. Sefrioui, M. Varela, V. Pe ̃na, D. Arias, C. Le ́on, J. San- tamarı ́a, J. E. Villegas, J. L. Martı ́nez, W. Saldarriaga, and P. Prieto, Superconductivity depression in ultrathin YBa2Cu3O7-δ layers in La0.7Ca0.3MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7- δ superlattices, Applied Physics Letters 81, 4568 https://pubs.aip.org/aip/apl/article- pdf/81/24/4568/10195994/4568 1 online.pdf. K. Dybko, P. Aleshkevych, M. Sawicki, W. Paszkowicz, and P. Przyslupski, The onset of ferromagnetism and su- perconductivity in [la0.7sr0.3mno3(n u.c.)/yba2cu3o7(2 u.c.)]20 superlattices, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 25, 376001 (2013). F. Jamet, C. Weber, S. Acharya, D. Pashov, and M. van Schilfgaarde, Disentangling the role of bond lengths and orbital symmetries in controlling Tc of optimally doped yba2cu3o7, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 033189 (2022). H. Chen and A. Millis, Charge transfer driven emergent phenomena in oxide heterostructures, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 29, 243001 (2017). Z. Zhong and P. Hansmann, Band Alignment and Charge Transfer in Complex Oxide Interfaces, Phys. Rev. X 7, S. Beck and C. Ederer, Charge transfer in lavo3/latio3 multilayers: Strain-controlled dimensionality of inter- face metallicity between two Mott insulators, Phys. Rev. Mater. 3, 095001 (2019). D. I. Khomskii, Basic aspects of the quantum theory of solids: Order and elementary excitations (Cambridge University Press, 2010) Chap. 12. J. B. Goodenough, Magnetism and the chemical bond, Interscience Monographs on Chemistry 1, 1 (1963). C. C. Zhang, M. G. Kang, R. Comin, and J. Y. Wei, Investigation of magnetic and non-magnetic mech- anisms for the attenuation of superconductivity in man- ganite/cuprate multilayers, Ceramics International 49, 24442 (2023), a selection of papers presented at CIMTEC R. A. Amoresi, L. Cichetto, A. F. Gouveia, Y. N. Col- menares, M. D. Teodoro, G. E. Marques, E. Longo, A. Z. Sim ̃oes, J. Andr ́es, A. J. Chiquito, and M. A. Zaghete, Metallic behavior in STO/LAO heterostructures with non-uniformly atomic interfaces, Materials Today Com- munications 24, 101339 (2020). J. J. Wisser and Y. Suzuki, Growth and char- acterization of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7−δ bilayers, AIP Advances 11, https://pubs.aip.org/aip/adv/article- A. Hoffmann, S. G. E. te Velthuis, Z. Sefrioui, J. Santamar ́ıa, M. R. Fitzsimmons, S. Park, and M. Varela, Suppressed magnetization in La0.7Ca0.3MnO3/YBa2Cu3O7−δ superlattices, Phys. Rev. B 72, 140407(R) (2005). C. Weber, C. Yee, K. Haule, and G. Kotliar, Scaling of the transition temperature of hole-doped cuprate super- 13 conductors with the charge-transfer energy, Europhysics Letters 100, 37001 (2012). T. A. Mellan, F. Cor`a, R. Grau-Crespo, and S. Ismail- Beigi, Importance of anisotropic Coulomb interaction in LaMnO3, Phys. Rev. B 92, 085151 (2015). B. Zheng and N. Binggeli, Effects of chemical order and atomic relaxation on the electronic and magnetic proper- ties of La2/3Sr1/3MnO3, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21,