Intercalation in 2H-TaSe2 for modulation of electronic properties and electrochemical energy storage S. Koley1∗ 1 Department of Physics, Amity Institute of Applied Sciences, Amity University, Kolkata, 700135, India Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) exhibit an extensive va- riety of novel electronic properties, such as charge density wave quantum spin Hall phenomena, superconductivity, and Dirac and Weyl semi-metallic properties. The diverse properties of TMDs suggest that structural transformation can be employed to switch between different electronic properties. Intercalation and zero valence doping of molecules and atoms into the van der Waals gap of TMDs have emerged as effective approaches to modify the charge order states of the material. This eventually leads to phase transition or the formation of different phases, thus ex- panding the electronic, thermoelectric and optical applications of these materials. In this study, electronic and electrochemical energy storage properties of such an intercalated TMD, namely, 2H-TaSe2 via intercalation of lithium (Li), sodium (Na) and potassium (K) have been investigated. The intercalation of these ions into the dichalcogenide resulted in a modified band structure and novel structural effects, leading to the emergence of a 1 eV band gap. Possibility of electrochemical energy storage application is also explored in this study. Furthermore, the importance of multi orbital electron-electron correlations in intercalated TaSe2 is also investigated via dynamical-mean-field theory with local density approximation. Keywords: Energy Storage, Dichalcogenides, Density Functional Theory, Intercalation, Band Gap, Density of States ∗ sudiptakoley20@gmail.com arXiv:2309.07543v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 14 Sep 2023 2 I. INTRODUCTION Energy storage particularly in the form of rechargeable batteries, poses a critical limita- tion that impedes the progress of various technologies. From biomedical applications and portable electronic devices to emerging electric vehicles and renewable energy storage, the primary hindrance to advancing these fields is the lack of an efficient medium for energy storage. Batteries already play a significant role in modern life already. Despite substantial research in rechargeable battery technology, the problem of short battery life persists in many of our daily appliances. Over the past few decades two-dimensional materials with a diverse range of physical properties have gernered widespread attention from energy storage researchers[1–4]. The use of aqueous multivalent metal-ion batteries (AMMIB) has become a well-established approach to address the rapidly increasing demand for high performance and cost effective storage devices. Transition metal dichalcogenides have remarkable potential in the development of inno- vative electronic devices owing to their distinctive geometries and efficient charge transfer properties. The monolayers of these materials are bound by van der Waals interactions. Ample electronic and electron phonon interactions in TMDs lead to strong correlation. Additionally, charge density wave (CDW) and superconducting ground states are found fre- quently in their phase diagram. 2D materials are also one of the most fascinating topics of research due to the complex nature and significant quantum fluctuations of the collec- tive electronic states. The common chemical formula of TMD is MX2, where M represents a transition metal and X denotes a chalcogen. The layered structure of TMDs leads to excellent host for intercalation due to the weak interlayer van der Waals force. Intercalation is a familiar occurance in layered chalcogenides and is essential for variety of applications, such as, supercapacitors, battery electrodes, and solid lubricants. The weak interlayer force enables insertion of ion, thereby promoting the multivalent ion interca- lation in AMMIBs. Recent studies have attested that intercalated chalcogenides can induce superconductivity in the parent material in addition to serving as an effective medium for electrochemical energy storage. The intercalation process is easy and reversible without altering the structure of parent materials. Potential reversibility of this process facilitates in charging and discharging processes in intercalated battery structure. The concentration of intercalation varies with electrochemical potential or temperature leading to changes in 3 physical properties. Aditionally, this process provides a high doping concentration in 2D chalcogenides and can modify CDW ordering of a material, resulting in the appearance of another ordered (superconducting) state in the phase diagram of TMD materials. Theo- retical simulations predict that extra carriers will influence electronic dispersion and phonon band structure in TMDs, resulting in either suppressed CDW state or modified CDW transition temperature. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have garnered extensive attention for their po- tential applications in energy storage devices because of their favorable chemical and physical properties as well as their wide interlayer distance[12–14]. Recent theoretical studies sug- gested that MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and their heterostructures possess promising energy storage capabilities. These dichalcogenides are observed to retain much higher theoretical capacity than traditional batteries. Despite significant advancement in TMD-based cathode material development, further research is ongoing to devise innovative TMD cathode mate- rials that can surmount low conductivity issues in intercalated chalcogenides. To the best of author’s knowledge, no studies have yet reported theoretical capacity of lithium, magnesium and calcium intercalated 2H-TaSe2. 2H-TaSe2 is a material that possess zero bandgap in its density wave ordered state, thereby indicating higher conductivity in its intercalated phases. Consequently, to verify its theoretical storage capacity and conductivity it is imperative to determine the electronic properties and binding energy of the intercalated 2H-TaSe2. In this study, intercalation in 2H-TaSe2 have been investigated and the unique properties of the resulting intercalated dichalcogenide as well as its potential applications in energy storage and optoelectronics have been analysed. 2H-TaSe2 features a hexagonal structure with Se-Ta-Se tr-ilayer stack and is classified as a metallic TMD exhibiting CDW transition temperature at 122K and very low superconducting transition temperature of 0.15K. Also the interlayer distance of 0.4 nm of 2H-TaSe2 renders it as a suitable host for intercalation. II. METHODS In this work, intercalation in 2H-TaSe2 is investigated through the utilization of density functional theory (DFT) calculations based on the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) method. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) is employed for the exchange-correlation functional, while the full potential linearized augmented plane wave (FP-LAPW) method, 4 as implemented in WIEN2K package, is used for the calculations. A kinetic energy cutoff of 20 eV is applied for the plane waves to compute the electronic wave functions. The integration in momentum space is conducted through a 12 × 12 × 1 Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh centered around Γ-point. Furthermore, all the lattice constants and atomic coordinates are fully relaxed until the forces were smaller than 0.001eV/ ̊A. Self consistent field (SCF) calculations are implemented to calculate the total energy of intercalated and pristine compounds. In addition, the optical conductivity, and imaginary and real parts of dielectric tensor were computed within the WIEN2K code. The interstitial wave function is expanded in terms of plane waves with a cut-off parameter of RMT× Kmax=8.5, where RMT and Kmax represent the smallest atomic sphere radius and the largest k vector in the plane- wave expansion. The optical terms are evaluated using a dense k-point mesh of 15 × 15 × 1 Γ-centered Monkhorst-Pack with a fixed Lorentzian broadening of 0.05 eV. III. RESULTS The electronic properties of the dichalcogenide will exhibit modifications due to the pres- ence of intercalants. These modifications can be attributed to two mechanisms, (i) lattice modulation and (ii) transfer of charge from suitable intercalants to host atoms. The transfer of charge between the host atom and intercalant has the potential to alter both the Fermi surface and conductivity of the parent material. Consequently, intercalation induced changes in the Fermi surface can lead to transition between states such as metal-insulator, metal- semiconductor and even superconductivity. This study focuses on the changes observed in non-interacting structure of 2H-TaSe2 resulting from intercalation of three different in- tercalants: lithium, sodium, and potassium. FIG.1 illustrates crystal structure of lithium intercalated sample. The occupancy fractions for Li were determined by considering the total concentration of lithium and taking into account the multiplicity of the positions. The same constraint was applied to the intercalation of Na and K in 2H-TaSe2. In FIG. 2(a-c) depict the band structures of intercalated TaSe2 obtained through LDA calculations. While the original band structure displays a reasonable crossing of Ta-d orbital at the Fermi level, all doping cases exhibit an opening of energy gap initiating from the Fermi level. Intercala- tion induced bandgap, measured at 1 eV, subsequently introduces alterations in electronic, optical and energy storage properties of the material. 5 and colored for reference. The density of states depicted in FIG.3(a-c) serves as further evidence for the existence of a gap of approximately 1 eV near the Fermi energy. The graphical representations of energy band structure and density of states for all doping cases exhibit similar qualitative features. However, quantitative differences will produce different optoelectronic and electrochemical energy storage properties. Optical conductivity (σ(ω)) arises from the motion of carriers with oppositely charges in- duced by electromagnetic wave and, in turn, reflects the absorption coefficient and refractive index. In this study, the optical spectra are presented for a wide range of energy [0-10 eV] at room temperature. The optical conductivity plots [FIG.4a-4c] for doped 2H-TaSe2 confirm a shifted Drude peak due to the emergence of 1 eV band-gap. Notably, the new position of the first peak in the optical conductivity falls within the visible region, thereby increas- ing the potential applications of this novel semiconductor material in optoelectronics. The in-plane and out-of-plane optical conductivities exhibit significant asymmetry. This observa- tion aligns with earlier findings for the parent material as well. Specifically, the in-plane conductivity displays a small peak in the visible region while the out-of-plane conductivity exhibit a prominent peak in the higher energy range (4-8 eV). The optical conductivity plots 6 (a) (b) (c) three different intercalation (a) lithium, (b)sodium and (c) potassium. 1 eV gap in the band structure is a consistent phenomena in all the electronic structure. effectively demonstrate the intercalation induced changes in the electronic structure which have been well-established. The frequency-dependent dielectric functions which account for both the interband and represent the real and imaginary parts of the dielectric function, respectively. The imaginary part, ε2(ω) is computed through density functional theory band structure calculations. The real part of the dielectric function is obtained from the imaginary part using Kramers- Kroning relation. The energy dependencies of these functions are illustrated in FIG.4d- 4f for the intercalated 2H-TaSe2 with lithium(Li), sodium (Na) and potassium (K). The plots of the in-plane and out of plane dielectric function demonstrate sizable anisotropy in agreement with optical conductivity data. Notably, Drude peak is absent from zero frequency of imaginary dielectric function. The real part of dielectric function exhibits a high static dielectric constant. This observation indicates weak electron-hole interactions 7 (a) (b) (c) (c) potassium. Density of states also reveal a band gap of 1 eV and dominant band as Ta-d band. (a) (a) (f) (e) (d) (c) (b) intercalated 2H-TaSe2. Imaginary part of dielectri constant of the intercalated 2H-TaSe2 is shown in ((d), (e) and (f) respectively), insets show real part of the dielectric constant of the same. due to strong screening effect. 8 IV. ELECTROCHEMICAL ENERGY STORAGE In two dimensional dichalcogenides composed of transition metals, a metallic layer is sandwiched between the chalcogen layers. Li, Na and K ions are intercalated in between two dichalcogenide layers. The structure of 2H-TaSe2 belongs to space group of 194, leading to the selection of adsorption sites with fixed space group symmetry. As shown in FIG.1 the intercalants are placed in the site with 3m symmetry (0,0,0) and (0,0,1/2) position. After exploring other potential sites, this particular site is chosen following comprehensive structural relaxation as well as energy minimization as detailed in the methods section. The binding energy of intercalant atoms is defined as: Eb = (Ecompound − nEintercalant − ETaSe2)/n Ecompound is the full energy of the intercalated TaSe2, in which n is no of intercalants added on pristine 2H-TaSe2. Eintercalant is the energy of an isolated Li, Na and K ions in a vacuum. ETaSe2 is the energy of an solitary 2H-TaSe2 layer. The more negative the binding energy, the more favorable the structure. In the case of Li, Na and K with x=0.2, the calculated binding energies are -1.61 eV, -1.27 eV and -0.882 eV respectively. This points to strong attractive interactions between the intercalants and the parent structure. In order to assess the potential for electro-chemical energy-storage applications, the theoretical capacity is determined using the formula C = cnF/MTaSe2 . In the above equation c is the number of adsorbed ions on a single unit 2H-TaSe2, n is the valence state of ions, F is the Faraday constant (26801 mA.h.mol−1), and MTaSe2 is the molar weight of 2H-TaSe2. In this case, both c and n, are assumed to be 1 for the intercalations. As a result, the adsorption capacity for 2H-TaSe2 is determined to be 79.1. The electrical conductivity of the intercalated 2H-TaSe2 is obtained from Boltztrap code. The electrical conductivity of intercalated 2H-TaSe2 demonstrates a consistent upward trend with an increase in the atomic no of intercalants. Based on the considerations of binding energy and theoretical storage capacity, it can be concluded that Li intercalation is more favorable than Na and K intercalation. 9 (a) (b) (c) 2H-TaSe2). E E E E E E E E E E E E K K K K K K K K K K K K and 250 K ((d), (h) and (l)). 10 V. DYNAMICAL MEAN FIELD THEORY CALCULATION As dichalcogenide materials exhibit strong correlation, a fully charge-self-consistent dy- namical mean field theory (DMFT) is used to calculate electronic properties. The com- bination of DFT and DMFT is a well-established method to explain important physi- cal properties[20–24] of these materials. In this study, DMFT is implemented using the EDMFTF package which integrates the DFT formalism based on WIEN2K . The package effectively handles the issue of exact double-counting. The intra- and inter-orbital Coulomb interaction are treated accurately and self-consistent determination of the imagi- nary frequency Green’s function is performed. The extended Hubbard model incorporating both intra and interorbital Coulomb interaction is employed with a realistic range of values for these interactions. The total Hamiltonian is solved using the DMFT method from low to room temperature. The correlated Ta-d orbitals are treated dynamically within DMFT using an orbital projection-embedded scheme facilitated by the package while the p orbitals are treated at the DFT level. The continuous time quantum Monte Carlo (CT-QMC) in the hybridization expansion method is used as impurity solver of the DMFT code. Parame- ters such as temperature, Coulomb interactions U, and U′ are varied to obtain temperature dependent spectral function of the intercalated system. Convergence precision of 0.0001 is maintained with respect to chemical potential, self-energy and charge density in these calcu- lations for the intercalated structure. Finally, the maximum entropy method is utilized for the analytical continuation from the imaginary axis to real frequencies. The resulting real frequency spectral function is then presented in FIG.5 for the intercalated structures. band gap, except at 30 K, is evident from the plot. FIG.5b and FIG.5c depict the energy and temperature dependent spectral functions of Na and K intercalated 2H-TaSe2, respectively. While Na intercalation displays metallic behaviour across all temperatures, K intercalation shows a gap in the Fermi energy except low temperature. The DMFT spectral functions records the redistribution of spectral density due to dynamical correlations, which is missed by static mean-field theory. Static mean field theory fails to account for incoherent states and is therefore inadequate for describing strong correlation. Moreover, angle resolved pho- toemission spectroscopy (ARPES) band-structure maps are presented in FIG.6. For lithium doping (FIG.6a-6d) ARPES spectra exhibit striking difference at a low temperature (30 11 K) compared to the other temperatures. At very low temperature, the conduction band and valence band are overlapping indirectly with each other, but they separate and open a gap at the Fermi energy at all other temperatures. Further analysis of the ARPES map reveals that the valence band remains pinned at K point, consistent with the LDA band structure. However, the valence band shifts downward at Γ point after dynamical mean field calculation. Regarding sodium doping (FIG.6e-6h), the conduction band is observed to cross the Fermi level at the M point across the entire temperature range, while the valence band remains closer to Fermi level. This configuration allows for electron-hole interaction with a small value of hybridization constant. As a result, even the parent 2H-TaSe2 system favours electron hole interaction and formation of exciton. The ARPES maps for K doping are plotted in FIG.6i-6l. The putative valence band is just close to the Fermi level while the conduction band is above the valence band at all temperatures. Unlike lithium and sodium doping, potassium doping induces a gap in the Fermi energy along Γ − M − K − Γ direc- tion. Overall, the ARPES data provides insight into the ordering in intercalated 2H-TaSe2. The findings of the DFT and DFT plus DMFT calculation are summarized in conclusion. The intercalated 2H-TaSe2 exhibit a significantly different state compared to its pristine form. The ground state of the intercalated dichalcogenide is characterized by strong corre- lations and 1 eV bandgap. This material holds promise as a new semiconductor material in optoelectronics, given its suitable bandgap for the visible part of the optical spectrum. Furthermore, a substantial static dielectric constant is observed. The study of Li, Na and K intercalation also aims to explore alternative energy sources. The energy storage calcu- lations reveal an adsorption capacity of 79.1 for the intercalated dichalcogenide with ions of single valence state. This confirms the prospect of using these materials as alternate electrochemical energy storage material. Henceforth this theoretical research highlights the prospective application for fine tuning the properties of 2H-transition metal dichalcogenide. VI. DATA AVAILABILITY The data will be available on request. 12 VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT S. Koley acknowledges department of science and technology women scientist grant SR/WOS-A/PM-80/2016(G) for WIEN2K software. Novoselov, K. S. et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon films. Science, 306, 666 Mak, K.F. and Shan, J., Photonics and optoelectronics of 2D semiconductor transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Photonics, 10, 216 (2016). Wang, Q. H., et al., Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 699 (2012). Chhowalla, M. et al., The chemistry of two-dimensional layered transition metal dichalcogenide nanosheets. Nat. Chem., 5, 263 (2013). Manzeli S., et al., 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. Nature Reviews Materials 2, 17033 Wang, Z, and Sun, X., Ab initio study of adsorption and diffusion of lithium on transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers. Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 8, 2711 (2017). G. Du et al., Nature Communications 8, 14466 (2017). Koley, S. and Basu, S. Superconductivity induced by Ag intercalation in Dirac semimetal Bi2Se3. Computational Materials Science 210, 110989 (2022). Sengupta, J. and Hussain, M. C., Graphene-Induced Performance Enhancement of Batteries, Touch Screens, Transparent Memory, and Integrated Circuits: A Critical Review on a Decade of Developments. Nanomaterials 12, 3146 (2022). Liu, Y., et al., Ion intercalation engineering of electronic properties of two-dimensional crystals of 2H-TaSe2. Phys. Rev. Materials 3, 104003 (2019). Liu, J., Li, B., and Li, Q., Two-Dimensional Doped Materials. Magnetochemistry 8, 172 (2022). Stephenson, T., Li, Z., Olsen, B., Mitlin, D., Lithium ion battery applications of molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanocomposites. Energy Environ. Sci. 7, 209 (2014). Yu, X., Yun, S., Yeon, J.S., Bhattacharya, P., Wang, L., Lee, S.W., Hu, X., Park, H.S., Emergent Pseudocapacitance of 2D Nanomaterials. Adv. Energy Mater. 8, 1702930 (2018). 13 Chen, J., Luo, Y., Zhang, W., Qiao, Y., Cao, X., Xie, X., Zhou, H., Pan, A., Liang, S. Tuning Interface Bridging between MoSe2 and Three-Dimensional Carbon Framework by Incorpora- tion of MoC Intermediate to Boost Lithium Storage Capability. Nano-Micro Lett. 12, 171 Wu, S., Du, Y., Sun, S., Transition metal dichalcogenide based nanomaterials for rechargeable batteries. Chem. Eng. J. 307, 189 (2017). Yun, Q., Li, L., Hu, Z., Lu, Q., Chen, B., Zhang, H. Layered Transition Metal Dichalcogenide- Based Nanomaterials for Electro- chemical Energy Storage. Adv. Mater. 32, 1903826 (2020). Blaha P., Schwarz K., Madsen G.K.H., Kvasnicka D., and Luitz J., WIEN2k: An APW+lo program for calculating the properties of solids. J. Chem. Phys., 152, 074101, (2020). Dordevic, S.V. et al., Optical properties of the quasi-two- dimensional dichalcogenides 2H- TaSe2 and 2H-NbSe2. Eur. Phys. J. B, 33, 15 (2003). Georg K.H. Madsen and David J. Singh, BoltzTraP. A code for calculating band-structure dependent quantities. Computer Physics Communications , 175, 67 (2006). Taraphder, A. et al., Preformed Excitonic Liquid Route to a Charge Density Wave in 2H- TaSe2. Physical Review Letters, 106, 236405 (2011). Koley, S. et al., Preformed excitons, orbital selectivity, and charge density wave order in 1T-TiSe2. Physical Review B, 90, 115146 (2014). Koley, S., Pressure driven phase transition in 1T-TiSe2, a MOIPT+ DMFT study. Solid State Communications, 251, 23 (2017). Koley S., Mohanta N. and Taraphder A., Charge density wave and superconductivity in transition metal dichalcogenides. Eur. Phys. J. B, 93 77 (2020). Koley S., and Basu S., Intercalated phosphorene for improved spintronic applications. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 57, 1 (2020). Haule, K., Yee, C., and Kim, K. Dynamical mean-field theory within the full-potential meth- ods: Electronic structure of CeIrIn5, CeCoIn5, and CeRhIn5, Phys. Rev. B 81, 195107 (2010). Haule, K., Quantum Monte Carlo impurity solver for cluster dynamical mean-field theory and electronic structure calculations with adjustable cluster base, Phys. Rev. B 75, 155113 (2007). Jarrell, M., and Gubernatis, JE, Bayesian inference and the analytic continuation of imaginary-time quantum Monte Carlo data. J., Phys. Rep., 269, 133 (1996).