Zigzag chain order of LiVSe2 developing away from the vanadium trimer phase transition boundary K. Kojima,1 N. Katayama,1, ∗ K. Sugimoto,2 N. Hirao,3 Y. Ohta,4 and H. Sawa1 1Department of Applied Physics, Nagoya University, Aichi 464-8603, Japan 2Department of Physics, Keio University, Kanagawa 223-8522, Japan 3Diffraction and Scattering Division, Center for Synchrotron Radiation, Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute, Hyogo 679-5198, Japan 4Department of Physics, Chiba University, Chiba 263-8522, Japan (Dated: September 22, 2023) The phenomenon of self-assembly of constituent elements to form molecules at low temperatures appears ubiquitously in transition metal compounds with orbital degrees of freedom. Recent progress in local structure studies using synchrotron radiation x-rays is shifting the interest in structural studies in such molecule-forming systems from the low-temperature ordered phase to the short- range order that appears like a precursor at high temperatures. In this study, we discuss both experimentally and theoretically the relationship between the trimer structure that appears in the layered LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) system with a two-dimensional triangular lattice of vanadium and the zigzag chain-like local structure that appears near the phase transition boundary where molecular formation occurs. The vanadium trimerization that persistently appears in both low-temperature phases of LiVO2 and LiVS2 disappears in LiVSe2, and a regular triangular lattice is thought to be realized in LiVSe2, but this study reveals that the zigzag chain local distortion appears with a finite correlation length. This zigzag chain state local distortions are similar to the motif of local distortions in the high-temperature phase of LiVS2, indicating that the local distortions are persistent away from the trimer phase transition boundary. On the other hand, it is concluded that the zigzag chain order appearing in LiVSe2 is more stable than that in LiVS2 in terms of the temperature variation of atomic displacement and correlation length. The zigzag chain order is considered to be competitive with the trimer order appearing in the LiVX2 system. In this paper, we discuss the similarities and differences between the parameters that stabilize these electronic phases and the local distortions that appear in other molecular formation systems. I. INTRODUCTION Since the discovery of the Verwey transition of mag- netite in the 1930s , many physical and structural stud- ies have been devoted to transition metal compounds that undergo molecular formation at low temperatures [2–21]. The molecular formation phenomena in transi- tion metal compounds often appear in pyrochlore and triangular lattice compounds with high symmetry. High d-orbital degeneracy and associated orbital degrees of freedom, the low dimensionality of electronic structures such as hidden one-dimensionality produced by orbital linkages, and competition between itinerancy and local- ization are considered to be important factors in molecu- lar formation phenomena [2–5], and together with dras- tic physical properties such as metal-insulator transition and giant entropy change that appear with molecular formation [18, 22–24], they have attracted much atten- tion from both basic and applied perspectives. With recent progress in structural analysis techniques using synchrotron radiation x-rays and neutrons, the interest in structural studies of these molecular formation sys- tems is shifting from elucidating the complex molecular formation patterns that appear in the low-temperature ∗ Corresponding author.; katayama.naoyuki.m5@f.mail.nagoya- u.ac.jp phase to the precursor local distortions that appear in the high-temperature phase. For examples, in the spinel lattice system AlV2O4, vanadium heptamer (trimer + tetramer), which appears at low temperatures, persists as short-range order at high temperatures far beyond the phase transition , and in CuIr2S4, which forms com- plex dimer patterns with charge ordering at low tem- peratures, short-ranged tetragonal distortion appears in the high-temperature phase , as revealed by a pair distribution function analysis (PDF) using synchrotron radiation x-rays. The existence of such local distortions indicates that orbital ordering is localized in the high- temperature phase, which was believed to maintain high orbital degeneracy , and may affect our understand- ing of the mechanism of molecular formation and the thermodynamics associated with phase transitions. Layered LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) with a two-dimensional triangular lattice provides a unique playground for study- ing the relationship between the molecular formations that appear in the low-temperature phase and the local distortions that appear in the high-temperature phase. The electronic phase diagram characterizing the LiVX2 system is shown in Fig. 1, which was modified from Fig.1 in the Ref. based on the zigzag chain order of LiVSe2, which will be presented in this article later. LiVO2 is an insulator in the whole temperature range and shows a nonmagnetic insulator transition at about 480 K. It has long been argued that a vanadium trimer state appears arXiv:2309.11749v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 21 Sep 2023 2 in the low-temperature nonmagnetic insulating state of LiVO2, which has been fully clarified by a recent PDF structural analysis based on the unique structural model . Substitution of O(2p) for S(3p) or Se(4p) in- creases the itinerancy. In LiVS2, the high-temperature phase becomes metallic while maintaining the trimer in the low-temperature phase, and in LiVSe2, the trimer state is completely suppressed, and the metallic state ap- pears at all temperatures. Similar to AlV2O4 and CuIr2S4 mentioned above, LiVS2 also shows local distortion on the triangular lattice of vanadium above the trimer transition temper- ature of Tc ∼ 314 K . However, the characteristics of the local structure of LiVS2 are very different from those of other materials that undergo molecular forma- tion. First, in the high-temperature phase of LiVS2, a zigzag chain order appears preliminarily, which is clearly different from the trimer motif in the low-temperature phase. Second, the correlation length of the local dis- tortion appearing in the conventional molecular forma- tion system is only a few ̊A, whereas the zigzag chain order appearing in the high-temperature phase of LiVS2 has a long correlation length of several hundred ̊A. Sur- prisingly, the correlation length increases further just above the trimer transition and superlattice peaks ap- pear, which originate from the zigzag chain ordering. Third, this zigzag chain distortion appears to exhibit spatially and temporally fluctuating dynamics when ob- served by time-resolved Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope (STEM) measurements. It has been argued that this anomalous local distor- tion is related to the appearance of pseudogaps, a phe- nomenon of anomalous reduction in magnetic suscepti- bility that appears in the metallic phase near the trimer phase transition boundary in terms of physical proper- ties . If the zigzag chain order originates from the V3+(d2) electronic state and implies bond forma- tion between neighboring vanadium ions, it is understood that the evolution of correlation length implies a grad- ual increase in the number of d electrons involved in spin-singlet formation, leading to a pseudogap-like de- crease in magnetic susceptibility. Based on this idea, LiVSe2 could be an attractive research target to inves- tigate the development of zigzag chain order in LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) phase space. This is because LiVSe2 exhibits metallic conduction over the entire temperature range, and this metallic phase is connected to the metal- lic phase of LiVS2 in the phase space where the zigzag chains appear . More interestingly, according to the temperature dependence of the magnetic susceptibility of LiVSe2 reported previously , the Pauli paramag- netic component of the magnetic susceptibility obtained by subtracting the Curie tail has a positive slope with respect to temperature, seems to indicate that a pseu- dogap similar to that of LiVS2 appears persistently in LiVSe2. It should be noted that a similar temperature dependence of magnetic susceptibility has been observed for our LiVSe2 samples, the details of which are summa- Phase diagram of the LiVX2 system. Although the classification of each phase has been shown in previous studies , our study reveals that the zigzag chain state shown in green appears more stable in LiVSe2, which is farther from the trimer phase boundary compared to LiVS2. The different colored dotted lines on the inset figures indicate different V-V distances. rized in Supplemental Material . By clarifying the appearance of zigzag chains in LiVSe2, examining their stability with respect to temperature and pressure, and comparing them with the characteristics of zigzag chains in LiVS2, it is expected that the relationship between the trimer phase and zigzag chain order can be studied in detail. In this paper, we discuss the relationship between the zigzag chain ordering and the trimer phase in the LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) system, focusing on the results of structural studies obtained utilizing synchrotron radi- ation x-rays and theoretical calculations of LiVSe2. Syn- chrotron x-ray diffraction experiments have revealed that the zigzag chain order appears in LiVSe2 with a finite correlation length, as in the high-temperature phase of LiVS2. Strangely, even though LiVSe2 is farther from the trimer transition boundary in phase space, the zigzag chain order has a larger vanadium displacement than that of LiVS2 and persists at higher temperatures with longer correlation lengths. This indicates that the zigzag chain local distortion that appears in the LiVX2 system is not merely a precursor to the trimerization that appears at low temperatures. Based on theoretical calculations and pressure effects, we discuss the factors that stabilize the trimer and zigzag chains, and argue that the LiVX2 sys- tem is the stage for studying a unique local distortion phenomenon that is clearly different from conventional molecular formation systems. 3 II. METHODS A. Sample synthesis LiVSe2 was synthesized by a three-step synthesis method. First, the raw materials, V (99.5%) and Se (99.999%), were mixed so that V:Se = 1:1.01 to avoid V self-intercalation, sealed in a vacuum quartz tube, and calcined at 700 °C for 3 days to obtain 1T-VSe2. The resulting powder sample was then immersed in a large excess of 0.2 M n-BuLi/hexane solution for 2 days in a glove box under an Ar atmosphere. This yields Li2VSe2. To remove excess Li, the sample was immersed in I2- acetonitrile; by adjusting the weight of I2, the deinterca- lation of Li can be quantitatively controlled. The result- ing samples were annealed at 150 °C for 10 hours to re- store crystallinity and obtain powder samples of LiVSe2. For LiVO2 and LiVS2, we used the same batch of samples as presented in the previous paper . B. Experiments Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) measurements were performed to calculate the Li content of the synthesized samples. Considering the presence of impurity Li2Se (3.4%) revealed by Rietveld analysis, ICP measurement estimated the LiVSe2 used in this study to be Li/V = The occupancy of the Se site was 0.983(3) as a result of our Rietveld analysis. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was conducted using a DSC 204 F1 Phoenix (Netzsch). The ambient pressure x-ray diffraction data were mea- sured at BL44B2 and BL02B2 at SPring-8. 30 keV x-rays and the detectors commonly used at each beamline were used. The data obtained at BL44B2 were corrected, com- bined, and converted to one-dimensional data . The x-ray diffraction experiments under high pressure were performed at BL10XU at SPring-8 . A diamond anvil cell (DAC) was used for high-pressure generation. The sample was loaded into the DAC, together with some rubies as pressure markers . Helium was used as a pressure-transmitting medium. 30 keV x-ray energy was used, and diffraction data were acquired with an imag- ing plate detector. The obtained diffraction data were indexed using Conograph , and the analysis was per- formed using Rietan-FP . The obtained structures were drawn using VESTA . X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements were performed on the vanadium K-edge (∼ 5.47 keV) at BL5S2 and BL11S2 at Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center. XAFS spectra were collected by the Quick-XAFS method using a vanadium foil as a reference. The samples were mixed with BN and pelletized. Temperatures below 300 K were controlled by a cryostat, while temperatures above 300 K were controlled by a heater. The obtained data were transformed using Athena included in Demeter . For the Fourier transform, the range up to 12 ̊A −1 was used for the almost data, and for the 30 K data of LiVO2, the range up to 13 ̊A −1 was used so that the interatomic distances originating from the trimer would be apparent. C. Theoretical calculations The partial densities of states (PDOS) and the Fermi surfaces in LiVSe2 and LiVS2 were calculated by employ- ing the WIEN2k code based on the full-potential linearized augmented plane-wave method. These re- sults are obtained using the generalized gradient ap- proximation (GGA) for electron correlations, where the exchange-correlation potential of reference is used. To improve the description of electron correlations in V 3d orbitals, we use the GGA+U method with the around- the-mean-field double-counting scheme , which is be- lieved to be suitable for metallic systems. In the fol- lowing, we will present the results obtained at U = 4 eV. PDOS for the triangular lattice of LiVS2 and LiVSe2 were calculated using lattice parameters obtained by an- alyzing LiVS2 data at 400 K and LiVSe2 at 300 K as- suming trigonal space group P ̄3m1. We also calculated the PDOS for the zigzag chain structure of both mate- rials using the lattice parameters obtained by analyzing the data of LiVS2 at 320 K and LiVSe2 at 100 K as- suming the original space group, the monoclinic space group Pm. It should be noted that monoclinic distor- tions of these materials were small at high temperatures and could be indexed by the trigonal space groups, as dis- cussed below. In the self-consistent calculations, we use 12 × 12 × 6 k-points in the Brillouin zone. The muffin- tin radii (RMT) for the P ̄3m1 structure are taken as 2.23 (Li), 2.45 (V), and 2.11 (S) Bohr for LiVS2 and 2.14 (Li), 2.4 (V), and 2.4 (Se) Bohr for LiVSe2. Similarly, the RMT for the Pm structure are taken as 2.16 (Li), 2.29 (V), and 2.07 (S) Bohr for LiVS2 and 2.11 (Li), 2.3 (V), and 2.3 (Se) Bohr for LiVSe2. The plane-wave cutoff is set to Kmax = 7.5/RMT. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. X-ray diffraction experiments at ambient pressure 100 K performed assuming a triangular lattice structure of LiVSe2 with space group P ̄3m1 and the presence of Li2Se impurities. Although the simulation pattern seems to reproduce the diffraction data well, some peaks could not be indexed based on the structure model with a space group P ̄3m1. Assuming the structure of the monoclinic space group Pm with vanadium forming zigzag chains, all peaks, including these unknowns, were fitted well, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The obtained lattice parameters are 4 (a,b) Rietveld analysis at 100 K for assuming (a) a triangular lattice and (b) a zigzag chain structure. The insets show the area of the green box. The green ticks are the peak positions of the structure used for fitting, and the gray ticks are for impurity Li2Se. β = 89.884(14)◦, α = γ = 90◦. As can be seen from the fact that am/ √ 3bm = 1.011 is close to 1 and β is close to 90◦, the unit cell shape does not clearly show monoclinic distortion, which is the reason why diffraction pattern is fitted fairly well using the trigonal space group P ̄3m1. However, as indicated by the appearance of distinct su- perlattice peaks, the formation of the zigzag chains splits the V-V distance into three different types, as shown in the inset of Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the intensity of the superlattice peaks that appear due to monoclinic distortion gradually decrease with increasing temperature and are no longer observed as a distinct peak above 500 K. For quantita- tive evaluation, the intensities of the peaks at ̄1 1 210 and 1 1 20 ̄3 normalized by the 001 peak are shown in Fig. 3(b). The intensities of the superlattice peaks decay linearly with increasing temperature, reach- ing zero at around 500 K. Corresponding to the decay of these intensities, the splits of in-plane V-V interatomic distance shown in Fig. 3(c) gradually decrease with in- creasing temperature. The structural features of the zigzag chain state of LiVSe2 shown above are similar to those of the high- temperature metallic phase of LiVS2 . In LiVS2, even just above the metal-insulator transition temperature of 314 K, where the monoclinic distortion related to the zigzag chain is largest, β is 89.956(3)◦ and am/ √ 3bm re- tains to 1.001, which is the indicator of the magnitude of the monoclinic distortion. Thus, the monoclinic dis- tortion feature is hardly apparent in the unit cell shape. Nevertheless, a large vanadium displacement of ∼0.13 ̊A (a) Temperature dependence of the x-ray diffraction data of LiVSe2 obtained at ambient pressure. The indices of each peak listed in the figure assume a triangular lattice structure. (b) Intensity ratios of the peaks ̄1 210 (blue) and 1 20 ̄3 (red) in LiVSe2 and LiVS2 (Ref. ) to the 001 fundamental peak. The values due to LiVS2 are so small that they are enlarged and shown on the right. (c) Temper- ature dependence of the V-V distance obtained by Rietveld analysis. The colors plotted for each interatomic distance cor- respond to the dotted lines shown in the structure diagram to the right of the graph. appears with zigzag chain formation. The reason for these strange structural features ap- pearing in LiVS2 is related to the fact that the zigzag chain order is not long-range enough, and the corre- lation length remains finite. This is evident from the experimental results in Fig. 1(a) in the reference , where the vanadium displacement estimated by the aver- age structure is always smaller than the local vanadium displacement estimated by the pair distribution function analysis (PDF analysis). If the correlation length of the zigzag chain is long enough, the magnitude of the vana- dium displacement obtained from the average structural analysis should be equal to that obtained from the lo- 5 cal structural analysis. These features are also evident in the shape of the unit cell as estimated by the aver- age structure. If such a large vanadium displacement occurred, the unit cell would naturally be more distorted from trigonal. However, if the monoclinic distortion as- sociated with vanadium displacement is only localized and the monoclinic domains are oriented in various di- rections with short correlation lengths, the average struc- ture analysis will appear as if a trigonal lattice is realized. In LiVS2, such monoclinic distortions are developed with “mesoscopic” correlation lengths of a few hundred ̊A or more, so to speak, which is why they are observed as such strange structural features. B. XAFS experiments on LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) series It is interesting that structural features similar to LiVS2 were observed in LiVSe2. This seems to sug- gest that the same features are realized in LiVSe2 as in LiVS2, where the correlation length of the zigzag chain remains finite and shortens with increasing temperature. To confirm this, we performed the vanadium K-edge XAFS measurements of three LiVX2 compounds (X = O, S, and Se) at various temperatures. Fig. 4(a) shows the temperature dependencies of the radial distribution function (RDF) for three samples. This is a function of the probability of an atom at a distance r from any given vanadium in the crystal structure, obtained by the Fourier transform of the XAFS spectrum. In the LiVS2 data at 30 K, a peak corresponding to the V-S distance appears at ∼2 ̊A, and two peaks corresponding to the V-V distances associated with vanadium trimerization appear from 2.5 to 3 ̊A, as shown in Fig. 1. It should be noted that the presence of two separate peaks has al- ready been discussed in reference . Strangely enough, once the temperature is raised to the high-temperature phase, the peaks corresponding to the V-V distance dis- appear completely, and only the peaks related to the V-S distance appear. The absence of a peak corresponding to the V-V dis- tance is consistent with the previous paper , but the cause is not mentioned there. This may be since the correlation length of the zigzag chains of vanadium in the high-temperature phase LiVS2 is much smaller than the beam diameter of 500 μm and shows fluctuating dy- namics in time and space. These dynamics occur on the order of seconds, which is well faster than the measure- ment time of 60 s for XAFS spectra. Because of the rela- tionship between the features exhibited by zigzag chains and the experimental conditions, the addition of spec- tra obtained from multiple zigzag chain structures with different orientations is observed in XAFS measurements. Then, due to the phase cancellation of the XAFS spectra, the peaks corresponding to the V-V distance are lost in the RDF. It should be noted that exactly the same RDF results are obtained at 325 K, where the displacement of (a) The RDFs by XAFS measurements on LiVX2. (b) Results of DSC measurements in LiVSe2 and reference LiVS2; results of DSC measurements in LiVS2 are equal to those reported in previous studies . vanadium from the zigzag chains is clearly observed in the average structure, and at 400 K, where no displace- ment is observed. This suggests that the local structure remains unchanged as the temperature increases and that the vanadium lattice similarly fluctuates at 325 and 400 K. Similarly, in the spectrum of LiVSe2, a peak corre- sponding to the V-Se distance is observed near ∼2.2 ̊A, but no peak corresponding to the V-V distance is ob- served at all. If the zigzag chain structure in LiVSe2 forms a long-range order without fluctuating, three types of split V-V distances should be observed in RDF. There- fore, the present result indicates that the zigzag chain interactions are not sufficiently long-range ordered and disordered as in LiVS2. In addition, interestingly, no clear change in the RDF appears well beyond around 500 K, where the superlattice peaks disappear in x-ray diffraction data. This clearly suggests that the zigzag chain order persists to high temperatures while becom- ing short-range ordered in LiVSe2 as well. It should be noted that the correlation length of the zigzag chain changes continuously with temperature, and therefore no clear signature is observed in the physical property measurements. As shown in Fig. 4(b), DSC measurements of LiVSe2 performed in the range of 300 - 650 K show no anomaly around 500 K. This is also the case in LiVS2. In the DSC data of LiVS2, the su- perlattice peaks disappear without any sign around 350 K, indicating that the cause of the disappearance of the 6 superlattice peaks is similar in both cases. The above experimental results might seem to indi- cate that the zigzag chains that appear as precursors to trimerization in LiVS2 also persist in LiVSe2, but this is not such a simple case. If the zigzag chain order is best developed near the trimer phase transition bound- ary, then the zigzag chain order of LiVS2, which shows trimerization at low temperatures, should be more stable than that of LiVSe2. However, as shown in Figs. 3(b) and (c), the zigzag chain order in LiVSe2 is stable at higher temperatures with larger vanadium displacements. It should be pointed out that in LiVO2, which has the high- est trimer transition temperature in the LiVX2 series, no zigzag chain order is reported to appear at high tem- peratures . In fact, as shown in Fig. 4(a), XAFS measurement of LiVO2 clearly shows a single V-V dis- tance peak in the high-temperature phase as well as two V-V distances originating from the trimerization that ap- pear in the low-temperature phase. The appearance of a peak corresponding to the V-V distance in the high- temperature phase is also reported in Ref. . This indicates that the vanadium lattice disorder that ap- pears in LiVS2 and LiVSe2 does not occur in the high- temperature phase of LiVO2. This indicates that this anomalous zigzag chain state appears universally and stably over a range of the metallic phase of LiVS2 and LiVSe2, not only in the vicinity of the trimer phase, as shown in Fig. 1. C. Partial DOS calculations of LiVSe2 The above structural studies show that zigzag chain ordering is realized in both metallic phases of LiVS2 and LiVSe2, persistently surviving with the correlation length becoming shorter when the temperature increases. A unique feature of this system is that the zigzag chains are more stabilized at LiVSe2, which is farther from the metal-insulator transition boundary than LiVS2 in the phase space shown in Fig. 1. Partial DOS calculations were performed to determine the cause of these charac- teristics. Figure 5(a) is the DOS computed on the basis of the space group P ̄3m1 realized as an average structure at high temperatures in LiVS2 and LiVSe2. The calcula- tion result for LiVS2 is essentially identical to that shown in . LiVS2 and LiVSe2 have similar DOS shapes with a large population due to the 3d orbitals of vanadium near the Fermi surface. However, due to the difference in lattice parameters associated with the difference between S(3p) and Se(4p), the energy width of the d orbitals is slightly narrower in LiVSe2. This will be important in later discussions. On the other hand, Fig. 5(b), calculated for the space group Pm structure with zigzag chain structure, shows a clear decrease in the density of states near the Fermi surface for both LiVS2 and LiVSe2. This happens to be due to the nesting of the Fermi surfaces that occurs as a result of zigzag chain formation. In the structure of the (a) Partial-DOSs of LiVS2 (upper) and LiVSe2 (lower) assuming a triangular lattice structure. (b) Partial- DOSs of LiVS2 (upper) and LiVSe2 (lower) assuming a zigzag chain structure. (c) Shapes of Fermi surfaces for LiVS2 (up- per) and LiVSe2 (lower) with a triangular lattice structure. The figures of LiVS2 are equal to those shown in the previous study . (d) Relationship between dxy, dyz, and dzx or- bitals. Electrons occupy 1/3 of each orbital. (e) Zigzag chain formation due to the change of filling by charge transfer. space group P ̄3m1 of LiVS2, it has been discussed that there is an instability of the Fermi surface defined by the nesting vector Q = a∗/2 as shown in Fig. 5(c), which causes zigzag chain formation corresponding to vanadium displacements. A similar instability of the Fermi surface is expected to exist in LiVSe2, which may lead to the zigzag chain formation in LiVSe2. However, the Fermi surfaces have not completely disappeared in both cases, which is consistent with the high-temperature phase of LiVS2 and LiVSe2 being essentially metallic. The reason why the zigzag chain appears more sta- ble in LiVSe2, even though the partial DOS of LiVS2 7 and LiVS2 are very similar, may be due to the differ- ence in the energy width of the d orbital. In the trig- onal structure, the dxy, dyz, and dzx orbitals that con- sist of t2g orbitals are triply degenerate, and the elec- tron filling of these three orbitals are equal to 1/3, as shown in Fig. 5(d). If the triangular lattice is distorted to form a zigzag chain, in principle the electron filling This has been pointed out by Rovira and Whangbo , who argued that narrower t2g orbitals require less en- ergy for electron transfer, thus stabilizing the zigzag chain state. LiVS2 and LiVSe2 actually maintain metal- lic conduction in the zigzag chain state. Therefore, (dxy,dyz,dzx)=(0,1/2,1/2) is not strictly realized and some electrons are considered to remain in the dxy or- bitals. However, the difference in bandwidth as pointed out by Rovira and Whangbo is found in our theoretical calculations, as shown in Fig. 5(a), which may be the reason why more stable zigzag chains appear in LiVSe2. D. X-ray diffraction under high pressure Since the zigzag chain formation is associated with the instability of the Fermi surface, it is expected that ap- plying pressure causes poor nesting of the Fermi sur- face. Instead, trimerization is stabilized by the effect of closer V-V distance and stronger d-d hybridization. Based on these expectations, we performed diffraction experiments under pressure. Fig. 6(a) shows the diffrac- tion data at several pressure points at 8 K. When pres- sure is applied, the diffraction peak clearly shifts to the high-angle side, indicating that the lattice parameter is decreased, as summarized in the Le Bail analysis results in Fig. 6(b). The pressure dependence of the diffraction data in Fig. 6(a) shows that the intensity of the super- lattice peaks from the zigzag chain structure gradually increases with increasing pressure, suggesting that, con- trary to expectations, the zigzag chain state stabilizes under pressure. The Rietveld analysis is necessary to estimate the amount of atomic displacement of V that causes zigzag chains, but it is difficult to perform ac- curate analyses because of the reduced crystallinity and higher background under pressure. Therefore, we used the following method to estimate the atomic positions in the crystal. First, Rietveld analysis was performed on the data at 20.8(1) GPa, where the peaks are relatively sharp, and the superlattice intensity is reasonable. Us- ing the structural parameters obtained from this analysis and the ratio of fundamental and superlattice intensity, we estimated the structural parameters for each data. The Supplemental Material describes the method’s details. As shown in Fig. 6(c), the splitting of the V-V interatomic distance at 8 K increases continuously under pressure, reaching as much as 0.33 ̊A (10.6%) at 40.0(1) GPa. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 3(c), while the V-V interatomic distance shows a strong temperature depen- dence at ambient pressure, there is no difference in the magnitude of displacement between 8 K and 300 K un- der pressure, indicating that the zigzag chains are rapidly stabilized under pressure. There are two possible reasons for the unexpected sta- bilization of the zigzag chains. First, the Li ions between the VSe2 layers prevented the dimensionality from de- creasing under pressure. This is evident from the pres- sure dependence of c/a, a measure of dimensionality, shown in the lower part of Fig. 6(b). Generally, the c/a value decreases rapidly with applied pressure in lay- ered compounds because the van der Waals gap between layers is easily compressed. In VSe2, which is included for reference, the value of c/a decreases with pressure , but in LiVSe2, contrary to expectations, it does not change. This behavior may be due to the insertion of Li ions between the VSe2 layers, which prevents the van der Waals gap from compressing. The presence of Li in LiVSe2 not only sets the stage for the formation of zigzag chains by changing vanadium to the d2 electronic state, but also prevents the zigzag chains from becoming un- stable under pressure by losing the two-dimensionality of the electronic structure, which is important for Fermi surface nesting. Second, the V-S distance shrinks un- der pressure, and d-p hybridization is strengthened. As shown in Fig. 6(d), in LiVS2 where vanadium trimeriza- tion appears at low temperatures, the average V-S dis- tance is clearly increased by trimerization. This would indicate that trimerization appears from strong d-d hy- bridization between ionic V3+(d2) and therefore does not favor strong d-p hybridization. Under high pressure in LiVSe2, both d-d and d-p hybridization are enhanced. Al- though these two effects should be competing, the effect of reduced V-ionicity due to increased d-p hybridization is more dominant in LiVSe2, resulting in the trimer state not appearing under high pressure in LiVSe2. Instead, the zigzag chain state stabilizes under high pressure. E. Discussion From the above experiments, it seems likely that the zigzag chain states appearing in the LiVX2 system are not simply trimer precursors, but are characterized as competing electronic phases governed by various param- eters such as Fermi surface nesting, band width, d-p and d-d hybridization. On the other hand, however, the fea- ture that the correlation length of the zigzag chain state remains finite up to high temperatures indicates that the zigzag chain state is very different from the usual elec- tronic phase, rather similar to the local distortion fea- tures that appear in the high-temperature phase of many systems where molecular formation occurs at low temper- atures [8, 13, 45–49]. There seem to be several cases of local distortion phenomena that appear at high temper- atures: First, the case in which molecular formation pat- terns that appear at low temperatures appear as short- range order. This is the most common case and has been 8 (a) Pressure dependence of diffraction data. The figure shows diffraction data from ambient pressure to 40 GPa in increments of about 5 GPa. An enlarged view of the low-angle data is shown below. (b) Pressure dependencies of the lattice parameters and c/a at 8 K. c/a for VSe2 is taken from R. Sereika et al. as a reference. (c) Pressure dependence of the estimated in-plane V-V distance. (d) Temperature dependence of averaged V-S distance in LiVS2. discussed in Li2RuO3 , AlV2O4 , LiRh2O4 , RuP , etc. The recently reported dimer fluctuation of 1T-MTe2 (M = V, Nb, Ta) may also be a variant of this case . Second, the case in which distortion patterns different from those of the low-temperature phase appear as short-range order. A typical example is CuIr2S4 , where it is argued that the dimer of the low-temperature phase does not appear as a short-range order, but instead the tetragonal distortion appears as a short-range order. Third, the case of LiVX2 (X = S, Se), where a completely different pattern from the low-temperature phase appears with a finite correlation length. Among these, the LiVX2 system is also unusual in that it forms an order with a long correlation length on the mesoscopic scale, and it undoubtedly provides a unique playground that sets it apart from other material systems that exhibit molecu- lar formation. Through further exploration of materials forming short-range order, we expect that the physics of these molecule-forming systems will develop into an im- portant research field related to various fields, including quantum liquid crystals and nonequilibrium physics. IV. SUMMARY In summary, we have performed structural studies and theoretical calculations of layered LiVX2 and found that the zigzag chain state that appears in the high- temperature phase of LiVS2 is more stabilized in LiVSe2. This indicates that the zigzag chain phase appears more stable in the phase space of LiVX2 (X = O, S, Se) in regions away from the trimer phase boundary. The zigzag chain phases found in this system are significantly different from the local distortion features that appear 9 in conventional molecular formation systems, clearly indicating that molecular formation systems with a long history, as typified by the Verwey transition of magnetite, are still unique playgrounds with a rich variety of fascinating physics. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are very grateful to R. Isoda and Dr. R. Ishii for their experimental support. The work leading to these results has received funding from the Grant in Aid for Scientific Research (No. JP17K17793, No. JP20H02604, No. JP20H01849, No. JP21K18599, No. JP21J21236, No. JP22KJ1521, and No. JP23H04104) and Research Foundation for the Electrotechnology of Chubu. This work was carried out under the Visiting Researcher’s Pro- gram of the Institute for Solid State Physics, the Univer- sity of Tokyo, and the Collaborative Research Projects of Laboratory for Materials and Structures, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology. Powder x-ray diffraction experiments were conducted at the BL02B2, BL10XU, and BL44B2 of SPring-8, Hyogo, Japan (Proposals No. 2020A1063, No. 2021A1111, No. 2021A1117, No. 2021B1136 and No. 2022A1167), and at the BL5S2 of Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center, Aichi Science and Technology Foundation, Aichi, Japan (Pro- and No. XAFS experiments were con- ducted at the BL5S1 and BL11S2 of Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center (Proposals No. 201901017, 201902049, E. J. W. Verwey, Nature 144, 327 (1939). D. I. Khomskii and T. Mizokawa, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, D. I. Khomskii and S. V. Streltsov, Chemical Reviews M.-H. Whangbo and E. Canadell, J. Am. Chem. Soc. C. Rovira and M. H. Whangbo, Inorg. Chem. 32, 4094 P. G. Radaelli, Y. Horibe, M. J. Gutmann, H. Ishibashi, C. H. Chen, R. M. Ibberson, Y. Koyama, Y. S. Hor, V. Kiryukhin, and S. W. Cheong, Nature (London) 416, Y. Horibe, M. Shingu, K. Kurushima, H. Ishibashi, N. Ikeda, K. Kato, Y. Motome, N. Furukawa, S. Mori, and T. Katsufuji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 086406 (2006). A. J. Browne, S. A. J. Kimber, and J. P. Attfield, Phys. Rev. Mater. 1, 052003(R) (2017). N. Katayama, M. Uchida, D. Hashizume, S. Niitaka, J. Matsuno, D. Matsumura, Y. Nishihata, J. Mizuki, N. Takeshita, A. Gauzzi, M. Nohara, and H. Takagi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 146405 (2009). W. Tian, M. F. Chisholm, P. G. Khalifah, R. Jin, B. C. Sales, S. E. Nagler, and D. Mandrus, Mater. Res. Bull. M. Schmidt, W. Ratcliff, P. G. Radaelli, K. Refson, N. M. Harrison, and S. W. Cheong, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 056402 Y. Okamoto, S. Niitaka, M. Uchida, T. Waki, M. Taki- gawa, Y. Nakatsu, A. Sekiyama, S. Suga, R. Arita, and H. Takagi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 086404 (2008). M. Shiomi, K. Kojima, N. Katayama, S. Maeda, J. A. Schneeloch, S. Yamamoto, K. Sugimoto, Y. Ohta, D. Louca, Y. Okamoto, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. B 105, N. Katayama, H. Takeda, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Yamada, K. Iida, M. Takigawa, Y. Ohta, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. Y. Okamoto, H. Amano, N. Katayama, H. Sawa, K. Niki, R. Mitoka, H. Harima, T. Hasegawa, N. Ogita, Y. Tanaka, M. Takigawa, Y. Yokoyama, K. Takehana, Y. Imanaka, Y. Nakamura, H. Kishida, and K. Takenaka, Nat. Commun. 11, 3144 (2020). Y. Miura, Y. Yasui, M. Sato, N. Igawa, and K. Kakurai, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 76, 033705 (2007). S. Kobayashi, N. Katayama, T. Manjo, H. Ueda, C. Michioka, J. Sugiyama, Y. Sassa, O. K. Forslund, M. M ̊ansson, K. Yoshimura, and H. Sawa, Inorg. Chem. N. Katayama, S. Tamura, T. Yamaguchi, K. Sugimoto, K. Iida, T. Matsukawa, A. Hoshikawa, T. Ishigaki, S. Kobayashi, Y. Ohta, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. B 98, D. Hirai, K. Kojima, N. Katayama, M. Kawamura, D. Nishio-Hamane, and Z. Hiroi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 144, M. Isobe, E. Ninomiya, A. N. Vasil’ev, and Y. Ueda, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 71, 1423 (2002). T. Kajita, T. Kanzaki, T. Suzuki, J. E. Kim, K. Kato, M. Takata, and T. Katsufuji, Phys. Rev. B 81, 060405(R) M. Nakano, K. Shibuya, D. Okuyama, T. Hatano, S. Ono, M. Kawasaki, Y. Iwasa, and Y. Tokura, Nature 487, 459 D. Matsunami and A. Fujita, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106, Y. Kinemuchi, Y. Masuda, K. Ozaki, and A. Fujita, J. Alloys Compd. 882, 160741 (2021). E. S. Bozin, W. G. Yin, R. J. Koch, M. Abeykoon, Y. S. Hor, H. Zheng, H. C. Lei, C. Petrovic, J. F. Mitchell, and S. J. L. Billinge, Nat. Commun. 10, 3638 (2019). K. Kojima, N. Katayama, S. Tamura, M. Shiomi, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. B 100, 235120 (2019). K. Kojima, N. Katayama, Y. Matsuda, M. Shiomi, R. Ishii, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. B 107, L020101 (2023). N. Katayama, K. Kojima, T. Yamaguchi, S. Hattori, S. Tamura, K. Ohara, S. Kobayashi, K. Sugimoto, Y. Ohta, K. Saitoh, and H. Sawa, npj Quantum Mater. D. W. Murphy, F. J. Di Salvo, G. W. J. Hull, and J. V. Waszczak, Inorg. Chem. 15, 17 (1976). 10 See supplemental material at [url will be inserted by pub- lisher] for experimental details and structural aspects. K. Kato, Y. Tanaka, M. Yamauchi, K. Ohara, and T. Hatsui, J. Synchrotron Rad. 26, 762 (2019). K. Kato and K. Shigeta, J. Synchrotron Rad. 27, 1172 N. Hirao, S. I. Kawaguchi, K. Hirose, K. Shimizu, E. Ohtani, and Y. Ohishi, Matter Radiat. at Extremes C.-S. Zha, H.-k. Mao, and R. J. Hemley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 13494 (2000). R. Oishi-Tomiyasu, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 47, 593 (2014). F. Izumi and K. Momma, Solid State Phenom. 130, 15 K. Momma and F. Izumi, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 44, 1272 B. Ravel and M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat. 12, P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, F. Tran, R. Laskowski, G. K. H. Madsen, and L. D. Marks, J. Chem. Phys. 152, 074101 P. Blaha, K. Schwarz, G. K. H. Madsen, D. Kvas- nicka, J. Luitz, R. Laskowsk, F. Tran, and L. D. Marks, WIEN2k: An Augmented Plane Wave Plus Local Orbitals Program for Calculating Crystal Properties (Technische Universit ̈at Wien, Vienna, 2021). J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 77, 3865 (1996). M. T. Czy ̇zyk and G. A. Sawatzky, Phys. Rev. B 49, K. Imai, H. Sawa, M. Koike, M. Hasegawa, and H. Takei, J. Solid State Chem. 114, 184 (1995). R. Sereika, C. Park, C. Kenney-Benson, S. Bandaru, N. J. English, Q. Yin, H. Lei, N. Chen, C.-J. Sun, S. M. Heald, J. Ren, J. Chang, Y. Ding, and H.-k. Mao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11, 380 (2020). S. Torigoe, T. Hattori, K. Kodama, T. Honda, H. Sagayama, K. Ikeda, T. Otomo, H. Nitani, H. Abe, H. Murakawa, H. Sakai, and N. Hanasaki, Phys. Rev. B S. A. J. Kimber, I. I. Mazin, J. Shen, H. O. Jeschke, S. V. Streltsov, D. N. Argyriou, R. Valent ́i, and D. I. Khomskii, Phys. Rev. B 89, 081408(R) (2014). R. J. Koch, N. Aryal, O. Ivashko, Y. Liu, M. Abeykoon, E. D. Bauer, M. v. Zimmermann, W. Yin, C. Petrovic, and E. S. Bozin, Phys. Rev. B 106, 214516 (2022). N. Katayama, Y. Matsuda, K. Kojima, T. Hara, S. Kitou, N. Mitsuishi, H. Takahashi, S. Ishiwata, K. Ishizaka, and H. Sawa, Phys. Rev. B 107, 245113 (2023). R. J. Koch, R. Sinclair, M. T. McDonnell, R. Yu, M. Abeykoon, M. G. Tucker, A. M. Tsvelik, S. J. L. Billinge, H. D. Zhou, W.-G. Yin, and E. S. Bozin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 126, 186402 (2021).