1 A contactless scanning near-field optical dilatometer imaging the thermal expansivity of inhomogeneous 2D materials and thin films at the nanoscale. Victor Wong, Sabastine Ezugwu & Giovanni Fanchini* V. Wong, S. Ezugwu & G. Fanchini Department of Physics & Astronomy, University of Western Ontario, London ON, Canada N6A3K7 E-mail: gfanchin@uwo.ca G. Fanchini Department of Chemistry, University of Western Ontario, London ON, Canada N6A5B7 Keywords: Thermal Expansion Coefficient, Scanning-near field optical microscopy (SNOM), Thermoreflecance, Nanogranular materials. To date, there are very few experimental techniques, if any, that are suitable for the purpose of acquiring, with nanoscale lateral resolution, quantitative maps of the thermal expansivity of 2D materials and thin films, despite huge demand for nanoscale thermal management, for example in designing integrated circuitry for power electronics. Besides, contactless analytical tools for determining the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) are highly desirable, because probes in contact with the sample significantly perturb any thermal measurements. Here, we introduce ω-2ω near-field thermoreflectance imaging, as an all-optical and contactless approach to map the TEC at the nanoscale with precision. Testing of our technique is performed on nanogranular films of gold and multilayer graphene (ML-G) platelets. Our method demonstrates that the TEC of Au is higher at the metal-insulator interface, with an average of (17.12±2.30)x10-6 K-1 in agreement with macroscopic techniques. For ML-G, the average TEC was (-5.77±3.79)x10-6 K-1 and is assigned to in-plane vibrational bending modes. A vibrational-thermal transition from graphene to graphite is observed, where the TEC becomes positive as the ML thickness increases. Our nanoscale 2 method demonstrates results in excellent agreement with its macroscopic counterparts, as well as superior capabilities to probe 2D materials and interfaces. 1. Introduction With critical advances in integrated power electronics, there has been a tremendous demand for nanoscale thermal management in the pursuit of miniaturization and integration of submicrometric components while preserving high power density for applications in communication, aircraft engines and renewable and sustainable energy storage. The need for heat dissipation is essential for many of such applications as it assists in preserving the efficiency and lifespan of the circuitry components. Heat spreaders and heat sinks are typically integrated for the purpose of discharging local thermal buildup from long device operation time. With tremendous demand for miniaturization, understanding of heat dissipation in low-dimensional systems and thin film structures beyond the macroscopic level is rapidly becoming essential towards the development of next generation information technology. However, a major cause of powered electronics failure is due to thermal stress induced by a difference in thermal expansion coefficients of different materials in contact upon long durations of heat exposure. Despite the demand, there are few experimental techniques suitable for the purpose of providing thermal expansion information beyond the macroscopic level. Thermal expansion of inhomogeneous thin films is customarily investigated macroscopically with dilatometers, thus only measuring their average expansivity from bulk materials with known geometry through an external heat source. Microscopic and nanoscopic thermal expansion information is generally not provided by macroscopic dilatometry techniques. In principle, thermal expansivity information with higher resolution can be obtained by measuring 3 the changes in the crystallographic lattice sites with x-ray spectroscopy where the measured spectra are accompanied with a thermodynamical interpretation involving anharmonic effects to determine the thermal expansion. These methods are also macroscopic in nature, however, and they require crystalline materials. To date, guesses on the local thermal properties of surfaces and near-surface features at the mesoscopic level chiefly rely on scanning thermal microscopy (SThM) a contact-mode scanning probe microscopy. In SThM, heat is generated in the sample due to an external AC electrical source, while detection is measured through periodical oscillations of the probe cantilever to determine the thermal expansion coefficient of the material. However, heat detection in conventional SThM requires the cantilever to be in contact with the sample surface, which acts as a huge thermal sink that is also irreproducible due to unpredictable sample-probe distance. Furthermore, the cantilever also expands due to heat, thus further complicating the genuine identification of thermal expansion from the sample. Alternative methods of nanoscale thermal detection have been proposed, and they involve the combination of conventional SThM with other techniques or uses synchrotron-based methods assisted with high resolution transmission electron microscopy. Such methods were also occasionally proposed for acquiring thermal expansion information with nanoscale resolution. However, the configurations of the proposed systems are highly specialized and require a combination of multiple techniques, some of which are available only at large-scale synchrotron facilities. In this paper, we present and utilize for the first time contactless near-field thermo- reflectance imaging, a novel tool for precisely mapping the thermal expansion coefficient at the 4 nanoscale. Near-field thermoreflectance is a class of pump-probe techniques based on super- resolution, aperture-type, scanning near-field optical microscopes (SNOMs) –optical instruments capable of lateral resolution beyond the diffraction limit through the use of evanescent light waves. Aperture-type SNOMs make use of atomic-force cantilevers in which nano-sized apertures are drilled via focussed ion-beams and, therefore, the acquisition of an atomic force micrograph (AFM) of the sample surface is possible in conjunction with nano-optical imaging. In pump-probe near-field thermoreflectance experiments, samples are periodically heated by a “pump” laser beam from an inverted optical microscope, while periodic changes in the sample’s local reflectivity caused by the resulting heat waves are measured, in phase and amplitude, through an upright aperture-type SNOM operating in reflection mode from a low intensity laser (“probe”) of wavelength different from the “pump”. Near-field thermoreflectance tools can be operated in non-contact mode, thus making them contactless and offering significant advantages, in terms of little invasiveness, over methods requiring electrical currents to heat the sample, or nanosized thermocouples to measure their thermal properties, or both. The use of scanning near-field thermoreflectance methods to map the thermal conductivity and heat capacity of specific samples, by locking the probe beam detection at the same frequency  as the pump beam in an - pump-probe technique, is well assessed. Here, we demonstrate that one-of-a-kind -2 near-field thermoreflectance experiments, in which the probe is locked- in for detection at double frequency (2) as the pump, are spectacularly sensitive to the local expansivity of surfaces, and can thus be successfully used to satisfy the longstanding quest for a contactless tool capable of imaging the thermal expansion coefficient (TEC) of composite materials at the nanoscale. This novel technique, which can be termed scanning near-field optical 5 dilatometry (SNOD) is here demonstrated to quantitatively estimate and successfully image the nanoscale thermal expansion coefficient of samples with both positive and negative thermal expansivity. SNOD is anticipated to be uniquely suited for thermal expansion coefficient imaging in a variety of thin films and devices, thus solving longstanding fundamental and technological problems in nanoscale thermal management. 2. Results and Discussion 2.1. Operation Principles of SNOD Panels a and b in Figure 1 elucidate the principle of operation of thermoreflectance experiments and the differences between - and -2 operation modes, where this second mode of operation is specifically pioneered in this work. Samples include a transparent substrate with an optically absorbing and heterogeneous thin film on the top. As these thin films are heterogeneous and of different material properties, their TEC is expected to vary from point to point (x,y) of the probed surface. Due to the high transparency of the sample, the pump beam (0=405 nm, purple, in figure 1a-b) pulsed at a frequency  through an optical chopper and periodically heats the film, from which heat dissipates both along the surface or through the substrate and, to a limited extent, air at the top. Air experiences a stronger change in density than the solid sample, which results in oscillations of the air refractive index and surface reflectivity [(x,y)]. Such oscillations are probed by an upright SNOM in reflection mode (=532 nm in figure 1a-b). This allows to locally probe the oscillations in film’s surface temperature [Tf,(x,y)] which are linear in the reflectivity: Tf,(x,y) = (x,y) / h, (1) where h is a constant that only depends on , on the material, tip aperture radius and length, as well as the focal distance from the detector. 6 The interpretation of - measurements summarized by eq 1 assumes that the near-field thermo-reflectance entirely originates from the sample surface, which on its turn assumes the evanescent field to be spatially localized at lengths much shorter than the spatial fluctuations of the sample surface along the z-axis. This is normally not the case, as the near-field decays over lengths of the order as the tip radius a (i.e. a few tens nm) and these fluctuations can be either time- scanned point (x,y). Performing SNOM measurements in AFM non-contact mode eliminates the contribution from time-independent fluctuations, but not from time-dependent ones, as the tip resonant frequency is normally much larger than . As seen in figure 1b, the thermal expansivity [(x,y)] of the sample surface under sinusoidal heating induces time-dependent oscillations of the z-axis position of the sample surface at the same frequency: z(x,y,t) = z0 + (x,y) cos(t). (2) Because the reflected evanescent field is not point-like, but can be approximated as a gaussian profile peaked at a constant distance z0 from the sample, and of full width at half maximum of about the tip aperture radius a, the near-field reflectivity from temperature-induced, time- dependent fluctuations of the underlying surface is given by: (3) where a Taylor expansion of the gaussian can be used to work out the right-hand term of eq 3 in conjunction with eq 2 and the half-angle formula 2cos2(t)=1+cos(2t). Thus, the amplitude of the time-dependent SNOM signal at double-frequency (2) is given by: 2(x,y) = (x,y) (x,y)2 / 2a2. (4) (x,y) can be derived from 2 by means of eq 4, if (x,y) is known from an independent - 7 experiment, and the lateral resolution of this method will be ~ a. The z-axis resolution will be more accurate, however, as the use of a lock-in method enables the detection of quantities (x,y) / a ~ 10-2 and, therefore (x,y)  0.5 nm with a  50 nm aperture. As the two experiments (- and - 2) can be carried out simultaneously from the same instrumentation, this finding opens a robust pathway towards contactless near-field based scanning optical nanodilatometry. An immediate way to picture the underlying principle of contactless SNOD through -2 experiments is depicted in figure 1b. Consider the sample surface to be, on average, at temperature and height TMid and zMid, respectively. At a time tHi = /2 during a pump-beam cycle, the sample is heated up to THi=TMid+T, which expands it locally, thus placing its surface at zHi = zMid–(x,y)/2 below the tip. Cooling the sample at a time tLo = 3/2 during the same cycle, will bring the temperature down to TLo=TMid–T, thus locally placing its surface at a larger distance, zHi = zMid+(x,y)/2, from the tip. Hence, the temperature and position of the sample surface relative to the contactless tip oscillate at . However, the sample surface sits away from the gaussian peak of the reflected evanescent field at both tHi and tLo, where the sample reflectivity reaches equal minima, Lo = Lo = –2 = (1–2/2a2) because of the symmetry of the gaussian-shaped profile of the reflected evanescent field. Because the reflectivity reaches two minima, at /2 and 3/2, for each pump-beam period, then the reflectivity signal from thermal expansivity oscillations occurs at double frequency as the excitation. In addition, the amplitude of the reflected evanescent field will reach maxima at tMid = 0, /, and 2/, also twice as frequently as the pump beam, thus confirming the 2 oscillations of the signal associated to the sample’s thermal expansion. 8 After measuring (x0,y0) via eq 4, the next critical step is represented by properly taking into account the contributions from the substrate on the determination of the local TEC [f(x0,y0)] of the film, where the former can be substantial (up to 50%) even for thermally insulating substrates like glass. The two quantities are linked by the relationship: (5) where Tf(x0,y0) can be obtained through - thermoreflectance measurements via eq (1), and d(x0,y0) is the local thin-film thickness. Being scanning-probe techniques, SNOM and SNOD are uniquely suited to determine d(x0,y0) through a simultaneous AFM scan of the sample. Also, in eq 5, s is the TEC of the substrate, which, for most of the cases of practical interest, is known and expected to be homogeneous. More complicate is the determination of Ts(x0,y0,z0), the change in temperature at a point of the substrate at a level z0 below the measured point of the surface. Multiple neighboring substrate points (x,y) may affect the thermal expansion around (x0,y0). In an ideal case where the substrate is perfectly insulating, and the film is enough conducting for heat to be overwhelmingly dissipated in-plane along the surface, the integral from the second addend of eq 5 yields a negligible value, but this is normally not the case. To facilitate the determination of eq 5, Ts(x0,y0,z0) will be divided in two components, temperature oscillation Tf,av averaged over the entire scanned region (panel c, top), and ii) the local deviation from the average [Ts,(x0,y0,z0)] which originates from the fluctuations of the measured film’s temperature Tf(x0y0) (panel c, bottom). Due to the linearity of the equation of heat, this can 9 respectively, as boundary conditions, and the solutions can be superimposed as Ts(x0,y0,z0) = Ts,av(z0) + Ts(x0,y0,z0), (6) where Ts(x0,y0,z0) = Adx dy s(x–x0,y–y0,z0), (7) and A is the considered cut-off area of the sample. Ts(x0,y0,z0) obtained from eq 6 can then be integrated over z0 in eq 5 to yield f(x0,y0). Specifically, component i) offers a substrate temperature uniformly decaying over z irrespective of (x,y) (figure 1c, top), while component ii) results in a local temperature oscillation of the form s(x-x0,y-y0,z0), which is the product of a Supporting Information). Under the additional assumption that multiple s(x-x0,y-y0,z0) from neighbouring substrate points have random signs, and tend to cancel out due to the randomness of thermal fluctuations in disordered media, the integration in eq 5 is, at the present stage, carried out by neglecting the contributions from any component at x  x0 and y  y0 (i.e. with a cut-off area A corresponding to 1 pixel, so Ts(x0,y0,z0)  s(x0,y0,z0)). Nonetheless, it is anticipated that this simplified model of the substrate’s contributions to the thermal expansion is sufficient to describe optically transparent substrates at low enough thermal conductivity. In the following section, we explore the use of SNOD for investigating specific systems of practical interest, with both positive and negative TEC. The objective is to test our method with special attention to nanogranular and sparse films (where macroscopic dilatometry techniques may be inadequate) as well as highly thermally conducting systems such as gold and graphene, where the use of SThM is problematic due to strong heat transfer to the probe. 10 2.2. Demonstration of SNOD imaging 2.2.1. Nanogranular and continuous thin films of gold on glass Nanogranular but continuous thin films of gold on glass are ideal testing samples for SNOD as their data interpretation is simplified by the fact of heat being predominantly dissipated along the Au thin-film surface, which is very thermally conducting, while the relative uniformity of the thin film minimizes Tf(x0,y0) from figure 1c. For this system, the substrate’s contribution to the sample’s expansivity from eq 5 is overwhelmingly represented by Ts,av(z0) in eq 6, which is independent of (x,y) and, consequently (x0,y0). maps from an 80-nm thick Au film, where the sample granularity is noticeable from the AFM micrograph in panel a, with SNOM measurements in transmission and reflection mode in panels b-c, respectively. The corresponding - thermoreflectance map is shown in panel d, with their -2 thermal expansion counterparts presented in panels e-h. The TEC is an intensive property that, in the bulk of a solid, will only depend on the crystal structure; even though it can assume different values at surfaces and interfaces, it cannot depend on measuring parameters, such as . To validate this, thermal expansion maps are measured for  = 45, 60, 80 and 100 Hz in the same region as the AFM micrograph in panel a. We can thus observe that the thermal expansion maps are independent of , which is an indication of their genuineness. However, it can be observed that the TEC is highest in the proximity of Au-glass interfaces (panel i) and relatively constant elsewhere. From panels e-h, we estimate the average volumetric TEC of Au to be (51.35 ± 6.89) x 10-6 K-1 with an average linear TEC of (17.12 ± 2.30) x 10-6 K-1, and uncertainties 11 determined by the standard deviation from all the measured . Comparison of these values with the TEC for Au recorded by macroscopic dilatometry techniques from the literature is reported in Table I. In addition, the TEC of the same nanogranular Au thin film probed by SNOD was also measured macroscopically using an optical dilatometer (see Supporting Information) and comparable TEC estimates were obtained. We can thus infer that SNOD provides quantitatively correct measurements of TEC of Au thin films, with additional information at the grain boundaries and interfaces with the glass substrate. 2.2.2. Sparse multilayer graphene (ML-G) platelets on glass To further substantiate the capabilities of SNOD, we have performed the same measurements on a system of complementary characteristics, which is formed by sparse multi- layer graphene (ML-G) platelets deposited on optically transparent and thermally insulating glass, as summarized in Figure 3. As far as this system is concerned, the substrate’s contribution to the sample’s expansivity from eq 5 is overwhelmingly represented by Ts(x-x0,y-y0,z0) in eq 6, which, at a certain subsurface level z0, may depend on a relatively large number of substrate points (x,y) around (x0,y0). However, because of the sparseness of the ML-G platelets, heat is here overwhelmingly dissipated through the substrate, orthogonally from the surface, and therefore a small cut-off area A in eq 7 appears to be adequate. From the AFM micrograph in figure 3a, it can be observed that the ML-G platelets are dispersed over the substrate surface with little overlap, and some folding, which results in a broad range of number of stacking layers. The SNOM transmission and reflection maps over the same region are presented in Figure 3b and c respectively, while panel d shows the temperature profile 12 of the sample. A local optical absorption profile can be determined using the near-field transmission and reflectance signals to determine the local temperature profile and be used to calculate the local thermal expansion maps from f(x0,y0) in eq 5. TEC maps of ML-G platelets are presented in figure 3e-i for frequencies  = 100, 200, 400 and 700 Hz, respectively. Because the TEC is a material specific-parameter, the results in figure 3e-i should not depend on  and any differences are the result of measuring uncertainties. In fact, the differences between the TEC determined from such independent measurements are marginal, and consistent in magnitude with normal fluctuations during sequential AFM and SNOM scans. From the summary in figure 3h, which correlates average TEC results from panels e-i and the ML-G thickness from AFM (panel a), we can observe that the thinner ML-G the more negative the TEC. A transition point can be observed at approximately 175 layers. For platelets thicker than 175 layers, the TEC transitions to positive, as it happens in bulk graphite. Furthermore, the linear TEC above 175 layers undergo a plateau at (33.75 ± 3.24) x 10-6 K-1 which is consistent with the out-of-plane thermal expansion of graphite along the crystallographic c-axis, which corroborates the validity of SNOD as an accurate and quantitative method for thermal expansivity measurements. Conversely, a value of (-5.77 ± 3.79) x 10-6 K-1 is observed via SNOD for the thinnest ML-G platelets, below about 90 layers, which can be assigned to the in-plane bending modes of graphene, and is consistent with previous macroscopic measurements, as shown in Table II. A significant advantage of SNOD over all of such techniques rests in that it provides site-specific thermal expansion information while other probing methods only yield an ensemble average of the thermally induced expansion and provides minimal information on the distribution of the thermal expansion throughout the whole sample. In addition, through the 13 systematic use of newly invented SNOD technique, we have been able to prove that the transition between graphene and graphite occurs, from a thermal expansion point of view, at about 175 layers and, therefore, at a higher thickness than the transition of electronic properties between few-layer graphene and graphite, which typically occurs at about 10 layers or below. 3. Conclusions In this article, we have described the invention and construction of the first contactless nano-dilatometry apparatus capable of imaging the TEC at the nanoscale in nanostructured thin- film materials, 2D materials and relating electronic nanodevices. Our apparatus, a scanning near- field dilatometer, is all-optical and, therefore, does not require any external heater or electrical contact to vary the sample’s temperature, nor it requires any physical thermometer or nano- thermocouple to probe it. Our method is a -2 pump-probe method, where the probe is an aperture-type reflection-mode SNOM, which makes it uniquely suited for probing optically absorbing and thermally conducting layers on optically transparent and relatively thermally insulating substrates, albeit the role of the substrate in determining the measured thermal expansion is considered, through a rigorous model based on Fourier’s heat equation. Using SNOD, we also have found that the TEC of nanogranular Au films is shown to be higher at the glass/Au interface. Such a finding would have been impossible with any other techniques. It would have been impossible with macroscopic contactless techniques because of poor resolution, which would be insufficient to resolve them by several orders of magnitude. To the best of our knowledge, the same effect has never been observed before using SThM, arguably because the strong interaction of supposed SThM “nano-thermocouples” (that are, in fact, rather 14 voluminous) may produce a too large lateral heat spreads for thermal expansion gradients to be observed over few microns. As far as 2D materials are concerned, SNOD has led us to find for the first time to observe that, from a thermomechanical point, of view, the graphene-graphite transition occurs at ~175 layers. Such a finding has so far been elusive with other techniques because of the difficulty to reproducibly heat highly thermally conducting ML-G flakes on a thermally insulating samples without a contactless nanoscale dilatometer. The discovery that such a transition occurs over a hundred layers is particularly remarkable because, as far as its electronic structure is concerned, few-layer graphene is known to transition to graphite at about 10 layers or less, Therefore, the discovery that, from a thermomechanical standpoint, “graphene is thicker than we thought” may have critical implications for which include, for example, biodevices and bioimplants, in addition to nano-electronic devices and heat spreaders. Collectively, our work heralds the significance of the development of a near-field based super-resolution optical technique for nanodilatometry imaging applications. Owning to the unique properties of evanescent waves, we can probe thermal events beyond the limits of diffraction which will be invaluable for studying a large variety of 2D materials and nanostructured thin-film systems in which thermomechanics is critical for their applications. Materials and Methods SNOM Apparatus and Transmission/Reflection SNOM scans. Experiments described in this study were recorded on a WiTec Alpha 300S aperture type SNOM/AFM consisting in an AFM oscillator that can equipped with hollow cantilevers (SNOM-NC, NT-MDT) with 20x20x13 m LxWxH 15 pyramidal tips, at the end of which a subwavelength aperture (typical radius: 60 nm) was obtained by focussed ion beam (FIB) milling. The AFM oscillator is situated at the focal plane of an upright laser confocal optical microscope, from which different lasers can be focused to produce an evanescent field next to the tip aperture. The WiTec Alpha 300S can acquire both transmission- reflection-mode SNOM images while simultaneously measuring the surface morphology via AFM (panels a in figs. 2 and 3). Transmission-mode SNOM images (panel b in figs. 2 and 3) were obtained by illuminating the sample with light focused through the SNOM cantilever with a 405 nm diode laser (500 mW, Apinex) that is passed through a single-mode optical fiber (OZ Optics, NA=0.12). Evanescent waves generated at the apex of the cantilever is used to probe the sample where scattered photons that emerge from the substrate are collected with an inverted optical microscope from below the substrate, and fed into a photomultiplier tube (U64000 Hamamatsu). Reflection-mode SNOM images (panel c in figs. 2 and 3) were obtained within the same apparatus as the transmission-mode scans, but with scattered photons collected at a grazing angle in the near- field by a subminiature accessory (SMA, WiTec) and, from there, fed into the photomultiplier tube. It was essential to be able to acquire both transmission- and reflection-mode SNOM images as they provide information on the local sample absorbance and, from there, determine the sample heat profile in conjunction with knowledge of the pump-beam illumination. images (corresponding, respectively, to panel d and panels e-h in figs. 2-3) are recorded using the above mentioned WiTec instrument in the configuration previously reported in Figure 1, with the cantilever in noncontact (liftoff) mode. In this configuration, the sample is illuminated (“pumped”) with a 405-nm laser beam (500 mW, Apinex) from below the sample through the inverted optical 16 microscope previously used to collect the transmission-mode SNOM signal (see section above). This 405 nm laser is modulated with a mechanical chopper (SciTec Instruments, 300 CD/HRG) and the chopper angular velocity, , is varied to record different scans (as in panels e-h of figs. 2- 3). During the pulsed illumination and heating of the sample from this 405-nm pump beam, the sample surface is scanned (“probed”) in the near field with the upright SNOM microscope. These SNOM measurements are carried out by focussing a 532-nm laser (50 mW Excelsior, Spectra Physics) at the FIB-milled aperture of the scanning SNOM tip (SNOM-NC, NT-MDT, see above) through the upright confocal optical microscope. It is worthwhile noting that the power at the sample of this 532-nm probe beam is significantly lower than the 405-nm pump’s. The scattered light off the surface of the sample is collected at a grazing angle by the WiTec SMA reflection mode accessory. A 405 nm notch filter (Thorlabs Inc., NF405-13) and 530 nm long pass filter (Melles-Griot) are positioned in series with the reflection mode SMA to ensure the detected optical signal at the photomultiplier purely originates from the 532-nm probe-beam light, not from the 405-nm pump. The signal from at each point on the sample is obtained by connecting the photomultiplier tube with a dual phase lock-in amplifier (830, Stanford Research Systems) with the reference signal originating from the mechanical chopper, either at  (panels d of figs. 2-3) or 2 (panels e-h of figs. 2-3) frequency. Raw image data were saved in matrix format and processed in ad hoc MatlabTM routines implementing the model presented by eqs. 1 and 4-7 to obtain the TEC images. Testing samples–Nanogranular and continuous thin film of gold on glass. Nanogranular gold thin films were selected due to the chemically inertness of Au as a noble metal. Au thin films were thermally evaporated onto 1x1-in glass substrates (Corning 7101). Glass substrates were pre- 17 cleaned in a bath sonicator with multiple 15’ baths (soap water, deionized water, reagent-grade acetone, and methanol). The substrates were then blown dry with medical-grade nitrogen. The cleaned substrates were loaded into a custom-built thermal evaporator, and growth was monitored through a Sycom STM-2 thickness monitor controlling an Inficon EasyRate water- cooled sensor equipped with a Kurt-Lesker 5-MHz quartz oscillator. A growth rate of 2 nm/min up to 80 nm thickness was used. 80 nm is expected to be the optimal trade-off for SNOD imaging between film thinness (required for homogeneous optical absorption and heat generation along the z-axis) and film thickness (required for substantial heat dissipation in x-y direction to use these as test samples). The quality of the film accordingly to specifications was tested by AFM prior to SNOD measurements. Testing samples–Sparse ML-G platelets on glass. ML-G nanoplatelets on glass substrates (Corning 7101) were prepared accordingly to the method by Sharifi et al. Briefly ML-G was obtained from surfactant-assisted exfoliation of nanocrystalline graphite powder (average flake dimension: dav ≈ 700 nm) exfoliation using RNA VI from torula utilis (Sigma-Aldrich) as a surfactant, forming a stable ML-G suspension in water. These suspensions were filtrated on nitrocellulose membranes (EMD, Millipore) which were transferred on the requisite glass substrate and subsequently etched in multiple acetone and methanol baths, leaving behind an ensemble of surfactant-free nanoplatelets on their substrate, which were thoroughly washed in subsequent acetone, methanol and water baths to eliminate any traces of surfactant and filtration membrane, as ascertained by AFM, prior to being submitted for SNOD measurements. 18 Acknowledgements GF acknowledges a Canada Research Chair in Carbon-based nanomaterials and Nano- optoelectronics and funding from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada under the Discovery Grant program (506356-2020) and the Canada Foundation for Innovation (LOF-212442). VW acknowledges an NSERC PGS Doctoral Scholarship.