Perfect Coulomb drag in a dipolar excitonic insulator Phuong X. Nguyen1, Liguo Ma1, Raghav Chaturvedi1, Kenji Watanabe2, Takashi Taniguchi2, Jie Shan1,3,4*, Kin Fai Mak1,3,4* 1School of Applied and Engineering Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 2National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan 3Laboratory of Atomic and Solid State Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 4Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Ithaca, NY, USA *Email: jie.shan@cornell.edu; kinfai.mak@cornell.edu These authors contributed equally: Phuong X. Nguyen, Liguo Ma, Raghav Chaturvedi Excitonic insulators (EIs), arising in semiconductors when the electron-hole binding energy exceeds the band gap1–3, are a solid-state prototype for bosonic phases of matter4–12. Unlike the charged excitations that are frozen and unable to transport current, the neutral electron-hole pairs (excitons) are free to move in EIs. However, it is intrinsically difficult to demonstrate exciton transport in bulk EI candidates13–18. The recently emerged dipolar EIs based on Coulomb-coupled atomic double layers4,19–24 open the possibility to realize exciton transport across the insulator because separate electrical contacts can be made to the electron and hole layers. Here we show that the strong interlayer excitonic correlation at equal electron and hole densities in the MoSe2/WSe2 double layers separated by a 2-nm barrier gives rise to ‘perfect’ Coulomb drag. A charge current in one layer induces an equal but opposite drag current in the other. The drag current ratio remains above 0.9 up to about 20 K for low exciton densities. As exciton density increases above the Mott density25, the excitons dissociate into the electron-hole plasma abruptly, and only weak Fermi liquid frictional drag is observed. Our experiment moves a step closer to realizing exciton circuitry26 and superfluidity. Main The dipolar excitonic insulator (EI) of interest is realized in double layer structures made of two semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) monolayers that support a type-II band alignment21 (Fig. 1a). The two TMD monolayers, which are separated by a thin dielectric spacer, are separately contacted by metallic electrodes and form the two plates of a parallel-plate capacitor (Fig. 1b). The application of an interlayer bias voltage, Vb, splits the electron and hole chemical potentials by eVb, and reduces the charge gap to ƐG − eVb for quasiparticle excitations from the zero-bias band gap, ƐG, of the double layer (Fig. 1a). (Here e is the elementary charge.) When the charge gap becomes smaller than the exciton binding energy, ƐG − eVb < Ɛb, spontaneous formation of dipolar (interlayer) excitons is favorable. An EI has been demonstrated by recent thermodynamic measurements21,24. The separate electron- and hole-contacts to the EI also provide an electrical reservoir for dipolar excitons with continuously tunable density, nX, and chemical potential, eVb (,20). The Coulomb drag effect is a sensitive probe of the correlation effect between two spatially separated conductors27. The Coulomb interactions between the two layers here enable an electric current flowing in one layer (Idrive) to induce a voltage drop (Vdrag) in the other (Fig. 1d). If the second layer is part of a closed circuit, a net current (Idrag) will flow in that circuit (Fig. 1c). The drag current is typically much smaller than the drive current because the Coulomb interactions are heavily screened. Here we show essentially perfect Coulomb drag up to about 20 K in the dipolar EI based on TMD electron-hole double layers. Such a large drag current ratio (Idrag/Idrive) has been observed only in the context of exciton transport in the quantum Hall regime demonstrated in Coulomb-coupled quantum wells28– 30 and graphene double layers31–34. In contrast to the high magnetic fields required in these earlier studies, the strong exciton binding under zero magnetic field and the dispersive excitonic band in TMD double layers present a new regime for the studies of exciton transport35–37. Device operation and excitonic insulator Our sample consists of Coulomb-coupled MoSe2/WSe2 double layers with nearly symmetric top and bottom gates (Fig. 1b). Details on the device design and fabrication are described in Methods. These devices are divided into the channel and contact regions, in which the two TMD monolayers are separated by thin (5-6 layers) and thick (10-20 nm) hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) spacers, respectively. They are angle-misaligned to further suppress interlayer tunneling in the channel region. The MoSe2 (Mo) and WSe2 (W) layers are contacted by bismuth and platinum electrodes to achieve electron and hole transport measurements, respectively. The interlayer bias voltage Vb is applied to inject electron- hole pairs into the channel. The top and bottom gate voltages (Vtg and Vbg, respectively) further allow independent control of the electron-hole density imbalance in the double layer through the symmetric combination, Vg = (Vtg + Vbg)/2, and the perpendicular electric field through the antisymmetric combination, Δ = (Vbg − Vtg)/2. In the channel region, the electric field reduces the band gap; but in the contact regions, because of the much thicker hBN spacer, Δ is able to heavily electron- and hole-dope the Mo and W layers, respectively, to substantially reduce the metal-semiconductor junction resistances. Junction resistances on the order of several kΩ’s at 1.5 K can be achieved. The contact regions are thus charge reservoirs for efficient exciton injection into the channel region21. We identify the EI phase of the double layer using the capacitance measurements as reported in an earlier study21 (Methods, Extended Data Fig. 2). Both the penetration (CP) and interlayer (CI) capacitances are measured as a function of Vg and Vb at Δ = 5.5 V and temperature T ≈ 1.5 K. They characterize the charge and exciton compressibilities21, respectively. Figure 2a illustrates CP normalized by its geometric value (Cgg). The large penetration capacitance at small bias voltages marks the ii region with both layers being charge-neutral. Its boundary, denoted by two black dashed lines, traces the band edge of the electron and hole layers. Particularly, the band edge of the hole layer is fixed at Vg = 0 because the layer is grounded. Varying the gate voltage across each boundary introduces doping in one of the layers (the pi and in regions). At sufficiently large bias voltages, both layers become doped (the pn region). Further, the simultaneous interlayer capacitance measurement (Extended Data Fig. 2b) identifies the dash-dotted line, above which the electron-hole pairs are injected into the channel. The enclosed triangular region is therefore an EI, which at low temperatures is charge insulating but hosts an equilibrium dipolar exciton fluid. The exciton binding energy Ɛb ≈ 30 meV is approximately given by the difference between the bias voltage at the tip of the triangle (0.52 V), beyond which the excitons dissociate into free electrons and holes, and the base of the triangle (0.49 V), at which excitons are just injected into the double layer channel. The channel band gap ƐG is reduced from the intrinsic value of 1.6 eV to 0.52 eV by antisymmetric gating Δ. Perfect Coulomb drag We study Coulomb drag in our device using the drag counterflow geometry illustrated in Fig. 1c. Specifically, we drive an electron current in the Mo layer using a small ac in-plane bias (5-10 mV) and measure the drag current in the W layer (Methods). Figure 2b and 2c show, respectively, the Vg- and Vb-dependence of the drive and drag currents at 1.5 K (see Extended Data Fig. 3 for results from driving the W layer). As expected, a finite Idrive is observed whenever the Mo layer is turned on, that is, in the in, pn and EI regions; and the current increases with increasing electron doping. The discrepancy between the transport and capacitance results near the Mo band edge in the in region is likely related to the large contact resistance in the Mo layer in the device (see Methods and Extended Data Fig. 5). In contrast, a Idrag hot spot is observed only near the EI region; it decays rapidly with both increasing Vb and Vg. The former increases the exciton density, and the latter, the electron- hole density imbalance. In addition, Idrag always flows in the opposite direction of Idrive (Extended Data Fig. 4). Below we focus on the case of equal electron and hole densities in the double layer (along the white dashed line in Fig. 2a). The more general case of finite electron-hole density imbalance involving a Bose-Fermi mixture38,39 and screened excitonic interactions will be examined in future studies. Figure 3a shows the current amplitude in two layers at 1.5 K as a function of Vb or electron-hole pair density, nP. The pair density is obtained from the interlayer capacitance measurement, nP = ∫ CI e dVb (Extended Data Fig. 2c). The drive current turns on sharply at Vb ≈ (ƐG − Ɛb)/e when excitons are first injected into the channel, followed by a moderate increase with increasing Vb. The small deviations of the drive current from a smooth monotonic Vb-dependence are device specific; they are likely related to the junction imperfections and require systematic studies to understand the origin. Remarkably, Idrag is nearly identical to Idrive (but with opposite sign) until the bias reaches a threshold, Vb ≈ ƐG/e, beyond which Idrag vanishes abruptly. The corresponding pair density is nM ≈ 3.2 × 1011 cm-2. Figure 3a also shows that the tunneling current Itunnel between the two layers is negligible and cannot compromise the drag measurements. The lower panel of Fig. 3a shows the measured drag current ratio at 1.5 K. It displays ‘perfect’ Coulomb drag in the EI region and negligible Coulomb drag in the free electron and hole region with nP > nM. The temperature and pair density dependence of the drag current ratio is summarized in Fig. 3b, and representative density line cuts are illustrated in Fig. 3c. In general, Coulomb drag decreases with increasing temperature and pair density with the exception of the region near nM at low temperatures, where a non-monotonic temperature dependence is observed. Essentially perfect Coulomb drag (Idrag/Idrive > 0.9) persists up to about 20 K at low pair densities. When exciton transport dominates over the free carrier transport in the double layer channel, perfect Coulomb drag is expected because a steady current of electrons driven through one layer has to be accompanied by an equal current of holes in the other layer28. In contrast, when the electrons and holes are unbound, only small frictional drag is expected27. In the case of Fermi liquids, the phase space of electrons and holes available for Coulomb drag increases with temperature, and the drag current ratio scales quadratically with temperature at low temperatures27. The observed ‘perfect’ Coulomb drag in our experiment therefore demonstrates the dominance of exciton transport in the EI region at low temperatures. The temperature dependent Coulomb drag in this regime can be captured by the exciton thermal dissociation effect40. In this simple model (solid lines in Fig. 3c), the frictional drag and the contact resistance are negligible, and the exciton to charge carrier mobility ratio is the only fitting parameter and assumed to be temperature independent (Methods). The excitons can also be ionized into an electron-hole plasma at low temperatures by the state filling effect when the pair density exceeds the Mott density40. The latter corresponds to the abrupt vanishing of the drag current near nM at low temperatures, and nM is the Mott density. In the high-density electron-hole plasma regime, Coulomb drag increases with temperature at low temperatures by the phase space argument (np = 5 × 1011, Fig. 3c). Excitonic insulator-to-metal transition We measure the drag resistance of our device to directly probe the transition from an EI to an electron-hole plasma using the open-circuit geometry shown in Fig. 1d. Here we bias Idrive in the Mo layer and measure the drag voltage drop in the W layer, Vdrag, by a voltmeter with 100 MΩ input impedance. In this measurement geometry, the drag resistance, Rdrag = Vdrag/Idrive, reflects the charge resistance of the double layer (see the circuit model in Extended Data Fig. 1d and Methods). It is ultimately connected to the drag current measurement above. In the EI region at low temperatures (where the exciton conductivity far exceeds the charge conductivity and the frictional drag conductivity), the two quantities are simply related, Idrag Idrive = 1 1+RWC/Rdrag, via the contact resistance (RWC) in the drag layer (see Extended Data Fig. 1f). The good agreement between the measured drag current ratio and the inferred one from Rdrag using RWC ≈ 7 kΩ in Extended Data Fig. 7 supports the validity of the relation for a wide range of temperatures and pair densities. The contact resistance value is independently verified by a two-terminal resistance measurement in the W layer (Extended Data Fig. 5). temperature decreases, Rdrag increases for small nP’s (an insulating behavior) and decreases for large nP’s (a metallic behavior). A variation in Rdrag by nearly six orders of magnitude is observed at 1.5 K. On the metallic side, a Fermi liquid frictional drag, Rdrag ≈ AT2, is observed in the low-temperature limit 27,41 (Extended Data Fig. 6). And a non- monotonic temperature dependence is also visible near the Mott density nM. We analyze the observed insulator-to-metal transition by identifying the resistance at the critical density, Rc, as the one that displays a power-law temperature dependence42 (dashed line). The corresponding density agrees well with the Mott density nM. We then normalize the temperature dependent Rdrag at other densities by Rc. We are able to collapse all the temperature dependent resistances Rdrag/Rc into two groups, exhibiting an insulating and metallic behavior, respectively, by normalizing T using a density-dependent temperature scale, T0 (inset, Fig. 4a). The temperature scale T0 vanishes continuously towards the Mott density nM from both sides (Extended Data Fig. 9). On the insulating side, it is well correlated with the EI charge gap (≈ ∫ (CP/Cgg) dVg) obtained from the penetration capacitance measurement. The charge gap summarized in Fig. 4b carries a relatively large systematic uncertainty induced by the finite ac bias voltage in the penetration capacitance measurement. On the metallic side, we summarize in Fig. 4b the coefficient A from fitting the temperature dependent Rdrag to AT2 at low temperatures. The coefficient increases by three orders of magnitude when nP approaches nM from above. The combined results of a continuously vanishing charge gap (and T0) and a diverging A coefficient when the pair density approaches the Mott density from two sides suggest a possible continuous excitonic insulator-to-metal transition43. We make a further interesting observation that the coefficient A from our experiment scales with pair density as A ∝ (nP − nM)−3 (solid line, Fig. 4b). This resembles, but at the same time differs from, the theoretical prediction of A ∝ (nP)−3 for frictional drag from the interlayer Coulomb scattering27,44. The reset of the pair density by the Mott density suggests a vanishing effective electron/hole Fermi energy (or a diverging electron/hole effective mass) at nM (,44). The reset is beyond the current understanding. Future theoretical studies taking into account the BEC-BCS crossover45 and the possible Mott transition at nM are required to understand the density dependence of A as well as the non- monotonic temperature dependence of Rdrag near nM (BEC and BCS stand for Bose- Einstein condensation and Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer, respectively). Conclusions We have demonstrated essentially perfect Coulomb drag up to about 20 K in a gate-tunable excitonic insulator realized in TMD atomic double layers separated by a thin hBN barrier. The drag resistance measurement has further revealed an excitonic insulator-to-metal transition at the Mott density. These studies are enabled by successfully establishing separate electrical contacts to the electron and hole components of the excitonic insulator. The perfect Coulomb drag here demonstrates pure exciton transport across the excitonic insulator. The relatively large contact resistance of the present device limits the ability to settle whether the exciton transport here is dissipationless, that is, whether there is exciton superfluity. Future multiple exciton terminal measurements that can drive an exciton current and simultaneously measure the exciton chemical potential drop along the channel should be able to set strict limits on any dissipation occurring in the exciton channel. Methods Device design and fabrication In Extended Data Fig. 1a,b, we show an optical image and a schematic for our dual-gated WSe2/hBN/MoSe2 transport device to illustrate the basic design geometry. The top and bottom gates consist of few layer graphite gate electrodes and ~10 nm thick hBN dielectrics. The overlap region between the top gate, bottom gate and the TMD double layer defines the measurement channel and the two exciton contacts, which are shaded red and blue, respectively, in the optical image. In the channel region (region I in the schematic), the hBN barrier is around 1.5-2 nm thick (measured by atomic force microscopy); this thickness is optimized to suppress the interlayer tunneling current while maintaining a large exciton binding energy (~30 meV). In the exciton contact regions (region II in schematic), the two thick hBN barriers (10-20 nm) result in heavily doped regions of free electrons and holes (no exciton binding) under a perpendicular electric field; these regions serve as electrical reservoirs for efficient exciton injection and absorption in and out of the channel. Outside the channel region, the flow of exciton must be converted into flows of free electron and holes in the electrical wires. It is therefore crucial to have good electrical contacts to the monolayer TMDs for simultaneous electron and hole transport at low temperatures (down to 1.5 K). We chose platinum (Pt) that has a large work function to match the valence band edge of monolayer WSe2 ; this consistently yields < 10 kΩ contact resistance at temperatures down to 1.5 K. For the monolayer MoSe2 conduction band edge, we used bismuth (Bi) 47, a semimetal with a small work function; it can also achieve < 10 kΩ contact resistance at T = 1.5 K but has a lower yield compared to the Pt contacts. In addition, we designed a sample geometry such that the metal-TMD contact regions (region III in the schematic) are gated by only one gate (as seen in the optical image, the WSe2 contact pins W10 to W14 are covered only by the top gate, and the MoSe2 contact pins Mo6 to Mo9 are covered only by the bottom gate). With this specific design and the large perpendicular electric field from the antisymmetric gate voltage Δ = 5.5 V (large negative top gate and positive bottom gate voltages), we guarantee that the metal-TMD contact regions are heavily doped (more than the exciton contact regions) by holes for Pt- WSe2 and by electrons for Bi-MoSe2 for low contact resistances. Note that it remains challenging to obtain a device with multiple good contacts in each layer and a good geometry for exciton injection, mainly due to the variability of the mechanical stacking and microfabrication process detailed below. For our main device at T = 1.5 K, all five WSe2 contacts (W10 to W14) are around 5-7 kΩ in contact resistance; the two MoSe2 contacts (Mo8 and Mo9) are around 5 kΩ; the MoSe2 contact Mo7 is around 3 MΩ; and the MoSe2 contact Mo6 was mechanically broken during fabrication. We fabricated our device using the layer-by-layer dry transfer technique reported by . The flakes were obtained from mechanical exfoliation of bulk TMD crystals (HQ Graphene) onto Si/SiO2 substrates. The layers were then picked up sequentially at ~50 °C using a polymer stamp made of a thin layer of polycarbonate on a polypropylene- carbonate-coated polydimethylsiloxane block. At each step, careful alignment of the layers (up to 1 um lateral precision) is essential to achieve the ideal device geometry, especially for the exciton contacts. The completed stack (9 layers in total) was then released onto an amorphous quartz substrate with pre-patterned Pt electrodes to make contacts to the WSe2 monolayer and to the gate electrodes. The residual polycarbonate film was removed in chloroform and isopropanol. Amorphous quartz substrates were chosen for minimal parasitic capacitance background. The top graphite gate was then etched to define multiple contacts for the WSe2 layer. We used standard e-beam lithography followed by reactive-ion etching by oxygen plasma (Oxford Plasmalab80Plus). Lastly, we made Bi contacts to the MoSe2 layer by a second e-beam lithographic step to define the contact regions, followed by Bi deposition in a thermal evaporator at a rate of 0.5 Å/s. Since Bi oxidizes in air, we evaporated the metal as the last step to guarantee the best MoSe2-Bi interface; we also cannot use the standard pre-patterned electrodes scheme for WSe2 on Pt. Coulomb drag measurements We examine the exciton transport properties using two different configurations: the open- circuit and closed-circuit Coulomb drag measurements. Extended Data Fig. 1c,d show the circuit diagrams. In order to choose the driving layer, we first performed resistance measurements on each TMD layer separately to determine the contact resistances for each layer (Extended Data Fig. 5). We chose the Mo layer as the driving layer because of its much larger contact resistance (up to 3 MΩ) compared to that in the W layer (about 7 kΩ). As a result of the large Mo contact resistance, a proper closed-circuit Coulomb drag measurement cannot be performed if we chose the W layer as the driving layer because it would act like an open-circuit element. We applied a 10 mV (RMS) AC bias voltage at 7.33 Hz to drive the Mo layer through a 1:1 voltage transformer, which was connected to a 10 kΩ potentiometer to distribute the AC voltage on the two ends of the driving layer. This can reduce the AC coupling between the TMD layers by minimizing the AC interlayer potential difference in the channel. A DC voltage source was also connected to middle of the potentiometer to apply the interlayer bias voltage Vb between the driving (Mo) and the drag (W) layers. We further connected a 150 kΩ resistor in series with the driving layer; we measured the voltage drop across this resistor to obtain the driving current. In the closed-circuit measurement, we shorted the drag layer so that a drag current can flow. We used a current preamplifier and a SR830 lock-in amplifier to measure the drag current. In the open-circuit measurement, we connected the two ends of the drag layer to a voltage amplifier with 100 MΩ input impedance and directly measured the voltage drop between the two ends using a SR830 lock-in amplifier in order to obtain the drag resistance. We carried all of the measurements in a closed-cycle He4 cryostat (Oxford TeslatronPT) down to 1.5 K temperature. The measurement results are largely independent of the excitation amplitude (3–20 mV) and frequency (7 Hz to 37 Hz). Capacitance measurements Details of the capacitance measurements have been reported by . In short, we measured the penetration capacitance of the bilayer system to determine the electrostatic phase diagram. We applied a 5 mV (RMS) AC bias voltage at 737 Hz to the bottom gate, which induces a change in the carrier density, dn, in the top gate. This density change was measured by a low-temperature capacitance bridge based on a GaAs high-electron- mobility-transistor (HEMT). We also measured the interlayer capacitance between the TMD layers to determine the pair density in the channel. We applied a 5 mV (RMS) bias voltage at 1.577 kHz to the Mo layer and collected the displacement current from the W layer. The in-phase component is the tunneling current while the 90-degree out-of-phase component is proportional to the change in the pair density, dnP; the complex current was measured by the low-temperature HEMT transimpedance amplifier and the SR830 lock-in amplifier. Modeling the Coulomb drag ratio and drag resistance Extended Data Fig. 1e shows a circuit model that describes the electron, hole and exciton current flows in the bilayer. For a given applied in-plane electric field Ee in the Mo layer, the current density Je in the same layer has two contributions, one due to free electrons with conductivity σe = neeμe and the other due to excitons with conductivity σX = nXeμX. Similarly, the current density in the drag layer Jh has contributions from the free holes density and mobility, respectively.] The transport in the bilayer system can be described by a conductivity tensor Σ as: (Je Jh) = Σ (Ee Eh) = ( σX + σe −σX − σD −σX − σD σX + σh ) (Ee Eh). (1) The drag conductivity σD describes the frictional drag from the free electrons and free holes. For the open-circuit measurement, we have Jh = 0 and can obtain the drag resistance (for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width, see Extended Data Fig. 1a) as: Rdrag ≈ Eh Je = σX+σD det Σ . (2) For the closed-circuit measurement, the drag layer acts like a battery with an external load resistance equal to the total contact resistance in the W layer, RWC; we have Eh ≈ −JhRWC for a channel length approximately equal to the channel width. We can obtain an expression for the drag current ratio: | Jh Je| ≈ σX+σD σX+σe+(det Σ)RWC = 1 σX+σe σX+σD+ RWC Rdrag . (3) Note that the final result on the right of Eqn. (3) is exact and independent of the channel geometry because the geometry dependence is cancelled in the factor RWC Rdrag . Finally, by assuming σX ≫ σe, σD, which is a good approximation for nP < nM and at low temperatures, we get | Jh Je| ≈ 1 1+ RWC Rdrag as discussed in the main text; this approximate result is equivalent to a lumped circuit diagram shown in Extended Data Fig. 1f. Based on the measured drag resistance and the drag current ratio, we can confirm that this approximate expression works well for a wide range of exciton densities and temperatures for RWC ≈ 7 kΩ (Extended Data Fig. 7). Moreover, independent two-terminal measurements verify RWC ≈ 7 kΩ (Extended Data Fig. 5). Temperature dependence of the drag current ratio In the EI phase (nP < nM), we can assume small frictional drag (σX ≫ σD) and small contact resistance (RWC ≪ σe −1) and obtain | Jh Je| ≈ σX σX+σe = nX nX+ne(μe/μX) . (4) We can use the Saha equation to estimate the free carrier density due to thermal dissociations of excitons at finite temperatures 40,49: ne2 nX = kBT 2πħ2/m∗ e−εb/kBT, (5) where m∗ is the exciton effective mass. For a fixed pair density nP = ne + nX, the exciton binding energy Ɛb can be obtained from penetration capacitance measurements (Extended Data Fig. 8). We can then solve for ne and nX using Eqn. (5) and fit the experimental temperature dependence of the drag current ratio using Eqn. (4). The only fitting parameter is the mobility ratio (μe/μX), which is 2, 2.8 and 3.3 for nP = 1, 2 and 31011 cm-2, respectively. Acknowledgements We thank Allan MacDonald, Liang Fu, Sankar Das Sarma, Peter Littlewood and Erich Mueller for many helpful discussions.