1 Giant interfacial spin-Hall angle from Rashba–Edelstein effect revealed by the spin-Hall Hanle process Jing Li,1* Andrew H. Comstock,2* Aeron McConnell, 2 Dali Sun,2† and Xiaoshan Xu1‡ 1Department of Physics and Astronomy and Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, USA 2Department of Physics and Organic and Carbon Electronics Lab (ORaCEL), North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, USA Abstract: The Rashba–Edelstein effect (REE), which generates interfacial spin polarization and subsequent spin current, is a compelling spin-charge conversion mechanism for spintronic applications, since it’s not limited by the elemental spin-orbit couplings. In this work, we demonstrate REE at Pt/ferroelectric interfaces using the recently elucidated spin-Hall Hanle effects (SHHE), in which a Larmor precession of spin polarization in a diffusion process from the interface manifest as magnetoresistance and Hall effect. We show that REE leads to a three-fold enhancement of the effective spin Hall angle in ferroelectric interface Pt/h-LuFeO3 compared to that of Pt/Al2O3, although the difference in the spin relaxation time is negligible. Modeling using SHHEs involving REE as an additional source of interfacial polarization suggests that REE can lead to an interfacial spin Hall angle (≈ 0.3) that is one order of magnitude larger than the bulk value of Pt. Our results demonstrate that a ferroelectric interface can produce large spin-charge conversion and that SHHEs are a sensitive tool for characterizing interfacial spin transport properties. *These authors contributed equally to this work. †dsun4@ncsu.edu, ‡xiaoshan.xu@unl.edu 2 Introduction Charge-spin current conversion is a fundamental process in spintronics . In general, a charge (spin) current may generate a transverse spin (charge) current via the (inverse) spin Hall effect due to spin-orbit coupling, with a conversion efficiency up to a few percent . With broken inversion symmetry, e.g., at an interface, the gradient of potential energy couples to the spin and generates a preference of spin polarization transverse to the electron momentum and subsequent spin current [Fig. 1(a)], corresponding to the Rashba–Edelstein effect (REE) . The charge-spin conversion efficiency induced by REE is not limited by the elemental spin-orbit coupling, which is appealing for spintronic applications. In this regard, it is hypothesized that a metal/ferroelectric interface may have greatly enhanced spin-charge conversion efficiency via REE due to the large interfacial potential gradient with the advantage of non-volatile electric-field control [7–10]. On the other hand, determination of REE at metal/ferroelectric interfaces and their spin transport properties, especially at room temperature, has been challenging because of the lack of direct measurements of the spin polarization [11–14]. Here we reveal the presence of REE in Pt/ferroelectric interfaces by employing the spin Hall Hanle effects (SHHEs) technique . SHHE, including Hanle magnetoresistance (Hanle MR) and Hanle Hall effect , have proven successful in quantifying spin-transport parameters, i.e., spin-Hall angle θSH, spin diffusion length λs, and spin relaxation time τs in Pt films deposited on non-magnetic insulators which is free from magnetic proximity effects. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), SHHEs describe the generation of spin current and accumulation of spin polarization at the Pt/insulator interface via the spin Hall effect (SHE ), precession of spin polarization in the reflected spin current (Hanle effect ), and manifestation of spin precession in MR and Hall effects generated by the inverse spin Hall effect (ISHE ). Extra interfacial spin 3 accumulation induced by the presence of REE is expected to modify the Hanle MR and Hanle Hall effect, by which REE can be quantitatively studied. We show that the effective spin Hall angle i.e., spin-charge conversion efficiency, θSH ≡ Jc/Js, where Jc (Js) is the charge (spin) current density, at the Pt/ferroelectric interface is largely increased compared to that in Pt/Al2O3, while the spin relaxation time remain unchanged. Modelling of the Hanle MR and Hanle Hall effect reveals that REE at the Pt/ferroelectric interface leads to a rescaling of the bulk spin Hall angle. The effective spin-Hall angle of Pt/h-LuFeO3 interface is determined to be one order of magnitude larger than that of bulk Pt. Experimental We focus on one prototypical ferroelectric family, i.e., hexagonal ferrites (h-RFeO3, R = Y, Sc, Ho-Lu) . As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), the crystal structure of h-RFeO3 consists of layers of FeO5 trigonal bipyramids separated by layers of R ions. With non-centrosymmetric P63cm structure, the improper ferroelectricity of h-RFeO3 are induced by the K3 structural distortion below ~ 1000 K . Antiferromagnetic orders occur below TN~ 150 K, with Fe spins lying mostly in the basal plane. The K3 distortion can be viewed as the collective tilt of the FeO5 bipyramid and buckling of the R layer, which leads to a moderate spontaneous polarization (≈ 10 μC/cm2) along the c axis . Due to the improper nature of ferroelectricity, the spontaneous polarization of h-RFeO3 of various R and even that of h-RMnO3 (isomorphic to h-RFeO3) are about 10 μC/cm2, which is the desired material family for introducing the interfacial polarization effect. Pt(111)/h-LuFeO3(001), Pt(111)/h-YbFeO3(001), and Pt(111)/LuMnO3(001) heterostructures were epitaxially grown on yttrium stabilized zirconia (YSZ) (111) substrates using 4 pulsed laser deposition, with an yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) laser (266 nm wavelength, 70 mJ pulse energy, 3 Hz repetition rate). [See Supplementary materials S1] The thickness of h-LuFeO3, h-YbFeO3, and LuMnO3 layers are about 15 nm which were deposited in 20 mTorr O2 with 650 °C substrate temperature , followed by the deposition of the Pt layer of various thickness in 10−7 Torr vacuum at room temperature without breaking the vacuum. The Pt layer was patterned into Hall bar by photolithography and ion milling . The thicknesses of thin films were measured using x-ray reflectivity. Longitudinal (ρL) and transverse (ρT) resistivity was measured using the Hall bar configuration in magnetic field applied along different directions at room temperature . Field dependence of ρL and ρT was symmetrized and antisymmetrized, respectively, to minimize the possible artifacts due to sample misalignment with the field. Results and Discussion dependence of ρT) in the Pt (5.4 nm)/h-LuFeO3 and the control sample, Pt (5.2 nm)/Al2O3 . The MRs in both samples show a symmetry curve that is consistent with reported SHHE in ρL, i.e., MR(Bz) and MR(Bx) are almost identical and much larger than MR(By), similar to that of spin Hall magnetoresistance but without the presence of magnetic materials. As illustrated in Fig. 1(b), SHHEs include contributions from SHE, Hanle effect, and ISHE: a charge current flowing along the x direction produces a spin current along the z direction toward the Pt/insulator interface with spin polarization along the y direction via SHE; the precession of spin polarization of the reflected spin current in a magnetic field during the spin diffusion reduces the y component (Hanle effect) and generates the x or z component of the spin polarization; the spin precession shows up in both MR and Hall effect since the reflected spin current generates charge current via the ISHE. 5 Hence, MR(Bx) and MR(Bz) are expected to be larger than MR(By) since By does not lead to the spin precession. Remarkably, we found that the magnitude of both MR and Hall effect are much larger in Pt(5.4 nm)/h-LuFeO3 than that in Pt(5.2 nm)/Al2O3, implying that the spin Hall angle θSH is substantially larger in Pt/h-LuFeO3. To determine θSH in Pt/h-LuFeO3, the spin diffusion λs length is needed. Essentially, SHHEs vanish in both thin-film (d/s→0) and thick-film limits (d/s→∞). Therefore, λs can be extracted from the thickness dependence of SHHE signal. By applying Bz, SHHEs are described using the following equation ΔρSHHE ρL0 = θSH 2 tanh (d/2λs) d/2λs [1 − 1 κ tanh( κd 2λs) tanh( d 2λs)], (1) where ρL0 is zero-field longitudinal resistivity, d is the film thickness, κ = (1 − iΩτs)1/2 is a complex quantity with i= √−1, Ω = gμBBz/ħ is the Larmor frequency with g the gyromagnetic factor, μB the Bohr magneton, and ħ the reduced Planck constant. The real and imaginary parts of SHHE represent the longitudinal L,SHHE and the transverse T,SHHE, respectively. It is shown that at low field regime, T,SHHE would be linear to Ω (or Bz) . By fitting the slope of T(Bz) at low field regime [Fig. 2(c)], we found the spin diffusion length as s = 0.9 ± 0.2 nm for Pt/h-LuFeO3. Once s is determined, the spin Hall angle θSH and spin relaxation time τs can be extracted subsequently from the MR ΔL(Bz) and Hall effect T(Bz) simultaneously. As shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b), the measured MR and Hall effect can be well fitted using Eq. (1). It is noteworthy that for each sample, the fit for both MR and Hall effect uses the same set of parameters θSH and τs. The extracted θSH and τs are displayed in Fig. 4. The obtained θSH of Pt grown on h-LuFeO3 is roughly 3 times larger than that of Pt grown on Al2O3 [Fig. 4(a)], whereas τs in both two systems are quite similar [Fig. 4(b)]. 6 To further validate that the enhancement of θSH is induced by the ferroelectric interface of Pt/h-LuFeO3, we conducted similar SHHE measurements in Pt/h-YbFeO3 and Pt/LuMnO3 at different Pt thicknesses. LuMnO3 and h-YbFeO3 are both isomorphic to h-LuFeO3, with the same crystal structure and lattice distortion that result in the improper ferroelectricity. Although the rare earth-sites and the transition metal sites are substituted by different elements in h-YbFeO3 and LuMnO3 respectively, the spontaneous polarizations in all three materials are roughly the same. The MR ΔL(Bz) and Hall effect T(Bz) of Pt/h-YbFeO3 and Pt/LuMnO3 are shown in Fig. 3(c) and (d). All the curves can be well fitted using Eq. (1); the fitting parameters are displayed in Fig. 4. Obtained θSH and τs of Pt/h-YbFeO3 and Pt/LuMnO3 are consistent with that of Pt/h- LuFeO3. We found the averaged value of θSH = 0.06 ± 0.01 and τs = 1.8 ± 0.4 ps in Pt/h-RFeO3 as displayed in Table I. There is a three times enhancement of θSH in Pt/h-RFeO3 system compared with that in Pt/Al2O3 with negligible difference in τs. Considering the similarity in the spontaneous polarization but large differences in composition at the three interfaces, the enhanced θSH is attributed to the presence of the ferroelectric interface. Model Below we provide a model in which REE at the Pt/ferroelectric interface can lead to the enhancement of θSH. At the Pt/ferroelectric interface, the large electric potential difference and spin-orbit coupling adds a Rashba term in the Hamiltonian of the itinerant electrons, i.e., ĤR ∝ σ⃗ ⋅ (p⃗ × ẑ), where σ⃗, p⃗, and ẑ are the Pauli matrices representing the electronic spin, momentum, and surface normal unit vector . For a charge current with an average momentum 〈p⃗〉 along the x direction, 〈p⃗〉 × ẑ acts like an effective magnetic field along the y direction . This mechanism (or REE) is an extra source of spin accumulation along the y axis at the interface [Fig. 1(a)] which can contribute to the spin current along the z direction via subsequent diffusion [12–14]. 7 To model the extra spin accumulation via REE, we use the following equations that govern the spin transport at the Pt/ferroelectric interface : qi = −μEi + θSHεijkqjk (2) qij = −μEiPj − D ∂Pj ∂xi − θSHεijkqk (3) εijkPjΩk + ∂qki ∂xk + Pi τs − β LR (q⃗ × ẑ)ie −2z+d 2LR = 0 (4) where qi and qij (i, j = x, y, z) are the components of the charge and spin current density respectively in (unified) units of particle per unit time per unit area , xi, Ωi, Pi and Ei are the ith component of spatial coordinate, Larmor precession Ω⃗⃗⃗ = gμBB⃗⃗/ħ, spin polarization density, and electric field respectively, d, μ, D and εijk are film thickness, mobility times carrier density, diffusion coefficient, and antisymmetric matrix respectively. Eqs. (2) and (3) are essentially the “Ohm’s law” for charge and spin currents, including the typical drift and diffusion processes, as well as SHE and ISHE . Eq. (4) ensures the continuity of spin polarization. The term β LR (q⃗ × ẑ)ie −2z+d 2LR is introduced to describe the source of spin polarization at the interface (z = d/2) due to REE, where β is a dimensionless coefficient. LR is the nominal thickness of the interfacial layer which is presumably much smaller than the film thickness d and spin diffusion length s for Pt. Solving Eqs. (2-4) [see Supplementary Material S2] with the boundary conditions ∂Pi ∂x = ∂Pi ∂z = 0 and qzi (z = − d 2 , d 2) = 0, we found ρSHHE ρ0 = θSH 2 (1 + 1 2 β θSH) tanh( d 2λs) d 2λs [1 − 1 κ tanh( κd 2λs) tanh( d 2λs)]. Eq. (5) 8 Eq. (5) differs from Eq. (1) only by a rescaling of θSH 2 → θSH 2 (1 + 1 2 β θSH). In other words, the interfacial Rashba effect can manifest as an enhancement of effective bulk spin Hall angle θSH. Notice that integration of β LR (q⃗ × ẑ)ie −2z+d 2LR over the entire film thickness (z = 0 - d) leads to a spin current βq, suggesting that β is the interfacial spin Hall angle originating from REE. Using θSH = 0.022±0.006 measured from Pt/Al2O3 and θSH√1 + 1 2 β θSH = 0.06 ± 0.01 measured in Pt deposited on hexagonal ferrites and manganites (see Table I), we find β = 0.3 ± 0.1, which is about an order of magnitude larger than the bulk spin Hall angle θSH in Pt. Conclusion SHHEs are utilized to study the spin accumulation at the Pt/ferroelectric interface due to the Rashba–Edelstein effect. A three-fold enhancement of effective spin Hall angle was observed compared to that in Pt/Al2O3 whereas the spin relaxation times remain unchanged, corroborated by the modeling using the spin Hall Hanle process involving the Rashba–Edelstein effect as additional source of interfacial spin accumulation. The effective interfacial spin Hall angle was extracted as one order of magnitude larger than the bulk value. These results suggest that ferroelectric interfaces are promising for efficient spin-charge interconversion for future spintronic applications. Acknowledgements This research was primarily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences (BES), under Award No. DE-SC0019173. The work at NC State was supported by the U.S. DOE, Office of Science, BES, under Award No. DE-SC0020992. The 9 research was performed in part in the Nebraska Nanoscale Facility: National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure and the Nebraska Center for Materials and Nanoscience (and/or NERCF), which are supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. ECCS: 1542182, and the Nebraska Research Initiative. 10