Impact of Se concentration and distribution on topological transition in FeTe1-xSex crystals Jinying Wang1*, Gerhard Klimeck1-2 1. Network for Computational Nanotechnology, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA 2. School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA * corresponding authors: wang4205@purdue.edu Abstract A topological transition in high-temperature superconductors FeTe1-xSex, occurring at a critical range of Se concentration x, underlies their intrinsic topological superconductivity and emergence of Majorana states within vortices. Nonetheless, the influence of Se concentration and distribution on the electronic states in FeTe1-xSex remains unclear, particularly concerning their relationship with the presence or absence of Majorana states. In this study, we combine density functional theory (DFT) calculations, pz-dxz/yz-based and Wannier-based Hamiltonian analysis to systematically explore the electronic structures of diverse FeTe1-xSex compositions. Our investigation reveals a nonlinear variation of the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) gap between pz and dxz/yz bands in response to x, with the maximum gap occurring at x = 0.5. The pz-pz and dx2-y2-pz interactions are found to be critical for pd band inversion. Furthermore, we ascertain that the distribution of Se significantly modulates the SOC gap, thereby influencing the presence or absence of Majorana states within local vortices. Introduction The iron chalcogenide family has emerged as an intriguing platform to study unconventional superconductivity and novel quantum state transitions1–3. In particular, the recent discovery of topological superconductivity and Majorana bound states (MBS) in FeTe0.55Se0.454,5 has significantly promoted topological quantum computing research and has obtained immense attention. The unique electronic properties of this system have been suggested to depend strongly on the Te/Se concentration both theoretically6,7 and experimentally8. In contrast to the topologically trivial FeSe, FeTe1-xSex (x = 0.5 in first- principles calculations7 and x = 0.45 in experiments5) exhibits nontrivial topological surface states (TSS) due to the parity inversion and spin-orbit coupling (SOC) gap opening of p and d bands along the  to Z point in the Brillouin zone, induced by Te substitution. The sensitivity of topology in iron chalcogenide to chemical composition is also supported by recent angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements8, as TSS appears only at sufficiently high Te concentration, and FeTe0.55Se0.45 locates near the boundary among non-superconducting, normal superconducting, and topological superconducting phases. The coexistence of TSS and superconductivity gives rise to MBS in vortices, which can be detected using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy4,5. However, not all vortices host MBS9. The reasons behind the presence/absence of MBS have been intensely debated, including vortex overlap9, vortex disorder10, Zeeman coupling11, and local composition fluctuations12, etc. Based on an effective Hamiltonian analysis, Sau et al.12 have revealed that local fluctuations in Se concentration lead to chemical potential disorders as well as topological domain disorders, thus influencing the presence of MBS. Additionally, local composition fluctuations induce local strains, resulting in nematic transitions and nanoscale suppression of superconductivity in FeTe1-xSex13. Despite previous studies highlighting the significance of Se concentration for TSS and MBS, important questions such as the critical Se concentration for TSS and its impact on the electronic states remain unclear. Exploring the chemical composition effect on the electronic states of FeTe1-xSex poses considerable challenges from both experimental and theoretical perspectives. High-quality growth of FeTe1-xSex crystals with precise composition control remains a difficult task. The atomic structures are highly sensitive to the Se/Te concentration, and there are limited reports available8,14,15, making it even more challenging to unveil their atomic structures. The presence of local disorders further complicates the situation8. Although density functional theory (DFT) can offer qualitatively correct explanations of electronic states for certain compositions (e.g., x = 0, 0.5, 1)7, its failure to accurately describe strong correlation and coupling effects leads to large band renormalization factors (R) when compared to angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) data16. Additionally, these band renormalization factors are dependent on the composition and orbital characteristics6. Alternative methods such as DFT+U and dynamical mean-field theory (DMFT) can improve the renormalization, but they still fail to reproduce the experimental band values6,17. Effective Hamiltonian studies16,18 mainly rely on experimental or first-principles results, and lack a direct correlation between composition and Hamiltonian terms. Currently, our understanding of the composition effect on orbital interactions and electronic states in FeTe1-xSex with varying x is deficient even at a comprehensive qualitative level, let alone achieving an accurate quantitative description. Here, we focus on studying the relation among chemical composition, orbital interaction, and electronic structures. By combining DFT calculations, Wannier-based TB, and a pz-dxz/yz-based effective Hamiltonian analysis together, we systematically study the chemical composition effect on electronic states of FTS, especially the bands variation along -Z around Fermi level. The dependence of orbital interaction with x are clarified. Models Variation of Se concentration x in FeTe1-xSex crystals changes not only Se/Te proportion but also atomic structures. The structures of FTS are limited reported and slightly vary with preparation and measurement methods19–22. The lattice constants a and c in FTS gradually decrease by about ~0.05 Å (~2 %) and ~0.76 Å (~12 %), respectively, when x increases from 0 to 1. The relation between a/c and x can be approximately in linear ways22. The bond lengths between Fe and Se/Te atoms or heights between Fe and Se/Te planes (dz) are fewer reported7,21, and the dz-x relation displays more complex than the a/c-x linear relations. Besides, uneven local distribution of Se/Te atoms generally exists in FeTe1-xSex9. Here, we mainly study the average composition effect on band structures of FeTe1-xSex (x = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, 1.0, see in Fig. 1a) systems using 2*2*1 supercells of primitive FeTe0.5Se0.5 crystal structure7. Because the electronic structures of FeTe1-xSex are quite sensitive to both Se/Te proportion and crystal structures, we adopt experimental-based linear variation of lattice constants with Se concentrations: a = 7.6406 - 0.108x (Å), c = 6.3362 - 0.762x (Å), and optimize the atomic geometry using DFT calculations implemented in VASP. Methods Although DMFT and other beyond DFT methods give better description of correlation and coupling effects, all these calculations show x-dependent and orbital-dependent band renormalzation compared to ARPES data6. Instead of seeking for accurate band calculations, we focus on studying the critical orbital interactions caused by x changes by combining DFT calculations, Wannier TB, and a pz-dxz/yz-based Hamiltonian analysis together. 1. DFT DFT calculations with GGA-PBE23 functionals implemented in VASP24,25 are used to study the electronic structures of FeTe1-xSex crystals. Van-der Walls interactions are included in the optimization of FeTe1-xSex systems by using vdW-DF2 functional26,27 after many tests. The cutoff energy is set to be 400 eV, and (7 × 7 × 15) Monkhorst-Pack grids are used. We set the Fermi level to be zero in all cases. 2. Wannier TB Tight-binding (TB) Hamiltonians based on maximally localized Wannier functions of FeTe1-xSex systems are constructed using Wannier9028. A basis set of 5d orbitals (dxy, dxz, dyz, dz2, dx2-y2) of each Fe atom and 3p orbitals (px, py, pz)of each Se/Te atom are used here. The obtained Wannier functions show the same features with corresponding atomistic orbitals. 3. pz-dxz/yz-based Hamiltonian A pz-dxz/yz-based Hamiltonian16 is used to analyze the band dispersion along -Z direction of FeTe1-xSex systems with and without SOC effect, 3 3 1 2 2 cos 2 sin 2 sin ( ) . 2 cos ( 2 sin ) . . 2 cos p pp z x z y z z d dd z z z d dd z t k k k H k t k i k t k           + −     = + +     +   (1) Main results and discussion The optimized atomic structures of FeTe1-xSex (x = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, and 1.0, respectively) are shown in Fig. 1a, where the Fe-Se and Fe-Te bond lengths are 2.34 Å and 2.51 Å, respectively. The Fe, Se, and Te coordinates remain stable in proximity to their original lattice positions. Neither obvious atomic distortion nor rearrangement is found when x changes. Fig. 1b illustrates three distinctive bands near the Fermi level, which are primarily composed of pz orbitals of chalcogen and dxz/yz and dx2-y2 orbitals of Fe according to projected density of states analysis. The pz and dxz/yz bands along  to  has shown to be critical for the topology in FeSe0.5Te0.57,18. As the Se concentration (x) gradually increases from 0 to 1, the pz band at  exhibits a noticeable upward shift, ultimately leading to the vanishing of band inversion between pz and dxz/yz bands when x closes to 1. The SOC effect not only causes a split in the degenerate dxz/yz bands but also facilitates a hybridization between pz and dxz/yz bands, thereby opening an SOC gap between them along the − path. This SOC gap signifies a topological transition within FeTe1- xSex systems, which further leads to the manifestation of topological superconductivity and MBS within vortices at sufficiently low temperatures4,5. 0.75, 0.875, 1.0) calculated by DFT implemented in VASP with (red dot) and without (black dot) SOC effect. The approximated linear relation between lattice constants and x for FeSexTe1-x based on experimental data[] is used, that is, a = 7.6406 - 0.108x (Å) and c = 6.3362 - 0.762x (Å). Atomic positions are optimized using revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functional26 with nonlocal vdW-DF2 functional27. Interestingly, as x progresses from 0 to 1, the magnitude of the SOC gap experiences a nonlinear evolution: it begins at 0.0 meV, reaches its maximum value of 48.2 meV at x = 0.5, and subsequently recedes back to 0.0 (see Fig. 2a). This distinctive nonlinearity in the variation of SOC gap with x is found to be unaffected by optimization methods or lattice structures, hinging solely on the change of chemical composition (see Fig. S1-S2 in supplementary materials). To be noted, larger SOC gap should correspond to more robust MBS. To understand how Se concentration affects the orbital interactions and energy bands of FeTe1-xSex, we adopt a pz-dxz/yz-based Hamiltonian16 as well as Wannier-based TB approach with basis sets of 5d (Fe) and 3p (Se/Te) orbitals to fit and analyze our DFT results (see Fig. S3 in supplementary materials). The effective pd Hamiltonian reproduces the − bands in excellent agreement with DFT results. The onsite and hopping energies, denoted as p  , d  , tpp and dd t , mainly control the p and d bands shape and energy ranges. When x increases from 0 to 1, we observe a gradual increase in both p  and d  , accompanied by a decrement in tpp and small variation of d  and tdd (see Fig. 2b). The inversion of p and d bands along − path transpires when the signs of ( 2 ) ( 2 ) p pp d dd t t   + − + and ( 2 ) ( 2 ) p pp d dd t t   − − − differs. The splitting and curvature of dxz/yz bands are predominantly influenced by the dxz-dyz interaction term 1 2 ( 2 sin ) z z i k   +  and its conjugate. The pz-dxz/yz interaction which is a function of 3 mainly governs the SOC gap between pz and dxz/yz bands, mirroring a similar trend of variation with the SOC gap itself (see Fig. 2a). Hamiltonian parameters of FeTe1-xSex (x = 0.0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.375, 0.5, 0.625, 0.75, 0.875, 1.0). We extend our analysis by employing a Wannier-based TB approach for FeTe1-xSex (x = 0, 0.5 and 1) systems to elucidate the intricate correlation between Se concentration and atomic orbital interactions. The fitted Wannier Hamiltonian shows good description of DFT data (see Fig. S4 in supplementary materials), and the main interaction parameters governing the pz, dxz/yz, and dx2-y2 bands are listed in Table 1. Some Wannier- based Hamiltonian parameters exhibit variations consistent with those revealed through effective pd Hamiltonian analysis. For example, the on-site energies of d orbitals ((εdxz y ⁄ z, εdx2−y2) vary little with x, while the p-p hopping energies (tpz~pz 0 , tpz~pz 1 ) decline as x. This observation mirrors the inherent stability of Fe lattices under varying x and the greater localization of p orbitals in Se compared to Te. The Wannier analysis reveals that the interaction between pz and dx2-y2 is critical for pz-dxz/yz band inversion, which is ignored in the effective pd Hamiltonian. A stepwise substitution of Wannier Hamiltonian parameters from x = 1 with those from x = 0 (see Fig. S5 in supplementary materials) vividly demonstrates that even a slight reduction in |tdx2−y2~pz| triggers a significant descending of pz band. Consequently, the initially separate pz and dxz/yz bands intersect and undergo a band inversion. Although other Hamiltonian parameters change with x, their impact on pz-dxz/yz band inversion remains modest, except for the intralayer pz- pz interaction tpz~pz 0 which not only shifts the pz band to lower energy range but also broadens it. In summary, |tdx2−y2~pz| and tpz~pz 0 emerge as the most important orbital interactions which mainly determines the occurrence of pd band inversion. In contrast to the evident impact of pz-dxz/yz interactions on SOC gap in eq. (1), multiple interactions encompassing pz and d orbitals contribute to the SOC gap in Wannier Hamiltonian. Nonetheless, it remains uncertain how these interactions are influenced by x and subsequently govern the SOC gap from the point of the Wannier-based atomistic-orbital perspective. 1.0) systems without and with SOC effect. The on-site energies of dxz/yz, dx2-y2 orbitals of Fe and pz orbitals of chalcogen are noted as / dxz yz , 2 2 x d y  − ,  pz (Se,Te) , respectively. And 2 - 2 z (Se,Te)- x y p d t , / z (Se,Te)- xz yz p d t , 0 p p z z t − , 1 p p z z t − are the hopping energies of nearest-neighbor pz-dx2-y2, pz-dxz/yz, intralayer pz-pz, and interlayer pz-pz interaction terms, respectively. Fermi energy is set to be zero. x 0.0 0.5 1.0 HW90 woSOC dxz/yz (eV) dx2-y2 (eV) pz(Se, Te)(eV) |t0pz(Se, Te)-dx2-y2| (eV) |t0pz(Se,Te)-dxz/yz| (eV) t0pz-pz(eV) t1pz-pz(eV) HW90 wSOC dxz/yz (eV) dx2-y2 (eV) pz(Se, Te)(eV) |t0pz(Se, Te)-dx2-y2| (eV) |t0pz(Se,Te)-dxz/yz| (eV) t0pz-pz(eV) t1pz-pz(eV) The above discussion about the impact of Se concentration on the electronic structure of FeTe1-xSex is based on specific periodic structures for each x value which maximize the dispersion of Se and Te atoms. However, real samples manifest uneven distributions of Se and Te atoms. For instance, STM mappings have indicated that the fluctuations in local Se concentration on surfaces surpass 10%9. To address the variability in the distributions of Se atoms, we first undertake calculations for FeTe0.5Se0.5 using differing atomic configurations achieved by modifying the positions of Se/Te within a 2*2 supercell. As shown in Fig. 3, FeTe0.5Se0.5 with different Se distribution exhibit completely distinct electronic structures, with their SOC gaps ranging from 0.0 to 48.2 meV. Especially, the structure illustrated in Fig. 3c shows a SOC gap of 0 meV. Due to the overlapping of surface states and bulk states, the surface is topologically trivial, making the formation of MBS within vortices nearly implausible. Furthermore, we observe variations in the energy levels of SOC gap within FeTe0.5Se0.5 across different atomic distributions. Considering diverse local domains corresponding to these four atomic configurations (Fig. 1a and Fig. 3a-c) and placing the chemical potential at the marked black dash in Fig. 3d, it becomes apparent that only the local domain resembling the first atomic distribution (as seen in Fig. 1a with x = 0.5) is primed for a surface phase transition towards topological superconductivity and the consequent formation of robust MBS, as the chemical potential locates in the SOC gap18. In contrast, the formation of MBS in the other domains is hindered by the substantial occupation of bulk states and the presence of topologically trivial surfaces, attributed to the chemical potential residing well above the SOC gap. Our calculation unveil that the uneven dispersion of Se/Te atoms leads to fluctuations in both SOC gap and chemical potential of local domains. These fluctuations account for the presence and absence of MBS in vortices. are top views of the atomic structures. (d) The two energy points which determines SOC gap (blue square and green circle) for all four distinct atomic configurations of FeTe0.5Se0.5, and the chemical potential is marked as black dash line. We further explore the electronic properties of the FeSexTe1-x across varying Se concentrations and distributions. The SOC gap exhibits a nonlinear and intricate behavior as x changes (Fig. 4). As the local disorder of Se concentration and distribution increases, it can be expected that both SOC gap and its energy levels in local domains fluctuate. Considering the strong correlation between the SOC gap and chemical potential window for TSC phase in FeSexTe1-x, the MBS tends to diminish as the SOC gap contracts. Previous studies have shown the influence of chemical composition on chemical potential and band inversion in FeSexTe1-x systems7,12,18. For instances, Sau et al. have emphasized the distinctive features between topological disorder arising from band inversion and chemical potential disorder as well as their impacts on the emergence of MBS when Se concentration changes12. However, our discovery of the non-linear and multi-scattering characteristics of Se concentration and distribution in relation to the SOC gap offers a fresh perspective to rationalize the appearance and disappearance of MBS in localized vortices. The establishment of the TSC phase and local MBS exclusively materializes when the chemical potential aligns with the local SOC gap; otherwise, the localized domains revert to a topologically trivial state. distributions. Conclusion In conclusion, our study explores the intricate relationship between Se composition and electronic states in FeTe1-xSex. By combining DFT calculations and Hamiltonian analysis, we uncover a nonlinear variation of the SOC gap between pz and dxz/yz bands in response to x, and find the critical role of pz-pz and dx2-y2-pz interactions in pd band inversion. Importantly, our findings underscore the substantial impact of Se distribution on the SOC gap, subsequently influencing the presence or absence of MBS within local vortices. This study reveals the intricate interplay between chemical composition, electronic structure, and Majorana in FeTe1-xSex, providing a novel perspective to understand the appearance and disappearance of MBS. Acknowledgment This work is funded by the US National Science Foundation (NSF QII-TAQS) under Grant No.1936246.The authors acknowledge the Rosen Center for Advanced Computing at Purdue University for the use of their computing resources and technical support. We are also grateful for a helpful discussion with Prof. Jay D. Sau, Dr. Tamoghna Barik, Prof. Jennifer E. Hoffman, and Benjamin H. November.