Molecular Junctions for Terahertz Switches and Detectors. Imen Hnid,1* Ali Yassin,2,3 Imane Arbouch,4 David Guérin,1 Colin van Dyck,5 Lionel Sanguinet,2 Stéphane Lenfant,1 Jérôme Cornil,4 Philippe Blanchard2 and Dominique Vuillaume.1* 1. Institute for Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France. 2. MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, SFR MATRIX, F-49000 Angers, France. 3. Natural Sciences Department, School of Arts and Sciences, Lebanese American University, Beirut, Lebanon. 4. Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, University of Mons, Belgium. 5. Theoretical Chemical Physics group, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium. Abstract: Molecular electronics targets tiny devices exploiting the electronic properties of the molecular orbitals, which can be tailored and controlled by the chemical structure/conformation of the molecules. Many functional devices have been experimentally demonstrated; however, these devices were operated in the low frequency domain (mainly, dc to MHz). This represents a serious limitation for electronic applications, albeit molecular devices working in the THz regime have been theoretically predicted. Here, we experimentally demonstrate molecular THz switches at room temperature. The devices consist of self-assembled monolayers of molecules bearing two conjugated moieties coupled through a non-conjugated linker. These devices exhibit clear negative differential conductance behaviors (peaks in the current-voltage curves), as confirmed by ab initio simulations, which were reversibly suppressed under illumination with a 30 THz wave. We analyze how the THz switching behavior depends on the THz wave properties (power, frequency), and we benchmark that these molecular devices would outperform actual THz detectors. Keywords: molecular junctions, terahertz switch, self-assembled monolayers, negative differential conductance, conductive atomic force microscopy. 2 At the nanoscale, the interactions between molecular-based devices and microwave-to-terahertz electromagnetic waves are a fascinating and relatively recent field of research since the beginning of molecular-scale electronics fifty years ago.1, 2 As examples, the polarizability of alkyl chains and π-conjugated oligomers in self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) were first measured by combining a dc bias and a microwave signal (around few to few tens of GHz) in a rf-STM (radio frequency scanning tunneling microscope) experiment.3, 4 The spin resonance of single molecules deposited on surfaces can be probed and manipulated (in UHV and at low temperatures) with a rf-STM, combined with a magnetic field (ESR- STM: electron spin resonance STM).5-8 THz waves coupled with a STM (lightwave- driven THz-STM)9, 10 was proven a powerful approach to study ultrafast dynamics of single molecules (e.g. ultrafast electron transfer), from simple H2 to pentacene, nickelocene, for example.11-13 These works have demonstrated their benefit to overcome the diffraction limits allowing to reach simultaneously high spatial and ultrafast temporal resolution affording new insights for nanoscale devices (see a review in ). However, to the best of our knowledge, none of these works concern the direct measurement of the dynamic conductance of molecular devices in this microwave frequency regime and at room temperature. From a device point of view, molecular-scale electronics suffers a serious limitation for electronic applications, because their electronic transport properties have been mainly studied in the dc regime, or restricted to low-frequency (< MHz). However, most of the metrics of these molecular devices (e.g., injection barrier height at the electrode interfaces, electron transit time...) scale in the THz frequency range. For example, transit times through molecular junctions of a few femtoseconds (i.e., THz frequency range) were theoretically predicted.14, 15 Trasobares et al. demonstrated that a molecular diode can be operated at a frequency of ~18 GHz, and a frequency bandwidth of 520 GHz was estimated from a simple device modeling.16 The electron transport properties of single molecule 3 (C60) transistors can also be tuned by THz radiation. THz photon-assisted tunneling and electron-vibron coupling were also recently demonstrated.17, 18 Tunneling charge transfer plasmon was demonstrated at 145 and 244 THz, depending on the nature of the molecules in the molecular junction.19 In this context, a molecular terahertz switch was theoretically proposed but never experimentally demonstrated. The suggested device is based on the dynamic interaction between a THz wave and a molecular junction featuring a negative differential conductance (NDC).20 Here, we demonstrate such a molecular THz switch device. We study the electron transport properties under 2.5-30 THz irradiation of SAMs of molecules (dihydroanthracene derivatives) made of two conjugated parts coupled through a non-conjugated linker (generally referenced as π-σ-π system). Due to this non- conjugated linker, the molecule can be seen as two weakly coupled sites in series constituting an efficient conducting channel only when the energies of the two sites are aligned leading to NDC behaviors.21-24 We demonstrate that the NDC behavior is reversibly suppressed (observed) when the THz irradiation is turned on (off). We establish how this switching behavior depends on the THz wave characteristics (frequency, power). To explain these features, mechanisms involving THz-induced resonant electron transfer between the neighboring subunits, “coherent destruction of tunneling” in nanodevices25 and molecular junctions,26-28 or interaction between a surface plasmon polariton (SPP) and two- level molecular devices,29, 30 are considered. Finally, from a benchmarking of the device performances, we envision that these THz molecular switches are prone for applications as THz detectors. The molecules are based on a dihydroanthracene core which was symmetrically linked to two π-conjugated ethynylthiophene units. Both compounds were end-capped with two thiol functions protected by 2-cyanoethyl or 2-(trimethylsilyl)ethyl groups referred to as AH1 and AH2 (Fig. 1a), respectively 4 (details in the Supporting Information). A third molecule already known to exhibit a NDC behavior was synthesized as reference (AH3, based on dihydroanthracene with ethynylbenzene side units,21 and functionalized with thioethyltrimethylsilane). These molecules were chemisorbed on ultra flat template-stripped Au (TSAu) surfaces used as bottom electrodes (details in the Supporting Information) to form the SAMs. Ellipsometry measurements showed that the SAMs have a thickness between 2.3 and 3.1 nm (±0.2 nm, Fig. S5 and Table S1). Compared to the geometry optimized length of the molecules (2.8-3 nm), these values suggest different molecular organizations in the SAMs. For the three molecules and whatever the protecting group, XPS measurements (S2p peak) show that the molecules are chemisorbed on the bottom electrode by Au-S bonds with the amplitude ratios of [S-Au]/[S-C] consistent with the molecule stoichiometry (Fig.S6, Table S2). UPS measurements (secondary cutoff) show that the three TSAu/SAM samples have almost the same work function (Fig. S7). The molecular junctions (MJs) were established by gently contacting the SAMs with the tip of a conductive-atomic force microscope (C-AFM) with a loading force of ≈ 6-8 nN, Fig. 1b. This approach allows to fabricate a nanoscale MJ TSAu- molecules//PtIr tip (top electrode area of ≈ 6-7.5 nm2), i.e. a MJ made of ≈ 20-25 molecules (see the Supporting Information, section 3), where "-" indicates a chemical bond and "//" a mechanical contact. We acquired hundreds of DC current-voltage (I-V) curves by contacting the SAM with the C-AFM tip at different places for statistical analysis of the electron transport (ET) properties of the MJs with the laser source turned on or off (Fig. 1c). Two laser sources (continuous wave) were used, a quantum cascade laser (QCL) at 30 THz and a gas laser at 2.5 THz, with irradiating power up to 43 mW on the MJs. 5 structure of the (AH2). (b) Scheme of the molecular junction with the SAM connected by the tip of the C-AFM. (c) Scheme of the experiment. THz waves are focalized under the tip of the C-AFM (see details in the section 3 of the Supporting Information). All three molecules showed a marked NDC behavior at RT, which is suppressed under THz irradiations. Figure 2a shows the I-V dataset (116 I-V traces) for the TSAu-AH1//PtIr tip MJs without THz wave irradiation. We observed a negative differential conductance (NDC), i.e., a decrease in the current when increasing the applied voltage, for all the I-V traces shown in the dataset. The I-V curves are rather symmetric and the voltage positions of the peaks of current at 6 positive and negative voltages (inset Fig. 2a), extracted from the statistical distribution given in Fig. 2c, are VP+ = 0.42 ± 0.05 V and VP- = -0.48 ± 0.05 V. The peak-to-valley current ratios (RPV=IP/IV) range between 1.5 and 18 with a mean value RPV = 3.1 ± 1.3 (Fig. 2d). When the 30 THz laser is turned on, the I-V dataset measured under irradiation no longer exhibited the NDC effect (Fig. 2b). The switching is fast and reversible. The inset in Fig. 2b presents the time evolution of the current measured at the positive peak voltage while turning on and off the 30 THz laser (5 cycles). The switching occurs in less than 24 ms, the minimal time accessible between two successive acquisitions of the current with our C-AFM equipment. The real switching time is much faster, the switching being purely electronic in nature (e.g. ≈2 ps in the model proposed in ). These NDC and THz switching behaviors are reproducible (checked on another sample of AH1 from another batch, Fig. S8). The same behavior was observed for the TSAu-AH2//PtIr tip MJs (Fig. S9), albeit we note that the peak voltages Vp+ and Vp- are slightly larger (0.6-0.8 V in absolute value) than for the AH1 junction. The peak-to-valley ratios remain in the range 2-10, comparable to the AH1 junctions. This slight difference between the AH1 and AH2 MJs (while the core molecules are identical) is discussed below. This THz switching effect was also observed for SAM-based MJs made of molecules AH3 with ethynylphenyl sides (Fig. S10) for which a NDC behavior was already reported at the single molecule level using mechanically controlled break junction.21 7 AH1//PtIr tip MJs without THz wave irradiation (116 I-V curves, different colors, acquired at different places on the SAM, see the Supporting Information). The bold black line is the mean Ī-V curve. The inset illustrates, for one of the I-V of the dataset, the determination of the peak and valley currents and the peak voltage. tip MJs under a 30 THz continuous wave irradiation (at a power of 40 mW). The bold black line is the mean Ī-V curve. The inset shows the time evolution recorded at the positive peak voltage when switching on and off the 30 THz waves, the tip of the C-AFM remaining at the same position on the SAM surface. (c) Histogram of the voltages of the peak currents (from the dataset in Fig. 2a) for the positive, VP+, and negative, VP-, voltages. (d) Histogram of the peak-to-valley ratios (from the dataset in Fig. 2a) calculated for every I-V as depicted in the inset of Fig. 2a. (a) (b) (c) (d) AH1: THz off AH1: 30 THz on Vp+=0.42±0.05 V Vp-=-0.48±0.05 V RPV=3.1±1.3 Ip Iv Vp 8 The THz switching effect depends on the microwave power and frequency (Fig. 3). We have observed a power threshold. When the 30 THz power applied on the TSAu-AH1//PtIr tip MJs is below 28 mW, we do not observe the disappearance of the NDC peaks even for a period of irradiation up to few minutes (Figs. 3a-b), a time much larger than the switching time previously observed (Fig. 2b). Between 28 and 40 mW, the NDC peaks are suppressed (Fig. 2b, Figs. 3c-d) and the current recorded under irradiation is almost similar as the "background" current of the I- V without irradiation (i.e., the current superimposed to the NDC peaks, Fig. 3c). The switching effect depends also on the THz frequency. We did not observe the suppression of the NDC effect under irradiation at 2.5 THz (Figs. 3e-f). As a control experiment, we measured I-Vs under 30 THz irradiation (same power of 40 mW) of MJs made of SAMs of oligo(phenylene ethynylene) (OPE). We did not observe any modification of the I-Vs (Fig. S15). The current suppression observed for the AH1, AH2 and AH3 MJs is specific to the NDC behavior of these π-σ-π molecules. We note that we have not observed, under these THz irradiation conditions, an increase of the background current due to THz photon-assisted tunneling effect (PAT)9, 17 see section 4.2 in the Supporting Information. 9 measured on the TSAu-AH1//PtIr tip MJ without/with THz irradiation (30 THz) at different powers (P) applied during few tens of seconds to few minutes: (a-b) P < 10 The I-V datasets with the THz laser off are well explained by the two-site model developed for this type of π-σ-π molecule.21 In a simple picture, the peak of the current occurs when the applied voltage aligns the energy of the two π- arms giving rise to a resonant ET inside the MJ. Increasing the applied voltage, the NDC effect results from the breaking of this resonant condition, pulling the energy of the two π sites apart. The analytical model developed in Refs. 21, 22 was used and it well reproduced the NDC behavior of our MJs (Fig. 4 and Fig. S11). The model (inset in Fig. 4a) is parametrized by the energy levels ε0 of the π moieties (at zero bias, with respect to the Fermi energy of the electrodes), the electronic coupling energy Γ with the electrodes and τ the coupling between the two π sites (Eq. S4 in the Supporting Information). Figure 4a shows the fit of the mean Ī-V curve of the TSAu-AH1//PtIr tip MJ, and Figs. 4b-c the fits on two representative I-V curves of the dataset with a clear NDC behavior (the NDC effect being reduced on the mean Ī-V due to data dispersion). All the individual I-V of the dataset shown in Fig. 2a were fitted and the histograms of the fitted parameters are shown in Figs. 4d-f. The energy levels are Gaussian distributed, with ε0=0.35±0.04 eV, while the coupling energies are more dispersed with 3<Γ<140 meV (with ∼ 78% of the values below 50 meV) and 2<τ<10 meV (∼ 85% of the values <5 meV). Similar results are obtained for the AH2 molecular junctions (Fig. S12). We note a slightly larger ε0 for the AH2 MJs, which might be related to a slightly more densely-packed molecular organization in the AH2 SAM (see section 2.3 in the Supporting Information). The model also fits the I-V of the AH3 MJs (Fig. S13), as already reported for single molecule experiments.21 The general observed trend that τ < Γ is qualitatively in agreement with the structure of the junction (sigma bonds vs. chemisorbed thiol bonds), and the ab initio calculations (τ ≈ 10 meV, Fig. S16 and Γ ≈ 150-200 meV, Fig. S19). 11 I-V from the dataset with a marked NDC behavior. The fit parameters are: (a) eV, Γ=119 meV, τ=3.5 meV. The fits are limited between the voltage positions of the two current valleys since the monotonous increase of the background “off- resonance” current with the voltage at higher voltages is not taken into account by this model (see Fig. 4d in ). (d-f) Histograms of the fit parameters obtained by fitting all individual I-V curves of the dataset (Fig. 2a): (d) energy of molecular orbital ε0, the red line is the fit with a Gaussian distribution; (e) electrode coupling energy Γ and (f) intramolecular electronic coupling energy τ. Under the 30 THz irradiation, the I-V curves (Fig. 2b) are well fitted with a single-energy level (SEL, Eq. S6 of the Supporting Information) with ε0-THz = 0.50±0.09 eV and coupling energies to the electrodes in the 0.05 to 3 meV range (Fig. S14). A similar result was obtained for the AH2 MJs, ε0-THz = 0.56 ± 0.04 eV and 12 coupling energies to the electrodes in the 0.01 to 1.5 meV range (Fig. S14). The meaning of this virtual molecular orbital level ε0-THz under dynamic excitation is discussed in below. To explain and rationalize the experimental results, we performed DFT (density functional theory) calculations coupled to the NEGF (non-equilibrium Green function) formalism31 (Supporting Information, section 5). Figure 5 shows the optimized geometry of the AH1 junction considering chemisorbed S-Au bonds at the two ends (Fig. 5a), the calculated transmission probability T(E) at several voltages and the localization of the HOMO and HOMO-1 orbitals (Fig. 5b). At zero bias, the HOMO and HOMO-1 are degenerate at ca. 0.47-0.49 eV below the Fermi energy of the electrodes. When a voltage is applied the two MOs split by following the different electrodes, with the HOMO (HOMO-1, respectively) localized on the right (left, respectively) side of the molecule and the energy moving upward (downward, respectively) – more data in Fig. S16. The NDC behavior is due to the opposite shift of the HOMO and HOMO-1 with the applied voltage, the HOMO-1 being always pulled out from the transmission energy window at V>VP (VP=0.7 V in this calculation), thus decreasing T(E) and the current, confirming the NDC mechanism proposed for single molecule break-junction measurements.21 Figure 5c shows the energy difference, Δ, between the two MOs versus the applied voltage. The simulated I-V curve is shown in Fig. 5d with NDC peaks at +/- 0.7 V. 13 molecular junctions (the molecule is V-shaped with an S-to-S length of 2.2 nm) - see also Fig. S5 and Table S1 in the Supporting Information. (b) Calculated transmission coefficient, T(E), at several applied voltages. The blue and red dashed lines highlight the voltage-dependent shift of the energy position of the HOMO and HOMO-1, respectively. The vertical dark dashed lines indicate the position of the Fermi energy of the two electrodes (the energy window used to calculate the current, see the Supporting Information). The blue and red boxes show the corresponding electronic density of the HOMO and HOMO-1 orbitals, with their energy position with respect to the Fermi energy of the electrode. (c) Evolution of 14 the energy gap Δ between the HOMO and HOMO-1 with the voltage. The calculated Δ is fitted with Eq. S5 to determine the fraction of the voltage that drops inside the molecule (parameter α ≈ 0.8, see Supporting Information). Due to the symmetry of the MJ, the same results are obtained at negative voltages. (d) Simulated I-V curves with NDC peaks at +/- 0.7V. (e) Illustration of the THZ switching effect. Schematic description of the molecular junction under THz wave irradiation and at a voltage around the peak voltage VP. The HOMO and HOMO-1 are split by about 0.5 eV (Fig. 5c) and broadened by the large coupling with the electrodes (Γ up to 150-200 meV as measured in the “dark”, i.e. without THz, Figs. 4 and S11). The 30 THz photons (energy of 120 meV) induce charge transfers and interactions between the two levels, which can cancel the NDC peak current (see text). The ET through the MJ is described by a single virtual level that lies at an energy between the HOMO and HOMO-1 levels. The simulations are in good agreement with the experiments. The zero bias, the degenerate HOMO/HOMO-1 levels lie at 0.47 - 0.49 eV below the Fermi energy, while the value deduced from the fits of the two-site model on the experimental datasets gives ε0 around 0.35 - 0.47 eV (vide supra). Since the protecting groups could remain at the top surface of the SAMs, we also consider calculations for the Au-AH1//Au MJ (one side chemisorbed, one with mechanical contact with the C-AFM tip). Globally, we end up with similar conclusions: the splitting of the HOMO and HOMO-1 levels gives rise to the NDC behavior, but due to the strong asymmetry, the NDC peak is only present at a positive voltage (Fig. S17). We conclude that in our experiments a majority of the protecting groups are spontaneously removed when the C-AFM tip is put in contact with the surface of the SAM, and that Pt-S bonds are formed like in SAMs,32 resulting in the experimentally observed almost symmetric NDC behaviors in agreement with our 15 calculations. No significant rectification is expected from the different nature of the electrodes (TSAu surface and PtIr tip) since they have almost the same work function: 4.2-4.4 eV for TSAu electrodes functionalized by the SAMs (UPS measurement, Fig. S7b in the Supporting Information) and ≈ 4.3 eV for the PtIr tip.33 The observed suppression of the NDC behavior under THz radiation is qualitatively in agreement with the theoretical model of Orellana and Claro,20 where the dynamic coupling between the THz wave and the molecular orbitals of the two sites of the molecule induces a charge transfer between the MOs turning the current to a low value. This model predicts the existence of a threshold in the THz field strength to trigger the switching, as experimentally observed. A sufficiently large field (square root the power of the incoming THz wave) is required to observe the THz switch. Several authors have theoretically proposed mechanisms that can suppress the conductance in MJs under electromagnetic wave irradiation. For instance, in a molecular wire (ET through sequential tunneling between adjacent levels), a phenomenon known as “coherent destruction of tunneling”25 was theoretically described in various ac-field driven MJs.26-28 In a two-level system, a resonance between the two levels and a surface plasmon polariton (SPP) can induce a decrease of the current.29, 30 In , the authors considered the HOMO and LUMO as the two-level system under visible light excitation, while in the two-level system is made of a delocalized orbital between the electrodes of the MJs and a localized one in the middle of the molecule. Here, the 30 THz ac driven field, enhanced by the plasmonic cavity created between the C-AFM tip and the Au surface (field increased by a factor 102- 106, the exact value being dependent on the precise shape of the electrodes, cavity modes, nature of material of the electrode spacer, see section 4.2 in the Supporting Information)9, 34 can be coupled with the molecules in the MJs. We propose that the THz photons with an energy of 120 meV (at 30 THz) can induce a 16 destructive resonance (dynamic charge transfer in ) between the split HOMO and HOMO-1 levels. Considering the existing large broadening of the HOMO levels (as measured in the “dark” (no THz) by the large electrode coupling energy Γ, Figs. 4 and S11), these orbitals can overlap with an energy band of at least a width of 120 meV (Fig. 5e) comparable to the energy of the 30 THz photons. Thus, the THz wave can induce charge transfers and interactions between these two levels, which can cancel the NDC peak current. The current at the NDC peak is strongly reduced and only a virtual MO is generated by this ac driven ET in the MJs.35, 36 This virtual energy level is detected at an energy ε0-THz when fitting the I- Vs curves measured under the THz irradiation with the SEL model (Fig. S14). This virtual level lies between the HOMO and HOMO-1, Fig. 5e (ε0-THz ≈ 0.5-0.56 eV). At 2.5 THz, the photon energy (10 meV) is too weak to induce this coherent destruction of the ET, and no suppression of the NDC is observed on the measured I-Vs. In summary, we have demonstrated an efficient conductance switching at room temperature in MJs made of π-σ-π molecules under the irradiation of THz waves. In the following, we envision potential applications as THz detectors. Quantum-well photodetectors (QWPs) based on electron intersubband transitions have a high responsivity among several types of THz detectors based on THz- induced electronic current variations (photocurrent) but they require working at low temperatures (<77 K).37 The best reported performance38 is a responsivity (at ca. 4 THz) of 1 AW-1 with a detection area 1.6x105 μm2 (at 5 K), i.e., 6.3x10-6 AW- 1μm-2. Here, the current variation at the NDC peak voltage is about ΔI = I(THz off)- I(THz on) ≈ 5 nA on average (see Fig. 2, with values up to 20 nA) at a minimum power of 28 mW. With a detection area of ≈ 10 nm2 (C-AFM tip contact area, see Supporting Information, Section 3.3), we get a responsivity of 1.8x10-2 AW-1μm-2 (up to 7x10-2 AW-1μm-2). Our MJs present a huge increase in the responsivity (at equivalent detection area) and, moreover, they are working at room temperature. 17 To implement such molecular THz detectors, we need integrated MJs compatible with modern nanoelectronic fabrication processes, with electrodes of large areas and transparent to THz waves. A candidate of choice is a single layer graphene (SLG) top electrode, SLG being practically transparent to THz waves.39 The technology is already available to deposit (soft process by transfer printing) and pattern SLG top electrodes (typically 10-100 μm in diameter) on SAMs40 and thin molecular films41 with low contact resistance (<1 Ω) and fabrication yield of 50- 90%. The frequency response (here 30 THz) can be modulated by molecular engineering. Modifying or functionalizing the π moieties,22, 42 the HOMO and HOMO-1 energy levels can be adapted to match with the THz photon energy, thus modulating the frequency response of the molecular detector. Associated Content The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/..... Details on the synthesis of the molecules, NMR characterizations, bottom electrode fabrication, thickness measurements, XPS and UPS characterizations, Conductive-AFM protocol, data analysis, theoretical models and methods, and additional results. Author Information Corresponding authors Imen Hnid – Institute for Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France; orcid.org/0000- 0002-4468-5334; E-mail: imen.hnid@iemn.fr 18 Dominique Vuillaume – Institute for Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France; orcid.org/0000-0002-3362-1669; E-mail : dominique.vuillaume@iemn.fr Authors Ali Yassin – MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, SFR MATRIX, F-49000 Angers, France; and Natural Sciences Department, School of Arts and Sciences, Lebanese American University, Lebanon; orcid.org/ 0000-0002-3047-9863 Imane Arbouch – Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, University of Mons, Belgium; orcid.org/ 0000-0002-4593-0098 David Guérin – Institute for Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France; orcid.org/ Colin van Dyck – Theoretical Chemical Physics group, University of Mons, Mons, Belgium: orcid.org/ 0000-0003-2853-3821 Lionel Sanguinet – MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, SFR MATRIX, F- 49000 Angers, France; orcid.org/0000-0002-4334-9937 Stéphane Lenfant – Institute for Electronics Microelectronics and Nanotechnology (IEMN), CNRS, University of Lille, Av. Poincaré, Villeneuve d'Ascq, France; Jérôme Cornil – Laboratory for Chemistry of Novel Materials, University of Mons, Belgium; orcid.org/0000-0002-5479-4227 Philippe Blanchard – MOLTECH-Anjou, CNRS, University of Angers, SFR MATRIX, F- 49000 Angers, France; orcid.org/0000-0002-9408-8108 Author Contributions I.H. and D.G. fabricated and characterized the SAMs. A.Y. synthesized the molecules. A.Y., L.S. and P.B. discussed synthetic procedures and performed physico-chemical and spectroscopic analysis. I.H. did all the C-AFM measurements. I.A., C.v.D. and J.C. conducted the theoretical simulations. I.H. and D.V. analyzed 19 the I-V datasets. D.V. conceived the project, S.L. and D.V. supervised it. The manuscript was written by D.V. with the contributions and comments of all the authors. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript. Note The authors declare no competing financial interest. Acknowledgements. We acknowledge support from the ANR (projet #ANR-20-CE30-0002). We thank X. Wallart (IEMN) for the XPS and UPS measurements, J.F. Lampin (IEMN) for the loan of the THz lasers and help for their use. The work in Mons has been funded by the Fund for Scientific Research (FRS) of FNRS within the Consortium des Equipements de Calcul Intensif (CECI) under grant 2.5020.11, and by the Walloon Region (ZENOBE Tier-1 supercomputer) under grant 1117545. J.C. is an FNRS research director.