1 Pulsed-mode metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy of GaN on graphene-coated c-sapphire for freestanding GaN thin films Seokje Lee1, Muhammad S. Abbas2, Dongha Yoo1, Keundong Lee3, Tobiloba G. Fabunmi1, Eunsu Lee1, Imhwan Kim1, Daniel Jang4, Sangmin Lee5, Jusang Lee5, Ki-Tae Park6, Changgu Lee4,7, Miyoung Kim5, Yun Seog Lee6, Celesta S. Chang1, Gyu-Chul Yi1* AUTHOR ADDRESS 1Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea 2Department of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University College of Natural Science, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 3Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States 4SKKU Advanced Institute of Nano Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 2 5Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea 6Department of Mechanical Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea 7School of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University College of Engineering, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea *Corresponding author: gcyi@snu.ac.kr ABSTRACT We report the growth of high-quality GaN epitaxial thin films on graphene-coated c-sapphire substrates using pulsed-mode metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy, together with the fabrication of freestanding GaN films by simple mechanical exfoliation for transferable light-emitting diodes (LEDs). High-quality GaN films grown on the graphene-coated sapphire substrates were easily lifted off using thermal release tape and transferred onto foreign substrates. Furthermore, we revealed that the pulsed operation of ammonia flow during GaN growth was a critical factor for the fabrication of high-quality freestanding GaN films. These films, exhibiting excellent single crystallinity, were utilized to fabricate transferable GaN LEDs by heteroepitaxially growing InxGa1-xN/GaN multiple quantum wells and a p-GaN layer on the GaN films, showing their potential application in advanced optoelectronic devices. KEYWORDS remote epitaxy; metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy; GaN; graphene; freestanding thin films 3 Manufacturing high-quality inorganic thin films on large-area flexible substrates is a key technology required for flexible devices such as wearable sensors,1 flexible displays,2,3 and electronic devices.4 One promising approach for the fabrication of flexible devices using inorganic thin films is to grow epitaxial thin films on two-dimensional (2-D) layered materials such as graphene and h-BN since the 2-D materials offer weak bonding with as-grown films for easy exfoliation of epilayers from 2-D materials.2,5-8 In particular, an epitaxial method called remote epitaxy enables us to grow single-crystalline thin films on graphene-coated polar substrates where the partially screened electrostatic potential of the substrate allows the epitaxial relationship between the substrate and the epilayer.9,10 Recent studies have demonstrated successful remote epitaxy of single-crystalline thin films for various III-V,9,11 III-N,12-14 and complex-oxide materials, showing its potential for providing flexible and high-quality materials platforms for future device applications.15-18 While the remote epitaxy of single-crystalline GaN thin films has also been studied, its growth has mainly been limited to molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).12,19 However, considering the ultra-high vacuum required for MBE, limited sizes of GaN films, and low throughput, more improvements are expected to reach the commercialization of remote epitaxially grown GaN films. Meanwhile, metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) is an epitaxial method commercially used in industrial settings with its ability for wafer-scale manufacturing, promising for mass production of high-quality GaN devices. Although remote epitaxy of other III–V materials such as GaAs, InP, and GaP using MOVPE has already been reported,9,11 no reports were made for GaN thin films that show complete exfoliation from graphene-coated substrates, which is one of the prerequisites to acknowledge as successful remote epitaxy. This is due to H2 and NH3 ambient 4 gases that degrade graphene at high growth temperatures of GaN MOVPE, which inevitably leads to failure in GaN exfoliation from the graphene-coated substrate.20-22 To circumvent this problem, a more robust graphene-like buffer layer (GBL) obtained through the graphitization of SiC instead of graphene has been used for the remote epitaxy of GaN thin films in MOVPE.23 Alternatively, remote epitaxial growth and exfoliation of GaN micro-rods, which require a relatively low gas flow rate and growth temperature compared to those of GaN thin films, have also been reported.24 However, these approaches do not directly solve the inherent problem, while the range of substrate and application field still remains limited. To enable mass production of high-quality GaN-based devices, developing a simple and universal recipe for remote epitaxy of GaN using MOVPE would be crucial. Here, we report a strategy for MOVPE growth of transferable single-crystalline GaN thin films on graphene-coated sapphire substrates by using the pulsed operation of NH3 flow to prevent the deterioration of graphene substrates during GaN growth. The NH3 pulsed-flow MOVPE technique, where the NH3 injection to the reactor is periodically interrupted, was used to enhance the lateral growth of the GaN buffer layer by a controlled V/III ratio.25-27 The continuous buffer layer created by lateral overgrowth was shown to protect graphene from damage under high- temperature GaN growth, which we confirmed by various characterization methods and successful exfoliation of high-quality GaN thin films without even using a metallic stressor layer. The quality of the GaN film was demonstrated by fabricating light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and transferring them onto a copper foil, showing the potential application of remote-epitaxial GaN films grown by MOVPE. 5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The basic strategy for epitaxial growth of transferable single-crystalline GaN thin films on graphene-coated c-sapphire substrates is shown in Figure 1. As a template for GaN growth, graphene was directly grown on a c-sapphire substrate by chemical vapor deposition to eliminate the graphene transfer process that inevitably introduces unwanted defects and residues.28,29 The graphene-coated sapphire substrates were treated using oxygen plasma in order to enhance the nucleation of GaN on the surface of graphene (Figure 1a),2,30 which we confirmed with Raman spectroscopy and an exfoliation test (Figure S1). To obtain high-quality GaN thin films with a uniform and smooth surface, we developed a three-step growth method that increases the nucleation sites while preventing the deterioration of graphene. In the first growth step, a 150-nm thick low-temperature GaN (LT-GaN) buffer layer was grown at 600 °C for 10 min (Figure 1b). For the second growth step, we used a pulsed epitaxial lateral overgrowth (PLOG) method at a higher temperature of 1050 °C for 10 min, where the NH3 flow was periodically interrupted while trimethylgallium (TMGa) was continuously injected into the reactor (Figure 1c). Under Ga-rich conditions enabled by the pulsed NH3 injection, Ga adatoms tend to laterally diffuse towards {101̅1} and {101̅0} facets.27,31 This promoted the lateral growth of the GaN buffer, resulting in the formation of a continuous film over graphene.32 Additionally, employing the NH3 pulsed-flow growth could mitigate damage to the graphene by effectively reducing the NH3 partial pressure since we observed that annealing under a high-temperature NH3 environment severely etched the O2 plasma-treated graphene (Figure S2). The continuous PLOG layers protected the graphene from damage at the next stage. Additional layers were grown on top of the PLOG layers at a higher temperature (1150 °C) for 30 min under a continuous flow of NH3 to obtain high-quality GaN thin films (Figure 1d). 6 A series of GaN growth experiments were conducted with different NH3 flow modes at the second growth step to investigate the influence on the surface morphology and exfoliation of GaN films grown on graphene-coated sapphire substrates. In the second growth step at 1050 °C, various NH3 flow modes were individually tested for the same growth time of 10 min, including flow modes. Throughout these experiments, the first growth step at 600 °C and the third growth step at 1150 °C maintained a continuous NH3 flow. When NH3 was continuously supplied during the second growth step, GaN islands were not merged, resulting in discontinuous surface morphology, as shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image (Figure 2a). In contrast, a 3s-on/1s-off pulsed flow of NH3 during the second growth step led to merged GaN surfaces with 200-400 nm diameter pinholes (Figure 2b). A 2s-on/2s-off pulsed flow of NH3 produced a fully merged and continuous GaN film (Figure 2c). This enhanced lateral growth under the NH3 pulsed- flow mode was attributed to Ga adatom lateral diffusion to {101̅1} and {101̅0} facets in Ga-rich conditions during NH3 interruption time. However, when the NH3 injection time was significantly shorter than the interruption time, as in the 1s-on/3s-off mode, excess Ga adatoms accumulated, resulting in a rough surface morphology (Figure 2d). After the third growth step at 1150 °C with continuous NH3 flow, all samples became smoother and more continuous than those seen after the second growth step (Figure 2e-h). Nonetheless, pinholes remained visible on the film surfaces of samples with incomplete GaN merging after the second growth step, such as those grown using NH3 continuous-flow and 3s-on/1s-off pulsed-flow modes (Figure 2e,f). Meanwhile, the samples grown with 2s-on/2s-off and 1s-on/3s-off NH3 pulsed-flow modes in the second growth step exhibited featureless and flat surfaces after the third growth step (Figure 2g,h). 7 We also attempted to exfoliate GaN films from the graphene-coated sapphire substrates using thermal release tape. Notably, films grown with NH3 continuous-flow and 3s-on/1s-off pulsed-flow modes were not exfoliated (Figure 2i,j). In contrast, over 90% of the films grown with 2s-on/2s-off and 1s-on/3s-off NH3 pulsed-flow modes were successfully exfoliated using only the thermal release tape (Figure 2k,l). To confirm whether the film simply needs higher stress for exfoliation, a metallic stressor layer was deposited before applying thermal release tape. However, GaN grown on graphene-coated sapphire under NH3 continuous-flow mode in the second growth step were still unable to be exfoliated, while the GaN grown by 2s-on/2s-off pulsed-flow mode showed 99% exfoliation of the film (Figure S3). Additionally, Raman spectroscopy confirmed the presence of graphene on the surface of the original substrate after GaN exfoliation (Figure S4). We speculate that the NH3 pulsed-flow growth not only enhanced the lateral growth of the buffer layer but also mitigated NH3-induced damage to graphene by effectively reducing the NH3 partial pressure in the reactor during the second growth step. As a result, the continuous buffer layer grown in the second growth step with the pulsed-flow NH3 led to smooth and continuous GaN films that could be exfoliated after the final growth step. The GaN/graphene/sapphire interfaces of two individual GaN samples, one grown with NH3 continuous-flow mode and the other with the 2s-on/2s-off pulsed-flow mode, were investigated using cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM). As shown in a representative high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM image of the GaN sample grown under the NH3 continuous-flow mode (Figure 3a), discontinuous graphene between GaN and sapphire was observed. GaN appeared to have grown directly on sapphire through a locally damaged graphene area which is likely to be the main reason why the sample could not be exfoliated. Moreover, especially in the region where graphene is damaged, the atomic arrangement 8 of GaN is not precisely aligned with the c-axis (0001) but tilted with respect to the c-axis (Figure 3b). This tilting of GaN could be caused by lateral growth of GaN along irregular surfaces of damaged graphene, where pits or steps can be created under the continuous flow of NH3 at the second growth step.33 In contrast, a clear separation of GaN and sapphire by a 6 Å graphene gap is shown in a representative HAADF-STEM image of the GaN sample grown under the 2s-on/2s- off pulsed flow of NH3 at the second growth step (Figure 3c), which means that the layered structure of graphene was well preserved during the lateral growth of GaN under the pulsed flow of NH3. In addition, GaN shows a well-aligned growth direction parallel to the c-axis (Figure 3d). The only difference between these two GaN samples was whether the NH3 was supplied in the continuous or pulsed flow mode at the second growth step among the three growth steps. Hence, these distinctly different GaN/graphene/sapphire interfaces of the two samples support that the NH3 pulsed-flow growth at the second growth step has significantly reduced graphene damage leading to improved crystalline quality of GaN. We also investigated the heteroepitaxial relationship of GaN thin films grown on graphene- coated c-sapphire using the three-step growth method with 2s-on/2s-off NH3 pulsed-flow mode during the second growth step. A selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern was taken from the GaN/graphene/sapphire interface, as shown in the low-magnification cross-sectional STEM image of Figure 4a. SAED pattern reveals heteroepitaxial relationship of GaN (0002) // same epitaxial relationship was confirmed in the SAED pattern of GaN on bare c-sapphire grown in the same batch with GaN on graphene-coated c-sapphire (Figure S5). This indicates that GaN thin films were grown, maintaining a heteroepitaxial relationship with the c-sapphire substrate despite the presence of graphene between GaN and c-sapphire. Two possible mechanisms can 9 explain this heteroepitaxial relationship across 2-D materials. One is remote epitaxy, and the other is pinhole-seeded epitaxy where GaN nucleates directly from the bottom substrate through pinholes on 2-D materials and laterally overgrows to form a continuous film.34 By investigating the entire 4.4-μm long cross-sectional region of the GaN films, we could not find any region where GaN was directly connected to sapphire through the graphene layers. This result suggests that the heteroepitaxial growth does not result from pinhole-seeded epitaxy (Figure S6). The crystallinity and growth orientation of GaN thin films grown on graphene-coated c- sapphire were further investigated by electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). As shown in Figure 4c, the uniform red color in the normal Z-direction inverse pole figure (IPF) map shows that the GaN thin films were well-aligned along the c-axis. Furthermore, IPF maps in the X and Y directions exhibit uniform green and blue colors, respectively, which indicate that the GaN films were epitaxially grown in a single in-plane domain. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements also revealed the single crystallinity of GaN films grown on graphene/c-sapphire. XRD theta-2theta spectrum shows strong intensity peaks of GaN(0002) and GaN(0004) at 34.60° and 72.93°, respectively, indicating GaN film with a wurtzite structure grown along the (0001) direction (Figure 4d). The GaN (0002) rocking curve, with a full-width half maximum (FWHM) value of 0.19°, indicates that GaN thin films were well aligned along the c-axis (Figure 4e). In addition, the azimuthal scan demonstrates in-plane six-fold rotational symmetry for the GaN films (Figure 4f). To demonstrate the optoelectronic application of our transferable single-crystalline GaN thin films, we fabricated GaN thin-film LEDs before exfoliation and then transferred them onto Cu foils. The schematic diagram illustrating the LED fabrication process is shown in Figure 5a. Initially, Si-doped n-GaN, ten-period InxGa1−xN/GaN MQWs, and Mg-doped p-GaN layers were deposited on the PLOG-GaN grown on a graphene-coated sapphire substrate. Doped and multi- 10 quantum-well (MQW) layers were grown under an NH3 continuous-flow condition to minimize defect formation. For the electroluminescent (EL) device fabrication, a 20 nm/20 nm Ni/Au bilayer was deposited on the p-GaN surface. Next, thin-film LEDs were exfoliated from the graphene- coated sapphire substrate using a thermal release tape. A 20 nm/20 nm In/Au bilayer was deposited on the exposed n-GaN surface after exfoliation. Finally, thin-film LEDs were transferred onto Cu foil using a conductive tape with the n-GaN surface facing the foil. At an applied bias voltage of 6 V, the thin-film LEDs on Cu foil exhibited strong blue light emission that could be seen under normal room illumination (Figure 5b). LED characteristics were investigated by measuring the current-voltage characteristic (I-V) curve and EL spectra. The I-V characteristic curve of LEDs shows a typical rectifying behavior of GaN p-n junction diodes (Figure 5c). EL spectra were obtained at various applied bias voltages ranging from 3.5 V to 6 V (Figure 5d). At an applied bias voltage of 3.5 V, the dominant EL peak was observed at 486 nm, which shifted to 468 nm as the applied bias voltage increased to 6 V. The change in the EL peak position could be presumably due to the band-filling effect of the localized energy states, commonly observed in LEDs with GaN/InxGa1-xN MQWs.35 CONCLUSION In summary, we introduce a new strategy to enable high-quality GaN remote epitaxy with MOVPE, by simply controlling the NH3 flow at a certain GaN growth stage. Under the pulsed flow of NH3 with a controlled V/III ratio, we observed that the lateral growth of the GaN buffer layer on graphene was greatly enhanced, which later served as a protection layer for graphene preventing its damage under high-temperature GaN growth. Consequently, we obtained high- quality GaN thin films grown by remote epitaxy on graphene-coated c-sapphire substrates and 11 demonstrated successful exfoliation of these films using only thermal release tape. The crystallinity and quality of the GaN film were confirmed by cross-sectional TEM, EBSD, and XRD characterization, followed by a demonstration of LEDs fabricated using the GaN film grown by our method. This study presents a straightforward approach to reducing the 2-D material damage caused by gas flow in the harsh GaN MOVPE environment, opening up new possibilities for mass production of high-quality GaN devices and other III–N or III–V material growth on graphene. Therefore, we expect our study will pave the way for various applications and highly efficient GaN device production in bioelectronics and flexible displays. METHODS Direct growth of graphene on sapphire substrates. Graphene was grown on c-sapphire using a catalyst-free chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. 2-inch c-sapphire substrates were put in a CVD furnace, purged with Ar for 10 minutes, and heated to 1160 °C. A mixture of Ar, H2, and CH4 gases was introduced into the furnace to synthesize graphene on c-sapphire substrates at 20 torr for 1 hour. The furnace was then rapidly cooled with Ar flow. MOVPE growth of GaN thin films on graphene-coated sapphire substrates. Graphene-coated c-sapphire substrates underwent a 3-sec O2 plasma treatment before entering a GaN MOVPE chamber. Using a horizontal MOVPE system, GaN thin films were grown with TMGa and NH3 as precursors. The chamber had a consistent 100 torr pressure. The substrate was cleaned and annealed in an H2 and NH3 mix at 800 °C for 10 min. A 150-nm LT-GaN buffer layer was applied at 600 °C. PLOG merged the LT-GaN layer with pulsed NH3 flow in 150 cycles. During PLOG, a 200 sccm NH3 flow was periodically injected (on) into the reactor for 2 sec and interrupted (off) for 2 sec in one cycle, while TMGa carried by 4 sccm H2 was continuously 12 introduced into the reactor. Finally, HT-GaN was grown at 1150 °C for 30 min, resulting in ~2.5 μm thick GaN films. GaN thin-film LED fabrication. To make transferable GaN LEDs, a 1.5 μm Si-doped n- GaN was regrown on a 1 μm PLOG GaN layer on graphene-coated sapphire substrate. Ten periods of InxGa1−xN/GaN MQWs followed, with 5 nm GaN barriers and 3 nm InxGa1−xN wells. A 100 nm Mg-doped p-GaN layer completed the LED structure. As-grown GaN LEDs underwent thermal activation at 750 °C for 10 minutes. A Ni/Au (20 nm/20 nm) bilayer was deposited to the p-GaN and annealed at 500 °C for 5 min. The entire LED structure was released by a thermal release tape from the graphene substrate, and a 20 nm/20 nm In/Au bilayer was deposited on the n-GaN. Finally, the LED structure was transferred onto a conducting carbon tape/Cu foil, with the n-GaN surface facing the foil. Characterization. The surface morphology of GaN films was studied using a Zeiss field- emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) (Merlin Compact). Their crystal structure was analyzed using a PANalytical X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. Crystal orientation was checked with an EBSD detector (Oxford Instruments) on a JSM-7600F FE-SEM. Cross-sections of GaN films were made using a Helios G4 focused ion beam (FIB) system with Ga+ ions. GaN/graphene/sapphire interfaces were imaged at atomic resolution with a Themis Z STEM system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For LED testing, a Keithley 2400 source meter measured current-voltage curves and applied DC voltages. EL spectra were recorded with an Andor Technology CCD (DU401A) linked to a Dongwoo Optron monochromator (DM150i). 13 coated c-sapphire substrate using the NH3 pulsed-flow growth technique. The process includes (a) O2 plasma treatment to increase nucleation sites on graphene, (b) low-temperature GaN (LT-GaN) buffer layer growth, (c) pulsed epitaxial lateral overgrowth (PLOG) under a pulsed flow of NH3 to form a continuous buffer layer over the graphene, and (d) high-temperature GaN (HT-GaN) growth under a continuous flow of NH3 to obtain high-quality GaN thin films. 14 substrates using various NH3 flow modes in the second growth step at 1050 °C. (a-d) SEM images of GaN samples after the second growth step with different NH3 flow modes: (a) continuous-flow, samples. (e-h) SEM images of GaN samples after the third growth step at 1150 °C: (e) continuous- mode samples. (i-l) Photographs showing the specimen and the exfoliation results for GaN samples using thermal release tape: (i), (j) shows no exfoliation, whereas (k) and (l) shows clear substrate and the exfoliated films on the thermal release tape side by side. 15 substrate grown using continuous-flow NH3 in the second growth step and (b) a magnified image of the dashed box. (c) Cross-sectional STEM image of GaN thin films on graphene-coated c- sapphire substrate grown using a 2s-on/2s-off pulsed-flow NH3 in the second growth step and (d) a magnified image of the dashed box. 16 using a three-step growth method with the pulsed-flow NH3 in the second growth step. (a) A low- magnification STEM image and (b) selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern at the interface between GaN and sapphire. (c) Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) inverse pole curve, and (f) XRD azimuthal scan of the as-grown GaN thin films on graphene-coated c-sapphire. 17 Photograph capturing light emission from GaN thin-film LEDs. (c) I-V characteristic curve of transferred LEDs with positive bias applied to Ni/Au and negative bias applied to the copper foil. (d) Room-temperature electroluminescence (EL) spectra at various applied bias voltage levels. 18 ASSOCIATED CONTENT Supporting Information The supporting information is available free of charge. Effect of O2 plasma treatment on graphene and subsequent GaN buffer layer growth, annealing test on graphene/c-sapphire, metallic stressor layer-assisted exfoliation test, step-by-step exfoliation and Raman measurement, remote heteroepitaxy of GaN grown on a graphene-coated c-sapphire substrate, and additional cross-sectional STEM images of GaN grown by the NH3 pulsed-flow method (PDF) AUTHOR INFORMATION Corresponding Author Gyu-Chul Yi − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea; Email: gcyi@snu.ac.kr Authors Seokje Lee − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Muhammad S. Abbas – Department of Physics, Sungkyunkwan University College of Natural Science, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea Dongha Yoo − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea 19 Keundong Lee − Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States Tobiloba G. Fabunmi − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Eunsu Lee − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Imhwan Kim − Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Daniel Jang − SKKU Advanced Institute of Nano Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea Sangmin Lee − Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Jusang Lee − Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Ki-Tae Park − Department of Mechanical Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Changgu Lee – SKKU Advanced Institute of Nano Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea; School of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University College of Engineering, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 20 Miyoung Kim – Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Yun Seog Lee − Department of Mechanical Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Celesta S. Chang – Department of Physics and Astronomy, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Republic of Korea Notes The authors declare no competing financial interest. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We acknowledge the support provided by the Science Research Center (SRC) for Novel Epitaxial Quantum Architectures and the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea (NRF- 2021R1A5A1032996). This research was also supported by grants NRF-2020R1A2C2014687, NRF-2022R1A2C3007807, and NRF-2020R1C1C1005880 from the NRF of Korea. Additionally, we appreciate the Brain Korea 21-Plus Program, the Institute of Applied Physics (IAP), Research Institute of Advanced Materials (RIAM), Institute of Advanced Machines and Design (IAMD), and the Creative-Pioneering Researchers Program through the Institute of Engineering Research at Seoul National University. 21