arXiv:2310.08736v1 [cond-mat.other] 12 Oct 2023 Comment on pressure driven flow of superfluid 4He through a nanopipe (Botimer and Taborek 2016) Phil Attard phil.attard1@gmail.com Botimer and Taborek (2016) measured the mass flux of superfluid 4He through a capillary into an evacuated chamber for various temperatures and pressures of the reservoir chamber. They found a sharp transition from low flux at low pressures to high flux at large pressures. Here it is shown that the superfluid condition of chemical potential equality predicts the induced temperature and also the transition pressure, which is attributed to the transition from a semispherical cap to a pool of 4He at the exit of the capillary. The results show that the two-fluid equations of superfluid flow, Landau’s phonon-roton theory, and Feynman’s critical vortex theory are unnecessary for a quantitative account of the measured transition pressure. Botimer and Taborek (2016) measured the mass flow rates of superfluid 4He through a capillary into an evacu- ated chamber as a function of temperature and pressure of the reservoir. Figure 1 is a sketch of the experimen- tal arrangement, showing the liquid 4He pooling at the exit of the capillary, which model Botimer and Taborek (2016) invoke for their analysis. These authors find su- perfluid flow below the λ-transition temperature, with a relatively sharp transition from low to high flow rates with increasing reservoir pressure. They call this the crit- ical pressure whereas here it is called the transition pres- sure. With decreasing reservoir temperature, the transi- tion pressure decreases and the relatively flat flow rates in each of the two regimes increase. The basis of their analysis is that the flow velocity is proportional to the square root of the chemical poten- tial difference (divided by mass) between the reservoir and the evacuated chamber (Botimer and Taborek 2016, equation (6)). This contradicts analysis of fountain pres- sure measurements that show that superfluid flow equal- izes chemical potential (Attard 2022). Equation (6) fol- lows equation (5), which equates the acceleration of the flow to the gradient of the kinetic energy plus the chemi- cal potential. But the correct conservation of momentum hydrodynamic equation with the viscosity set to zero has instead the gradient of the pressure (Attard 2012 equa- tion (5.26)). The difference between the two involves the entropy times the gradient of the temperature, and so Botimer and Taborek (2016) effectively assert that the entropy of the liquid in the capillary vanishes. This is a highly contentious proposition for two reasons: first the liquid in the capillary contains a large fraction of uncon- densed 4He, and second the entropy of condensed bosons does not vanish (Attard 2022, 2023a). The application of equations (5) and (6) is also dubious in that the chemical potential μ2 refers to the liquid 4He in the pool, which is stationary. In any case, the classical equations of mo- tion upon which equation (5) is based do not hold in the quantum condensed regime (Attard 2023b, 2023d). Botimer and Taborek (2016) calculate the temperature of the evacuated chamber based on certain equations for the evaporation rate, and find T2 =0.7–0.8 K, this being relatively insensitive to T1 and independent of p1. This is p1 T1 p2 T2 JN superfluid flowing through the nanopore and evaporating in the evacuated chamber 2. The puddle invoked by Botimer and Taborek (2016) (left) is compared to the semispherical cap envisaged here at low pressure drops (magnified, right). used to calculate the chemical potential, μ2 = μsat(T2). The reservoir pressure at which μ1 = μ(T1, p1) first ex- ceeds μ2 is taken by them to be the transition pressure, p1 = ptr. Botimer and Taborek (2016) acknowledge that their calculations predict zero flow rates below the tran- sition pressure, and monotonically increasing flow rates above the transition pressure, both of which are contrary to the observed behavior. As mentioned above, the condition for superfluid flow is that the chemical potentials are equal (Attard 2022, 2023a). At large pressure drops the pool model advo- cated by Botimer and Taborek (2016) is reasonable and μ2 = μsat(T2). Hence the superfluid condition is μsat(T2) = μ(T1, p1) = μsat(T1) + ρ−1 1 [p1 − psat(T1)]. (1) This determines T2, the temperature of the evacuated chamber (figure 2). It can be seen that as the reservoir temperature decreases, the evacuated chamber temper- ature increasingly falls below the reservoir temperature. The effect is larger for larger pressure drops. At small pressure drops, the flow rate is too small to form the puddle assumed by Botimer and Taborek Instead it likely forms a semispherical cap to the capillary tube (figure 1, right). The curvature ra- dius of the cap is Rlv, with Rtube ≤ Rlv < ∞. There is a Young-Laplace pressure drop across the interface, p2,liq − psat(T2) = 2γlv/Rlv, where γlv is the liquid-vapor 2 1.5 2 T2 (K) 0.5 1 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 T1 (K) p1=1 kPa p1=2 kPa the reservoir temperature T1 for reservoir pressure p1 = 1 kPa (solid curve) and p1 = 2 kPa (dashed curve), as given by equa- tion (1). The dotted line is T2 = T1. The thermodynamic data is taken from Donnelly and Barenghi (1998), with the chemical potential corrected as detailed by Attard (2022). surface tension. The evaporation across this interface is arguably proportional to the surface area of the cap, which is πR2 tube for p1 → psat(T1), and 2πR2 tube for p1 → ptr. Obviously the area of the semispherical cap is substantially less than the area of the pool that forms at high pressure drops, which explains the transition from low to high flow rates. Invoking the superfluid condition μ2 = μ1 one obtains in the semispherical cap regime μsat(T2) + 2γlv,2 ρ2Rlv = μsat(T1) + ρ−1 1 [p1 − psat(T1)]. (2) For given T2, T1, and p1 this gives Rlv, which decreases with increasing reservoir pressure. The condition Rlv = Rtube defines the transition pressure. The transition pressure predicted by this agrees semi- quantitatively with the measured values (figure 3). The results suggest that the temperature of the second cham- ber is lower than that of the reservoir, but perhaps not quite so low as estimated by Botimer and Taborek (2016). The present calculations explain the sharp transition from low to high flow rates with increasing pressure as being due to the transition from a semispherical cap at low pressure drops to, as suggested by Botimer and Ta- borek (2016), a flat pool of large surface area at high pressure drops. The present calculations do not invoke the superfluid velocity, or attempt to predict the mass flow rates, which Botimer and Taborek (2016) do do. In any case, the fact that the transition in flow rates can be accounted for by a simple morphological change says that dynamic considerations such as the superfluid critical velocity, the Feynman estimate of the critical vor- tex size, or the Landau theory of rotons, are superfluous.