arXiv:2310.08766v1 [physics.chem-ph] 12 Oct 2023 Quantum hydrodynamics of coupled electron-nuclear systems Rocco Martinazzo1,2,∗, Irene Burghardt3 1Department of Chemistry, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy∗ 2Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari, CNR, via Golgi 19, 20133 Milano, Italy and 3Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, Goethe University Frankfurt, Max-von-Laue-Str. 7, D-60438 Frankfurt/Main, Germany The quantum dynamics of electron-nuclear systems is analyzed from the perspective of the exact factorization of the wavefunction, with the aim of defining gauge invariant equations of motion for both the nuclei and the electrons. For pure states this is accomplished with a quantum hydrodynam- ical description of the nuclear dynamics and electronic density operators tied to the fluid elements. For statistical mixtures of states the exact factorization approach is extended to two limiting situa- tions that we call “type-n” and “type-e” mixtures, depending on whether the nuclei or the electrons are, respectively, in an intrinsically mixed state. In both cases a fully gauge invariant formulation of the dynamics is obtained again in hydrodynamic form with the help of mechanical momentum moments (MMMs). Nuclear MMMs extend in a gauge invariant way the ordinary momentum mo- ments of the Wigner distribution associated with a density matrix of positional variables, electron MMMs are operator-valued and represent a generalization of the (conditional) density operators used for pure states. The theory presented here bridges exact quantum dynamics with several mixed quantum-classical approaches currently in use to tackle non-adiabatic molecular problems, offering a foundation for systematic improvements. It further connects to non-adiabatic theories in condensed-phase systems. As an example, we re-derive the finite-temperature theory of electronic friction of Dou, Miao & Subotnik (Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 046001 (2017)) from the dynamics of “type-e” mixtures and discuss possible improvements. CONTENTS I. Introduction 1 II. QHD with gauge fields 3 A. Momentum and velocity fields 4 B. QHD for a particle in 3D space with gauge fields 5 C. Many-particle QHD with gauge fields 7 D. Statistical mixtures 8 III. Quantum Hydrodynamics of exactly factorized electrons-nuclei 10 A. Pure states 10 B. Type-n statistical mixtures 13 C. Type-e statistical mixtures 14 D. Remark on mechanical momentum moments 17 IV. Applications 17 A. Mixed quantum-classical dynamics 17 B. Electronic friction at finite temperature 21 V. Summary and Conclusions 24 A. Circulation theorem 25 B. Wigner function and momentum moments 26 C. Gauge invariant formulation of the pure-state electron dynamics 30 ∗ rocco.martinazzo@unimi.it D. Electronic moments 32 E. Lie-Trotter identity 34 F. Pseudo-magnetic contribution to the finite-temperature friction kernel 35 G. Independent electrons 36