Introduction to SQUID Sensors for Electronics Engineers Yongliang Wang a,b* a Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology (SIMIT), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200050, China b CAS, Center for Excellence in Superconducting Electronics (CENSE), Shanghai 200050, China *Corresponding author. Tel.: +86 02162511070; Fax: +86 02162127493. E-mail address: wangyl@mail.sim.ac.cn ORCID: Yong-Liang Wang (0000-0001-7263-9493) Abstract Flux transformers and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) are two key superconducting devices used in the cutting-edge magnetic-field sensor systems, such as magnetocardiography (MCG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG). They are superconductor integrated circuits enabled by two superconductor elements, superconductor wire and Josephson junction, based on Meissner’s effect and Josephson effect. The principles of SQUID sensors are unfamiliar for electronics engineers who are trained with semiconductor electronics, due to the superconductor physics. We present an introduction to SQUID sensors, ranged from superconductor elements to the superconductor-semiconductor hybrid system. It is demonstrated that, SQUIDs inside are the resistor-inductor-capacitor (RLC) network driven by Josephson currents, and share the common network equation with normal RLC circuits; SQUID outside are magnetic-field-effect transistors (MFETs), and are dual to the semiconductor FETs in signal conversions; SQUID magnetic-field sensors are linear current amplifiers, as semiconductor FET electric-field sensors are linear voltage amplifier. Keywords: SQUID, FF-OPA, FLL, TIA, Magnetometer, MCG, MEG. Elements and Devices Levels of abstraction Overview of SQUID electronics Duality between MOSFET and SQUID electronics Abbreviations SQUID: Superconducting Quantum Interference Device SFQ: Single-Flux Quantum SQIF: Superconducting Quantum Interference Filter MCG: Magnetocardiogram MEG: Magnetoencephalogram FTMG: Full Tensor Magnetic Gradiometer JJ: Josephson Junction RLC: Resistor-Inductor-Capacitor RCSJ: Resistively-Capacitively-Shunted Junction FQL: Fluxoid Quantization Law KCL: Kirchhoff’s Current Law KVL: Kirchhoff’s Voltage Law VCO: Voltage-Controlled Oscillator MFG: Magnetic-Flux Generator MFF: Magnetic-Flux Flow MFET: Magnetic Field Effect Transistor CI-MFET: Current-Input MFET MOSFET: Metal-Oxide Semiconductor Field-Effect Transistor AFE: Analog-Front-End GBP: Gain-Bandwidth-Product FLL: Flux-Locked Loop OPA: Operational Amplifier VF-OPA: Voltage Feedback Operational Amplifier CF-OPA: Current Feedback Operational Amplifier FF-OPA: Flux Feedback Operational Amplifier INA : Instrumentation Amplifier TIA : Trans-impedance Amplifier CBVA : Current-Bias-Voltage-Amplifier VBCA: Voltage-Bias-Current-Amplifier Variables ψ: macroscopic waver function; φ: macroscopic quantum phase; A: vector potential of magnetic field; Φ0: flux quantum; θ: phase difference; u: voltage difference; I0: critical current; Vs: average voltage of dc-SQUID ωrf: resonance frequency; iJ: Josephson current; icir: SQUID loop current; σi: factor of incidence matrix; Φm: total flux in loop; Φa: applied flux; in: noise current Lm: loop inductance; Lp: inductance of pick-up coil; Li: inductance of input coil; nT: number of flux quanta trapped in flux-transformer; Φp: flux picked by pick-up coil; Ib: external current source; ib: bias current; i1: current through J1; i2: current through J2; Gcmm: equivalent conductance of two Josephson currents; Vs0/Φ0: resonance frequency Z11, Z22, Z12, Z21: network impedances; A(ω): open-loop gain; G(ω): gain of amplifier Wj: j-th working point; Vw: voltage at working point; nw: number of periods; Φw: flux at working point; Φf: feedback flux Vn: voltage noise; Φn: flux noise; Vf: voltage of FLL; Rf: feedback resistance; Mf: mutual inductance of feedback coil; ∂Vs/∂Φa: flux-to-voltage transfer-coefficient; Rftr: trans-impedance of dc-SQUID; Vf_FS: full-scale range of Vf; Φe_FS: full-scale range of Φe; Rwire: wire resistance; SRmax(f): maximum slew rate; GBP(f): GBP of amplifier; Vm: voltage of preamplifier Rd: dynamic resistance of dc-SQUID; Rn: noise-impedance of preamplifier; MI: mutual inductance for current feedback; MV: mutual inductance for voltage feedback; RI: impedance of current feedback; RV: impedance of voltage feedback; Φth: threshold value of flux input; Φin: flux input; jx: equivalent current that generates target magnetic fields; iS: average value of icir; 1. Introduction After the discoveries of Meissner effect and Josephson effect , various superconducting devices and circuits are developed for both analog and digital applications ; for example, flux transformers and superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUIDs) are devices for designing magnetic-field sensors , ; single-flux-quantum (SFQ) logics are applied for power-efficient computing , and superconducting qubits are developed for quantum computing . Superconductive elements and devices for the design of magnetic field sensors are illustrated in Fig. 1. Those devices are networks composed of resistor-inductor- capacitor (RLC) elements and two superconductor elements: superconductor wire and Josephson junction, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and (b). For instance, a flux-transformer is a closed superconducting loop of superconductor wires, as shown in Fig. 1(c); a superconducting loop inserted with one Josephson junction forms the radio-frequency (rf) SQUID, and it inserted with two Josephson junctions is called the direct-current SQUID, as shown in Fig. 1(d) and (e) respectively. Fig. 1. Superconductor elements and devices: (a) superconductor wire; (b) resistively-shunted Flux transformers are flux-to-current convertors, and SQUIDs are the most sensitive flux-to-voltage convertors; they are combined to develop many advanced magnetic field measurement systems successfully applied for biomagnetism , and geophysical applications , such as magnetocardiogram (MCG), magnetoencephalogram (MEG), and full-tensor magnetic gradiometers (FTMG). In those SQUID sensors, the flux-transformer and the dc-SQUID are the flux-input front ends for flux-to-voltage conversions, while the rest of circuits is still implemented by room-temperature semiconductor amplifiers . However, electronic engineers know well the semiconductor electronics, but not the superconductor electronics, in the design of SQUID systems, for the lack of superconductor physics. In this article, we introduce the principles of SQUID sensors in the way that can be easily understood by the electronics engineers. We interpret the basic principles of superconductor elements and derive the general network equation of superconductor integrated circuits to reveal the working mechanism inside SQUIDs; We find the general analytical expression of dc SQUIDs, and present a magnetic field-effect transistor (MFET) concept to describe the function of SQUIDs in the design of the flux- or current-based analog circuits. It is shown that SQUID-based analog circuits are dual to the analog circuits based on the metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), in both the design concepts and working principles. 2. Overview of SQUID electronics 2.1 Basic concepts The overview of SQUID electronics, ranged from basic superconductive elements to sensor system, is illustrated in Fig. 2, where the concepts and objects for the design of SQUID systems are described as follows: 1) Superconductor wire: it is a strip of superconductor, which is not only a perfect conductor, but also a magnetic field coupler. its macroscopic phase difference at two terminals records the integral of magnetic vector potentials . 2) Resistively-shunted Josephson junction: it is a nonlinear phase-difference creator driven by the current; its equivalent circuit is described by the so-called Resistively-capacitively-shunted junction (RCSJ) model . 3) Flux-transformer: it is a superconducting loop connected with pure superconductor wires, which converts the flux coupled by the loop proportionally into superconducting current circulating inside the loop . 4) Magnetic-field-effect transistor (MFET) : it is a kind of nonlinear device which resistance is modified by the applied magnetic fields; dc-SQUID is a kind of MFET; its resistance is modulated by the flux coupled by the superconducting loop. If the flux inputs of MFETs are applied through input coils, the combination of a MFET and the input coils is the current-inputted MFET (CI-MFET). 5) Flux-feedback operational amplifier (FF-OPA) : it is a kind of operational amplifier simply realized by using a MFET as the flux-input front-end before a room-temperature operational amplifiers, where the MFET is used to implement the flux-to-voltage conversion. 6) Flux-locked loop : it is exactly a flux-follower implemented by the FF-OPA working in closed-loop, similar as the voltage-follower implemented by the semiconductor voltage-feedback operational amplifier (VF-OPA). 7) SQUID magnetometer or gradiometer: it is realized with a FLL tightly coupled to a flux-transformer. constitute, depending on the style of the pick-up coil. 8) Trans-impedance amplifier: a FLL integrated with an input coil works as a SQUID-based trans-impedance amplifier (TIA) . A SQUID sensor is a SQUID-based TIA connected with a pick-up coil; magnetometers and gradiometers are only different in the style of pick-up coils. 9) Multi-channel SQUID system: it is a muti-channel current-sensing system based on SQUID sensors. For example, the SQUID-based magnetocardiography (MCG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) systems use muti-channel SQUID sensors to pick up and read out the magnetic fields generated by the target current flows; they record the real-time signals of the target magnetic fields, and finally study the target through solving the inverse problem . Fig. 2. Overview of SQUID-based analog circuits and systems. The concepts of SQUID electronics above bring us an insight that, SQUID sensors are exactly the analog ‘integrated’ circuits of superconducting devices and semiconductor amplifiers, although SQUIDs and room-temperature amplifiers have to be installed separately for different working temperatures. 2.2 Levels of abstraction There are four levels of abstraction in the design of a SQUID sensor systems, as summarized in Fig. 3: 1) At device level, we use two superconductor elements, superconducting wire and Josephson junction, to design flux-transformers and SQUID-based MFETs. The circuit analysis methods for resistor-inductor-capacitor (RLC) networks are also suitable for the superconducting devices, as long as we use the macroscopic quantum phases as variables to replace the voltages. 2) At circuit level, FF-OPAs are the analog integrated circuits of SQUID-based MFETs and room-temperature amplifiers; they use fluxes as inputs, similar to the semiconductor OPAs, in the design of analog circuits and systems. 3) At module level, SQUID sensors are the combination of a pick-up coil and a SQUID-based TIA; they combine the functions of the flux-transformer and the closed- loop FF-OPA. 4) At system level, a multi-channel SQUID system is a group of SQUID sensors configured with different pick-up coils; it is a contactless current sensing system, where, the pick-up coils sense the currents flowing inside the object under test, and linearly convert them into voltages through SQUID TIAs. Fig. 3. Levels of abstraction for SQUID-based analog circuits and systems. 2.3 Duality between MFET and MOSFET Fig. 4 exhibits the charge-flux duality between MFET and MOSFET electronics. MOSFETs and their application circuits and systems are electric-field or charge oriented , while SQUID-based MFETs and their circuits and systems are magnetic- filed oriented; two devices use similar schemes in the design of analog circuits and systems. The comparison between SQUID-based MFET and MOSFET electronics is summarized in Table 1. SQUID electronics MOSFET electronics Physics Superconductor physics Semiconductor physics Circuit theory Flux-oriented Charge-oriented Elements Josephson junctions and RLC elements PN junctions and RLC elements Device level Magnetic FET Electric FET Circuit level Flux/current Feedback OPA Charge/voltage Feedback OPA Module level Flux/current follower Charge/voltage follower System level Flux/current sensing system Charge/voltage detecting system Fig. 4. Charge-flux duality between MOSFET and SQUID electronics. 2.4 Circuit theory for SQUID electronics Four variables are used in the analysis of electric circuits , as shown in Fig. 5. The charge Q and flux Φ are the entities of electric and magnetic fields; their flow rates are current i and v, respectively. The principles of using circuit variables are: 1) Magnetic field-oriented circuits are the flux-current systems; they are usually analyzed with Φ and i as variables; 2) Electric field-oriented circuits are the charge-voltage systems; they are usually analyzed with Q and v as variables. SQUIDs and their application circuits are magnetic-filed oriented, and are analyzed as flux-current circuit systems. Details about circuit variables and analysis methods are seen in the reference . Fig. 5. Variables and elements in the electric circuit analyses. 3. Principles of superconductor elements 3.1 Superconductor elements Superconductor circuits are superconducting RLC networks, in which superconductor wire and Josephson junction shown in Fig. 6 are the two unique elements that make superconductor circuits different from normal RLC circuits. Fig. 6. Superconductor elements: (a) Superconductor wire, and (b) Josephson junction. Superconductor wires achieve two properties: 1) They are the perfect conductors without resistance, similar with the wires in the conventional circuit graphs; 2) They are the magnetic-field couplers, which sense the magnetic field with their charge carriers . Cooper pairs are the charge carriers of superconductor wires; their condense state is described by a macroscopic wave function, ψ = |ψ| eiφ, as shown in Fig. 6(a). According to the Ginzburg-Landau theory , the quantum phase φ will vary along the wire with a gradient proportional to A; the phase difference between terminal-a and terminal-b of superconductor wire is 0 2 ( ) ( ) b a b a A dl          (1) where Φ0 is the flux quantum, Φ0= h/2e = 2.07×10 -15 Wb. Josephson junctions have a superconductor-insulator-superconductor (SIS) structure, as illustrated in Fig. 6(b), where φ1 is the phase at the ‘+’ terminal and φ2 is the one at the ‘–’ terminal; the two-terminal phase difference is θ, and θ = φ2 – φ1, which changes with the voltage u. Josephson current iJ is tunnelling through the insulator, which relation with the two-terminal phase and voltage is 0 2 1 0 sin 2 Ji I d u dt                (2) where I0 is the critical current of the Josephson junction. Josephson junctions implement two functions in superconducting circuits: 1) They are phase-difference generators, which create a phase gap between two superconductors. 2) Their Josephson currents are voltage-controlled oscillators (VCOs) , which are oscillating with a fundamental frequency ωrf controlled by the average voltage Vs at the two terminals. The VCO function of Josephson currents is described as follows:   0 0 0 0 sin sin (0) 2 ; 1 2 ; J rf s rf T s rf i I I t V C V u dt T T                             (3) where Cθ is a bounded constant for the ∆θ, and ωrf is the angular frequency controlled by the average voltage Vs, with a voltage-to-frequency ratio of 0.438 GHz/μV. 3.2 Closed-loop law The closed loops connected by two kinds of superconductor elements will comply with the fluxoid quantization law (FQL) . A superconducting loop connected by N Josephson junctions (N is an integer) and N superconductor is illustrated in Fig. 7, where each wire has a phase difference generated by the magnetic vector potential, and each gap between two wires has a phase difference created by the Josephson junction. Those phase differences will meet the uniqueness of the macroscopic wave function inside wires as   1 1 ( ) ( ) 2 1; if enters '+' of ; 1; if enters ' ' of N N i i i i i i i i cir i i cir i a b n i n i                      (4) The factor σi exhibits the polarity of θi inside the loop, with the direction of loop current icir as the reference. For instance, in Fig. 7, σ1 is 1, since icir enters the ‘+’ terminal of θ1, while σ2 is –1, since icir enters the ‘–’ terminal of θ2. Fig. 7. Superconducting loop connected by N Josephson junctions According to (1), we can sum the phase differences of N superconductive wires, and find that     1 1 0 0 0 2 2 2 ( ) ( ) i i N N b i i i i m a l i i a b A dl A dl                           (5) Therefore, we can derive the so-called fluxoid-quantization law (FQL) as 0 0 1 2 N m i i i n          (6) The derivative of FQL with respect to time is the Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction and the Kircholff’s voltage law (KVL): 1 0 N m i i i d u dt       (7) In other words, the FQL is the integral form of the Faraday’s law and KVL, in which the constant is specified as nΦ0. Therefore, the closed-loop law in (6) is general for both superconducting and normal loops. In a loop with a self-inductance Lm, the flux Φm coupled by the loop is applied by the external flux Φa and generated by the loop current icir, thus, m m cir a   L i  (8) where the self-induced flux is assumed to cancel the applied flux Φa. 4. Flux transformer 4.1 Principle of flux-transformer A Flux-transformer is a superconducting loop purely connected by superconductor wires, as illustrated in Fig. 8, where there is a superconducting current, namely iT, flowing through a pick-up coil Lp and an input coil Li. According to the FQL, the total flux coupled in the loop must be quantized as 0 m   Tn  (9) where, nT is the number of flux quanta trapped in the loop. Fig. 8. Flux-transformer consists of a pick-up coil and an input coil. The flux-transformer will turn the flux Φp picked-up by the pick-up coil linearly into loop current iT; the function of iT will be calculated by Φp as   0 p T m p i T p T p i n L L i i L L           (10) Accordingly, flux transformers are linear flux-to-current convertors. 4.2 Styles of pick-up coils Pick-up coils have various styles to extract the components of magnetic fields , , as illustrated in Fig. 9. The pick-up coil for magnetometers is winding along a planar surface, as shown in Fig. 9(a); the first-order gradiometer has two planar surfaces, as shown in Fig. 9(b); the second-order gradiometer have four planar surfaces, as exhibited in Fig. 9(c). The flexible configuration of pick-up coils for different targets is one of the advantages of SQUID sensors. Fig. 9. Flux transformers: (a) pick-up coil is a magnetometer; (b) pick-up coil is a first-order gradiometer; (c) pick-up coil is a second-order gradiometer. 5. Magnetic field-effect transistor 5.1 Structure of dc-SQUID A dc-SQUID is a superconducting loop inserted with two Josephson junctions, as shown in Fig. 10(a), where two terminals of Josephson junctions are led to a bias current source Ib, and a non-zero average voltage Vs will be measured when the bias current is larger than the critical current of Josephson junctions. The equivalent circuit of the dc- SQUID is a RLC network driven by two Josephson currents, as shown Fig. 10(b), where in1 and in2 are noise currents. Each Josephson junction is treated as a RCSJ , and is symbolized as shown in Fig. 10(c); accordingly, the dc-SQUID is represented with a two-terminal device as shown in Fig. 10(d). Symbol of dc-SQUID 5.2 Circuit equations of dc-SQUID The dc-SQUID loop contains a superconducting current icir, as defined in Fig. 11(a). The i1 and i2 flowing through two Josephson junctions are supplied by the icir and bias current Ib; therefore, the dc-SQUID can be redrawn as shown in Fig. 11(b), where each Josephson junction is separately biased with Ib/2. Fig. 11. (a) Superconducting current circulating in dc-SQUID loop. (b) Equivalent circuit of dc- SQUID, where two Josephson junctions are separately biased. Fig. 12. Two-port dc-SQUID network driven by Josephson currents . The dc-SQUID is equivalent to a two-port network equivalent circuit , as shown in Fig. 12. The two-port RLC network is driven by two Josephson currents and two bias currents. Josephson currents, iJ1 and iJ2, are the phase-controlled current sources; the Ib and Φa are the given inputs, while the θ1 and θ2 are two outputs. The circuit equations of the dc-SQUID are derived as follows: First, the FQL in the SQUID loop is written as   0 1 2 0 2 s cir a L i         (11) Second, two current-phase relations of Josephson junctions are 0 1 0 1 1 01 1 1 1 0 2 0 2 2 02 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 sin 2 2 2 sin 2 2 2 ; ; ; b n cir b n cir C I I i i R C I I i i R d d d d dt dt dt dt                                                      (12) 5.3 Dynamics inside dc-SQUID The circuit equations of dc-SQUID in (11) and (12) are exhibited by a system diagram shown in Fig. 13 . The module colored in grey is a second-order linear system modified by two nonlinear phase-to-current feedback functions, iJ1 and iJ2. The dynamics of this system are described as follows: 1) In zero-voltage state, θ1 and θ2 are stable in a certain value that enable iJ1 and iJ2 to cancel the i1 and i2 supplied by Ib and icir. 2) In voltage state, θ1 and θ2 will keep increasing because iJ1 and iJ2 are less than i1 and i2; the average increasing speed of θ1 and θ2 is proportional to the measured voltage Vs of dc-SQUID. 3) The external Φa is turned into icir to adjust the bias currents of two Josephson junctions, and thereby modulates the average speed of θ1 and θ2; this is how the flux-modulated current-voltage characteristics of dc-SQUID are formed. Therefore, under the same average voltage Vs, two Josephson currents are working as two VCOs, and are driving the two-port RLC network in oscillation state; the fundamental oscillation frequency ωrf is defined in (3). Fig. 13. System diagram of dc-SQUID . 5.4 Magnetic-flux-flow diagram of dc-SQUID SQUIDs and single-flux-quantum (SFQ) gates, as well as Josephson qubits, are all the superconducting RLC networks driven by additional Josephson currents, and are unified with normal RLC circuits with a common network equation , . The general network equation in matrix is   2 1 2 0 1 2 sin T T d d dt dt                  EL EL EL 0 m EL b n m a Φ Φ Φ C G I σ L σΦ i i σ L Const Φ (13) The variable vectors and parameter matrices for the dc-SQUID shown in Fig. 12 are             0 1 2 1 2 1 2 01 1 1 02 2 2 ; 2 ; ; 1 1 ; 2 2 0 0 1 0 ; ; 0 0 0 1 T T EL EL a T T b b n n s I I i i L I C R I C R                                                      EL a b n m 0 Φ Const Φ i i σ L C G I (14) This general network equation is derived by a genal flux-based circuit theory . In this theory, Josephson junction circuits can be described with a general network equation and simulated with a general system model; they can also be redrawn with magnetic-flux-flow (MFF) diagrams to vividly depict flux-flow dynamics. For example, the dc-SQUID shown in Fig. 14(a) is further exhibited with a magnetic- flux-flow diagram, as shown in Fig. 14(b). This MFF diagram reveals the flux-flow mechanism inside dc-SQUID as follows: 1) Two current-biased Josephson junctions are two magnetic-flux generators (MFGs), namely MFG-1 and MFG-2. In the conventional circuit diagram, two Josephson junctions are inserted in the SQUID loop, Loop-1, while they are connected to Loop-1 in the MFF diagram; 2) MFG-2 keep pumping flux quanta into Loop-1, while MFG-1 keep drawing the flux quanta out of Loop-1. The average flow-rate of the flux flow pumping in and out Loop-1, is exactly the average voltage Vs that is measured at two terminals of MFG-1 and MFG-2. 3) The external flux Φa applied to Loo-1 is turned into an offset current applied to two Josephson junctions, according to (13); it will therefore alter the flow-rate, like a water-tap. This MFF diagram vividly depicts the flux-flow dynamics inside dc SQUIDs working as MFETs. More details are seen in . 5.5 Characteristics of dc-SQUID The current-voltage characteristics of dc-SQUID are illustrated in Fig. 15. They are captured by measuring Vs under various Φa and ib, from the dc-SQUID shown in Fig. 15(a); They can also be numerically simulated with either the system model shown in Fig. 13 or the circuit equation in (13). The measured characteristics can be well agreed by the simulations , if the circuit model and parameters are properly set. With Vs and ib as the coordinates, the current-voltage curves under different Φa are shown in Fig. 15(b). Those curves are expressed with a function as    0  , , ; s b a b a V f i f i n n        (15) It is a periodical function for the flux input Φa, in which, the period is 1Φ0. By setting ib as Ib, we can observe a periodical flux-voltage characteristic, as illustrated in Fig. 15(c); this flux-voltage curve is defined with a function as     , s V a b a V f f I      (16) Those functions achieve practical physical meanings, in the system model shown in Fig. 13 and the MFF diagram shown in Fig. 14. In the system model in Fig. 13, those functions describe how the average increasing speed of θ1 and θ2 is modulated by ib and Φa; they also describe how the ib and Φa tune the average flow rate of the flux flow in MFG1 and MFG2, in the MFF diagram shown in Fig. 14. In the current-voltage curves shown in Fig. 15(b), there is a LC-resonance point, at which the flux-modulation characteristic disappears; the voltage Vs0 indicates the resonance frequency, and can be analytically expressed with the RLC parameters inside the SQUID washer . How the resonance frequency Vs under the given ib and Φa is decided by circuit parameters inside the dc-SQUID can be explained by the analytical expression of the current-voltage function defined in (15). Fig. 15. Dc-SQUID and characteristics: (a) dc-SQUID under current bias; (b) flux-modulated current- voltage curves of dc-SQUID; (c) periodical flux-voltage curve of dc-SQUID. 5.6 Analytical expression of dc-SQUID The analytical expression of (15) is difficult to be directly solved from the differential circuit equations that are varied with the equivalent circuit of dc SQUIDs ; it is still lacked in the long history of dc SQUIDs. We proposed a general analytical expression of dc SQUIDs , in another form of       11 * * 0 1 , (0) , , 0 , 2 b I s dc cmm s s b a a s dc dc cir s s s b i f V G V Z F V i f V LV L i                                   (17) where ib and Φa are the dependent variables of the resonance frequency Vs and the average phase difference between θ1 and θ2, namely ∆θdc. Fig. 16. A general two-port network model for dc SQUIDs . This general analytical expression is derived by using a general two-port network model of dc SQUIDs, as shown in Fig. 16. The model treats any dc-SQUID circuit as a two-port network driven by the ib and two Josephson currents. This two-port network achieve flux-modulated current-voltage characteristics, based on two principles: 1) Under a nonzero voltage Vs, two Josephson currents are VCOs, they generate both dc and ac currents into two-port network; the dc component of Josephson currents is proportional to the total power transferred by the ac components, due to the zero-power consumption principle of Josephson currents. 2) In response to ib and two Josephson currents, the two-port network creates both the Vs and ac voltages at two ports. In frequency domain, the two-port network implements its transfer-function with only four network impedances, such as Z11, Z22, Z12, and Z21 (Z12 = Z21 for reciprocity principle). The Gcmm in (17) is the equivalent conductance of the dc component of two Josephson currents, we find the analytical expressions of Gcmm with frequency domain analyses in . Based on the expression of Gcmm, a dc-SQUID is equivalent to a flux-controlled nonlinear resistor in parallel with the Z11(0), as illustrated in Fig. 17. 1) A bare-washer dc-SQUID shown in Fig. 17(a) is equivalent to two resistors in parallel, as shown in Fig. 17(b). 2) A dc-SQUID coupled with one input coil and the equivalent circuit are exhibited in Fig. 17(c) and (d), where Zi1 is the impedance at the terminals of the input coil, and is involved in four impedances, since the input coil is a part of the two-port network. 3) A dc-SQUID coupled with two input coils is modeled as shown in Fig. 17(e) and (f), where both Zi1 and Zi2 will affect the impedances of the two-port network, and thereby modify the current-voltage characteristics . Details of the derivation of Gcmm are seen in the reference ; it is shown that the Gcmm is the projection of the network impedances, and the real-part of impedance Z12, Re(Z12), decides the flux-modulation depth of current-voltage characteristics; the reason why there will be the crossing of current-voltage curves in Fig. 15(b) is that the real-part of Z12 is zero at the LC-resonance point. Accordingly, for a symmetric bare-washer dc-SQUID, we can derive that the Vs0 at the LC-resonance point is decided by the loop inductance and the capacitance of one Josephson junction , namely 0 1 2 0 1 ; 2 s j s j V C C C LC      (18) To be notice that, Vs0/Φ0 is not the resonance frequency of the SQUID loop composed of two junction capacitances which resonance frequency is 1/π√(2LsCj). More details are seen in . Fig. 17. Nonlinear resistance of SQUID-based MFET : (a) bare-washer dc-SQUID, and (b) its nonlinear resistor model; (c) CI-MFET with one input coil, and (d) the equivalent circuit; (e) CI-MFET with two input coils, and (f) the equivalent circuit. The general analytical expression of dc-SQUID in (17) will have two practical applications: 1) It can be used to characterize circuit parameters of a dc-SQUID with the measured current-voltage characteristics. 2) It can be used to predict the current-voltage characteristics of a dc-SQUID with the network impedances extracted from the circuit layout. 6. Flux-feedback operational amplifier 6.1 Concept of FF-OPA Operational amplifiers (OPAs) are the general scheme to design linear analog circuits using nonlinear devices . The voltage-feedback OPA (VF-OPA) and the flux- feedback OPA (FF-OPA) are illustrated in Fig. 18. With a three-terminal VF-OPA voltage follower is implemented by feeding the voltage output back to the inverting voltage input, as shown in Fig. 18(b). Similarly, with a three-terminal FF-OPA shown in Fig. 18(c), a linear flux-follower is realized by feeding the voltage output to the inverting flux input through a circuit consisting of a resistor and a feedback coil in serial, as illustrated in Fig. 18(d). Flux-feedback operational amplifier (FF-OPA) and (d) its flux-follower circuit. 6.2 SQUID-based FF-OPA A simple SQUID-based FF-OPA is shown in Fig. 19(a), where the dc-SQUID is simply a MFET used to sense the positive and negative flux inputs. The dc-SQUID is biased with a current source Ib and connected to the non-inverting input of the room- temperature amplifier U1. The current source Ir is applied on a resistor Rr to generate a voltage at the inverting input of U1. The flux-flower based on the negative feedback mechanism is accordingly implemented with the SQUID-based FF-OPA, as shown in Fig. 19(b), It is exactly the well-known flux-locked loop (FLL), which generates Φf to cancel the flux input Φe and keep the difference between V+ and V– being zero, V+ = V–. Fig. 19. (a) SQUID-based FF-OPA, (b) FLL implemented by a flux-follower . function diagram of SQUID-based FLL . Assuming that the input impedances of the U1 are far larger than the SQUID and Rr, and are ignorable, V+ = Vs, V– = Vw and Vw = IrRr; the SQUID output Vs will be locked at Vw dynamically. The points, such as, W1, W2, and W3, are the working points of the FLL periodically located in the positive slopes of the current-voltage characteristic, as illustrated in Fig. 20 (a). Since the j-th working point Wj is located at (Vw, Φw + nwΦ0), nw = j –1; those working points are defined as     0 0 , ; 0, w b w w w V f I n        (19) This nw records the period where the working point is located, with which the flux- voltage function in (16) can be rewritten as       0 0 0 ; 0, s V a w a w V f n n           (20) The transfer function of this dc-SQUID is modeled as shown in Fig. 20(b), where the nw is automatically tranced by a virtual flux-quantum counter (FQC). The SQUID- based FLL is accordingly a feedback system model, as shown in. Fig. 20(c). Fig. 21. Dynamic responses of dc-SQUID FLL; in the flux-voltage curve, W1 (Vw, Φw) is the working point, and the point (Vs, Φa) is the current state of dc-SQUID: (a) the initial state (Vs, Φa) of dc-SQUID is at the negative slope, and Vs > Vw; (b) the initial state (Vs, Φa) is at the positive peak; (c) the initial the initial state (Vs, Φa) is at the negative slope, and Vs < Vw; (f) the initial state (Vs, Φa) is at the negative peak; (g) the initial state (Vs, Φa) is at the positive slope, and Vs < Vw. The responses of FLL to different initial states of Φa are illustrated in Fig. 21, where the dc-SQUID is depicted by its flux-voltage curve in Φa and Vs coordinates. The increase of Φe will push Φa to right, while the increase of Φf will push Φa to left; the output Vs is amplified by the non-inverting input of U1 with gain G(ω); it will increase Vf and Φf, if Vs > Vw, while decrease Vf and Φf, if Vs < Vw. The working principle of this system is simply described as followings: 1) If Vs > Vw, the room-temperature amplifier will increase Vf and Φf to push Φa back to left, as shown in Fig. 21(a), (b) and (c). 2) If Vs < Vw, the room-temperature amplifier will decrease Vf and Φf to pull Φa back to right; as shown in Fig. 21(e), (f) and (g). 3) If Vs = Vw, the room-temperature amplifier will keep Φa stable at Φw, as illustrated in Fig. 21(d). As long as the initial state (Vs, Φa) is within the gray area around W1 shown in Fig. 21, the FLL will always move the Φa back to Φw. In other words, the FLL will be relocked at Φw + nwΦ0, when the initial Φa is in the grey area around Φw + nwΦ0. In Fig. 21, the various initial states of Φa are set by the sudden change of Φe; the relocking of FLL exhibits the step-response of FLL to the step input of Φe. The response time of FLL depends on the deflection of Φa: 1) The response time is approximately linear to the deviation of Φa, if the state (Vs, 2) The response time is nonlinear to the deviation of Φa, if the state (Vs, Φa) is located at the negative slope, as shown in Fig. 21(a) and (e). In summary, a SQUID-based FLL is a flux-follower implemented by a SQUID-based FF-OPA. In the FF-OPA, the dc-SQUID is an AFE with a periodical nonlinear flux-to- voltage characteristic to sense flux inputs. The SQUID-based flux-follower is similar with the semiconductor FET-based voltage followers, except that the SQUID-based analog-front-end (AFE) has multiple working points in its flux-to-voltage characteristic while the FET-based AFE usually has only one working point. 6.3 Transfer function of FLL In the flux-voltage characteristic shown in Fig. 22 (a), the transfer function of dc- SQUID in response to the small signal input around W1, is approximately defined with the transfer coefficient ∂Vs/∂Φa at W1; the ∂Vs/∂Φa at working points is defined by the flux-voltage function as 0 ( , ) b b a w w s b a i I n a a V f i            (21) Fig. 22. (a) Transfer coefficient at W1; (b) system diagram of FLL locked at W1 . With this small signal transfer function, the linear transfer function diagram of the FLL is shown in Fig. 22(b). In this model, the Φa is varying around Φw with a deflection ∆Φa; the dc-SQUID outputs a ∆Vs like a linear flux-to-voltage convertor, as long as the |∆Φa| is smaller than a value ε (ε < 0.5Φ0), |∆Φa| < ε. The negative feedback mechanism of the FLL keeps canceling the ∆Vs, and Φa will be fixed at the working point dynamically, thus 0 0 0 s n s s a a w w n a a a w w V V V V n n                               (22) where the Φn is the equivalent flux noised contributed by the voltage noise Vn of the room-temperature amplifier, and n n s a V   V  (23) Accordingly, the flux-voltage conversion function of FLL in static state is 0 e f a f w w n           n    (24) Meanwhile, to a given Vf_FS which is the full-scale range of Vf, the full-scale range of the input flux, namely Φe_FS will be _ _ f e FS f FS f M V R   (25) For a limited Vf_FS in the measurement instruments and a fixed Mf in the given SQUID chip, the Φe_FS is only adjusted by Rf in the practical operations. In frequency domain, the transfer function of the FLL is defined by         1 ; 0 1 ( ) f e f ftr H R R G            (26) where Rftr is the trans-impedance of the dc-SQUID seen from the two terminals of the feedback coil, and s ftr f a V R M    (27) This Rftr is decided by the transfer coefficient of the SQUID. From the transfer function, the cut-off frequency fc of the FLL can be defined as     ( ) 1 ftr f ftr c c f R R R G f GBP f R     (28) where GBP (f) is the gain-bandwidth-product (GBP) of the room-temperature amplifier with a gain G(ω), and   ( ) GBP f G  f  (29) The maximum slew-rate, SRmax(f) , evaluates the response of the FLL to large input of Φe; the maximum swing of Φf driven by the room-temperature amplifier is less than VsppG(ω)Mf/Rf, because the maximum swing of Vs is limited by the Vspp. Accordingly, the maximum slew-rate of the Φf is limited by max ( ) ( ) f Spp f M SR f V GBP f R   (30) The GBP(f) is a constant for the room-temperature amplifier implemented by one operational amplifier or one integrator; the maximum slew rate for the FLL with a constant GBP(f) is decided by the cut-off frequency fc as 0 max ( ) 2 Spp c c s a V f f SR f V       (31) However, the fc is limited by the phase-margin (PM) of the G(ω), and the PM is reduced rapidly in the cascaded amplifier; this is why we suggest to design a FLL with no more two amplifiers . 6.4 How to improve performances of FLL The advantages of SQUID sensors are low noise, low drift, wide range, and high slew-rate; they are achieved by using the different readout schemes as summarized in Performance Scheme