1 Landau-level spectrum and the effect of spin-orbit coupling in monolayer graphene on transition metal dichalcogenides Qing Rao, Hongxia Xue*, and Dong-Keun Ki* Department of Physics and HK Institute of Quantum Science & Technology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China E-mail: hxxue@hku.hk, dkki@hku.hk Keywords: graphene, quantum Hall effect, Landau level crossing, spin-orbit coupling, van der Waals heterostructures Abstract In graphene on transition metal dichalcogenides, two types of spin-orbit coupling (SOC)— Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs—can coexist that modify graphene’s electronic band differently. Here, we show that the Landau levels (LLs) are also affected by these SOCs distinctively enough to estimate their relative strengths from the Landau fan diagram. Using a simple theoretical model, we calculated the LL spectrums of graphene for different SOC strengths, and found that when the total SOC is strong enough (i.e., when it is comparable to the half of the energy gap between the LLs of an intrinsic graphene), the corresponding LLs will split and cross with others depending sensitively on the relative strengths of the SOC terms. To demonstrate how one can use it to estimate the relative SOC strengths, we first identified the four key features that are well separated from the complex background and can be compared with experiment directly, and used them to show that in our sample, the Rashba SOC is stronger than the spin-valley Zeeman SOC that is consistent with other spectroscopic measurements. Our study therefore provides a simple and practical strategy to analyze the LL spectrum in graphene with SOC before carrying out more in-depth measurements. 2 1. Introduction Interfacial interactions between the layers in van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures have been shown to be highly efficient in inducing new electronic properties that are originally absent in the individual layers. Examples include, but not limited to, strongly correlated states in magic- angle twisted bilayer graphene,1,2 Hofstadter’s butterfly effect in graphene/hexagonal boron- nitride (hBN) moiré superlattices,3-5 and unconventional ferroelectricity at the interfaces between hBN layers6-8 or between transition metal dichalcogenide (TMDC) layers.9,10 Another system of interest is graphene-TMDC heterostructures (Figure 1), where the TMDC induces two different types of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in graphene through proximity:11-13 the spin-valley Zeeman term that couples out-of-plane spin and valley degrees of freedom, Hvz = λvzτz sz, and the Rashba term that couples in-plane spin and sublattice degrees of Pauli matrix vectors that act on the sublattice (A and B) and spin (↑ and ↓) degrees of freedom in graphene, respectively, and τz = ±1 represents K and K′ valleys. Therefore, the graphene- TMDC heterostructures provide a new platform with high electron and hole mobility—in addition to the semiconductor-based 2D electron gas (2DEG)16-19 systems—to investigate the effect of SOC on carrier transport in low-dimensional systems. Many efforts have been made to estimate the SOC strengths of the system, which can be grouped into two: one that measures the spin relaxation time (τs) of the charge carriers and uses a model to estimate the SOC strength from the measured τs 11,20-22 and another that directly detects the change of the graphene’s electronic band by the SOC.13,23,24 These studies, however, often require a series of measurements by controlling more than two different experimental conditions such as a magnetic field (or its direction), charge density (n), and temperature (T). For instance, under a sufficiently large perpendicular magnetic field (B), the Landau levels (LLs) can be formed in graphene whose spectrum—the dispersion of the LLs in energy and magnetic fields—varies with the band structure and the internal degeneracy. In this quantum Hall (QH) regime, when the Fermi energy lies between the two LLs with an energy gap (∆Ev) that is larger than the thermal energy and the disorder width (Γ), ∆Ev > max(kT, Γ) (Figure 1(b); k: Boltzmann constant), the longitudinal resistance Rxx shows a dip (i.e., a local minimum) at the corresponding filling factor, v ≡ n nφ ⁄ (nφ ≡ eB h ⁄ with Planck’s constant h and electric charge e). Thus, one can study how the SOC modifies ∆Ev at different v and B by measuring the thermal activation behavior of the minimum longitudinal resistance Rxx min ∝ e−∆Ev 2kT ⁄ . The study had indeed provided useful insights about the change 3 of the graphene band in the presence of the SOC,23 but it involves a large set of multiple measurements to obtain Rxx as a function of n at different T and B. states (DOS) of an intrinsic graphene when Landau levels are formed (b). (c-e) Calculated band structure of monolayer graphene on TMDC at K valley for (λvz, λR) = (13.0,0.0), (9.2,9.2), and (0.0,13.0) meV, respectively, at a fixed total SOC strength λ = √λvz 2 + λR 2 = 13 meV in the absence of magnetic fields. Here, we propose and demonstrate a simpler way to estimate the relative strengths of the SOC terms, λvz and λR, in graphene-TMDC heterostructures from a Landau fan diagram Rxx(n or v, B) measured at a fixed T, without carrying out large sets of measurements. For this, we first use a simplified effective low-energy Hamiltonian25,26 (supplementary material) to calculate the LL spectrums for different values of λvz and λR, and show that, interestingly, the dispersions of the low-energy LLs below |v| = 6 sensitively depend on the SOC strengths (Figure 2 and 3). It indicates that one can use the Landau fan diagram to estimate their relative strengths. To demonstrate this, we further examined the calculated LL spectrums carefully and identified the four key features that are well separated from the complex background and thus can be compared directly with the experiment as listed below: i) A gap opens at v = 0 more rapidly in B as λvz becomes larger, i.e., the graphene becomes insulating at lower B, unless λvz ≪ λR; 4 ii) The QH signal—a dip in Rxx and a plateau in the transverse resistance Rxy—appears at v = ±3 (and ±5) from low B only when λvz, λR ≠ 0; iii) The QH signal at v = ±4 becomes stronger than the signal at v = ±6, i.e., it appears at lower B, only when λR ≈ 0; iv) As λR increases, the QH signals at v = ±4 and ±6 will disappear and appear again at a larger and smaller B, respectively. After identifying these key features, we examined a Landau fan diagram measured in one of the graphene-WSe2 heterostructures used in our previous study13 and found that λR > λvz, which is consistent with the results from other measurements done on the same sample previously.13 We believe this simple strategy can be used to study how the relative strength of the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs varies with different experimental conditions, such as twist angle,27-29 pressure,30 and strain,31,32 in graphene-TMDC heterostructures quickly before carrying out more in-depth studies. 2. Theoretical Analysis 2.1 Band Structure of Monolayer Graphene on TMDC at Zero Magnetic Fields To show that the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs can affect the graphene band differently, we first calculate the band structure of graphene on TMDC at zero B for different values of λvz and λR using the effective Hamiltonian,25,26 H = H0 + ∆σz + HKM + Hvz + HR, (1) where H0 is the graphene’s Dirac Hamiltonian and ∆σz is a symmetry breaking term that originates from the TMDC substrate which is nearly zero due to the large lattice mismatch between graphene and TMDC.12 We have also ignored the intrinsic Kane-Mele SOC term, HKM = λKMσzτz sz,33 as it is known to be extremely small in graphene (only a few eV).34 plotted in Figure 1(c-e), respectively. The plots clearly show that while the spin-valley Zeeman SOC splits the band in energy by keeping its linear dispersion (Figure 1(c)), the Rashba term creates a nearly parabolic dispersion around the charge neutrality point (Figure 1(e)). Moreover, only when both SOC terms coexist, the gap at the charge neutrality point opens (Figure 1(d)). This is because the spin-valley Zeeman term Hvz splits the spin up (↑) and down (↓) bands (so, it keeps the linear dispersion), whereas the Rashba term HR mixes the in-plane spin (i.e., the superposition of ↑ and ↓ spins) and sublattice degrees of freedom (A and B). Thus, without the broken sublattice symmetry term (∆σz) and the intrinsic Kane-Mele 5 SOC (HKM), the gap can be opened only when both terms exist. This is consistent with previous calculations,25 supporting the validity of our low-energy effective Hamiltonian given in Equation (1) and indicating that the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOC modifies graphene band differently. respectively. Red lines represent the n = 0 and −1 LLs, whereas the black and magenta lines are those for higher n ≥ 1. Solid (broken) lines are the LLs from K (K′) valley. Note that in (c), the solid and broken lines are perfectly merged together. The down- and up-triangles in view of LLs near zero energy shown in (a-c), respectively. Broken circles mark the position at which ∆Ev=−6 becomes zero. See the text for more details. 2.2 The Effects of SOC on the Landau Levels To investigate how these SOC terms affect the LL spectrum in the system, we followed the existing studies26,31 to derive the effective Hamiltonian in the QH regime at finite B (see supplementary material for details), and calculated the LL spectrums for (λvz, λR) = 6 results show rich features with clear differences between the three cases, suggesting that by studying the LL spectrum, one can estimate the SOC strengths in the system. For example, in all cases, v = ±2 states are the strongest with the largest energy gaps because the SOC strength used in the calculation, 13 meV, is still much smaller than the energy of the first excited LL in monolayer graphene (~36 meV at 1 T).35,36 However, at larger v, i.e., when the SOC strength becomes comparable to the half of the ∆Ev of the intrinsic graphene, complex features appear. First, when only λvz term exists (Figure 2(a)), the next filling factor at which the QH signal—minimum Rxx and quantized Rxy—would appear is v = ±4 (marked by the down-triangles) not v = ±6 as ∆Ev=±4 > ∆Ev=±6. On the other hand, when λvz = 0 (Figure the = ±4 . When both terms coexist (Figure 2(b)), the energy gaps between the LLs are not clearly visible except for the one at v = ±2, leading to a complex LL spectrum at larger |v|. Such a sensitive dependence of ∆Ev on λvz and λR is indeed the main reason why the LL spectroscopy works.23 Interestingly, while examining the LL spectrum more closely (see Figure 2(d-f) for the zoomed-in view) and comparing the ∆Ev calculated for different sets of λvz and λR (Figure 3), we found that some low-energy LLs at |v| ≤ 6 are separated from the complex background well enough to be compared with the experiment directly. First, as shown in a low B and increases more rapidly in B as the λvz gets larger (reaching ∆Ev=0 ≈ 26 meV at ~1 T when λvz = 13 meV). On the other hand, when λvz = 0, only a small gap opens due to the Zeeman effect. This is because the spin-valley Zeeman SOC (Hvz = λvzτz sz) splits the linear graphene bands in energy (see Figure 1(a)) and thus creates two charge neutrality points from which the two sets of zero energy LLs will appear, leading to the large gap at zero density. Second, Figure 2(d-f) and 3(b) show that the gap at v = ±3 and ±5, ∆Ev=±3,±5, is finite at low B only when both λvz and λR are finite, indicating that the QH signals would appear at v = ±3 and ±5 at low B only when λvz, λR ≠ 0. Third, Figure 2(d-f) and 3(c,d) indicate that when λR ≈ 0, the ∆Ev=±4 is larger than ∆Ev=±6, and it is suppressed as λR increases. Thus, the QH signal at v = ±4 becomes stronger than the signal at v = ±6, i.e., it appears at lower B when λR ≈ 0. Lastly, we found that as λR increases, ∆Ev=±4 and ∆Ev=±6 becomes zero at lager and smaller B, respectively (Figure 3(c,d)). This means that the QH signal at v = ±4 (and ±6) should exhibit a crossing (a dip in Rxx disappears and appears 7 again) at a higher (and lower) B for a larger λR. We note that these features are well separated from other LLs and can be compared directly with the experiment without quantitatively detecting ∆Ev(B), as only the qualitative comparison is sufficient to estimate the relative strengths of the SOC terms. 0, −3, −4, and −6, respectively, for λvz λR ⁄ = 0, 0.5, 1, 2, and ∞ (from blue to red) when λ = 13 meV. A shadowed area below B~1 T represents a low magnetic field range in which the QH signals are weak (or do not appear) in general due to disorder. In summary, after examining the corresponding energy scale, the robustness of the features and considering the electron-hole symmetry, we identify four features at low magnetic field range that are most practical in comparing with the experiments, i) the resistance at zero density, the QH signals at ii) v = ±3 (and ±5), iii) v = ±4, and iv) v = ±6. If we find a large resistance (or a clear insulating behavior) at zero density and a clearer QH signal at v = ±4 at lower B than that at v = ±6, we can estimate λvz > λR, whereas observing a stronger signal at v = ±6 than the others indicates λR ≫ λvz. Moreover, finding the QH signal at v = ±3 (and ±5) and the LL crossing at v = ±4 points to the coexistence of the Rashba and spin- valley Zeeman terms. 8 log(Rxx) as a function of B and v, and (b) its zoomed-in view in an area enclosed by the red broken box. The data is taken from our previous study13 (see supplementary material for details). Filled up-triangle, circle, and diamond mark the = −3, −4, and −5 QH signals, respectively. An arrow indicates the suppression of v = −4 LL above ~4 T. (c) 1D cuts of the data shown in (a) at v = −3 and −4. (d) Magnetic field dependence of ∆Ev=−3 (red) and respectively. 3. Experimental Signature and Comparison Having identified the four key features, we turn our attention to the Landau fan diagram, Rxx(v, B), measured in one of our graphene-WSe2 heterostructures at 1.5 K (see supplementary material for experimental details).13 Figure 4(a) plots the result from which we can clearly identify the dark vertical stripes at v = ±2, ±6, ±10, ±14, ... that matches with the QH sequence of the pristine monolayer graphene and find that the resistance peak at v = 0 remains small and it does not increase in B (the criteria i). Moreover, we find that the QH signal at v = ±6 appears with a smaller Rxx min at lower B than the signal at v = ±4 (see a stronger Rashba SOC, i.e., λR ≫ λvz. However, between v = −2 and −6 (Figure 4(b)), we can also identify the QH signals at v = −3 (up-triangle), −4 (circle), and −5 (diamond), and additionally, find that the v = −4 state disappears upon increasing B above ~4 T due to the 9 LL crossing (the criteria ii and iv). These findings indicate that although λvz is much smaller than λR, it is finite. For more detailed analysis, we plot the 1D cuts of Rxx(B) along v = −3 and −4 in Figure 4(c). The plot clearly shows that the Rxx min at v = −4 peaks at around 6 T, indicating the LL crossing while the Rxx min at v = −3 decreases continuously as B increases. By varying both λvz and λR, we find that when (λ, λvz) = (13.0, 4.8) in meV, the gap at v = −4, ∆Ev=−4, becomes zero around 6 T and ∆Ev=−3 keeps increasing in B that matches well with the observed behavior (Figure 4(d)). This is indeed consistent with the results from the ballistic transport spectroscopy measurements done on the same sample previously.13 However, it is worth noting that to determine the absolute values of the SOC strengths, we need to measure the thermal activation energy of the LLs at each v, ∆Ev, study how it varies with B, and compare it with the theoretical curves shown in Figure 3. This is because as long as ∆Ev becomes larger than the thermal energy or disorder level (i.e., ∆Ev > max(kT, Γ)), the QH signal will appear at the corresponding v, so one cannot trace how the ∆Ev varies in B quantitatively. For instance, the broken lines in Figure 4(d) plot the ∆Ev=−3 and ∆Ev=−4 for (λ, λvz) = (4.0, 1.1) meV that show a similar behavior as those calculated for (λ, λvz) = (13.0, 4.8) meV but at a much smaller energy scale. Nonetheless, we have clearly demonstrated that by checking the four key features in a single Landau fan diagram measured at a fixed T (Figure 4(a)), one can directly estimate the relative strength of the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOCs. This can be particularly useful when studying how the SOC strengths vary with external conditions, such as twist angle,27-29 pressure,30 or strain,31,32 as it is not practical to measure the thermal activation gap (∆Ev) for all different parameters. One can therefore use the four criteria proposed here to choose few parameters that may exhibit clear differences in SOC strengths to carry out more in-depth measurements. 4. Conclusion In conclusion, by carefully analyzing the LL spectrum of graphene-TMDC heterostructures, we demonstrate a practical way to compare the experimental data with calculations for the LL spectroscopy of spin-orbit-coupled bands in graphene. From the theoretical analysis, we determined four robust features, i) the resistance at zero density, the QH signals at ii) v = ±3 (and ±5), iii) v = ±4, and iv) v = ±6, that can be used to identify the relative strengths of the Rashba and spin-valley Zeeman SOC terms in the system (Figures 1-3). In the experiment (Figure 4), we found a LL sequence at v = ±2, ±6, ±10, ±14, ... that resembles those of 10 monolayer graphene and no clear gap opening at zero density, suggesting a stronger Rashba SOC. Moreover, we found that the v = −4 state appears at low B~2 T and disappears around 6 T and that the v = −3 and −5 states start to appear from a small B. This indicates that although the spin-valley Zeeman SOC is much weaker than the Rashba term, it exists in our sample, consistent with the results from the spectroscopic measurements done on the same sample.13 Although more in-depth studies are needed to estimate the exact values of the SOC strengths, we believe our work provides a simple and practical way to analyze the QH data in graphene-TMDC heterostructures that can be used to investigate how the SOC strength varies with external parameters, such as twist angle,27-29 pressure,30 or strain,31,32 more conveniently. Acknowledgements The work is financially supported by the University Grants Committee/Research Grant Council of Hong Kong SAR under schemes of Area of Excellence (AoE/P-701/20), ECS (27300819), and GRF (17300020, 17300521, 17309722). We also acknowledge financial support from University Research Committee (URC) of The University of Hong Kong under the schemes of Seed Fund for Basic Research (202111159043) and Seed Funding for Collaborative Research.