Structure transition and zigzag magnetic order in Ir/Rh-substituted honeycomb lattice α-RuCl3 Zachary Morgan,1 Iris Ye,2 Colin L. Sarkis,1 Xiaoping Wang,1 Stephen Nagler,1, 3 and Jiaqiang Yan4 1Neutron Scattering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA 2Next Generation STEM Internship Program Participant 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996, USA 4Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA (Dated: October 5, 2023) We report magnetization and neutron diffraction studies on crystal and magnetic structures of Ir- and Rh- substituted honeycomb lattice α-RuCl3. The iridium or rhodium atoms are distributed at the Ru site with little structural modification. Both systems undergo a room-temperature monoclinic C2/m to low-temperature trigonal R ̄3 phase transformation with a large recoverable hysteresis. At low temperature, a zigzag spin order is observed with the same characteristic wavevector (0, 0.5, 1) as in the parent α-RuCl3. Detailed magnetic structure refinement reveals an ordered moment of 0.32(5)μB/Ru and a upper boundary of canting angle of 15(4)◦ away from the basal plane at 5 K for the 10% Ir-substituted α-RuCl3, which is different from the 0.45-0.73 μB/Ru and 32◦-48◦ canting angle reported in the parent compound α-RuCl3. The observation of unchanged RuCl6 local octahedral environment, reduced magnetic moment size and canting angle highlights the potential to study quantum spin liquid behavior through non-magnetic ion doping. INTRODUCTION The interplay between topology and electron correlation leads to a large variety of interesting topological phenomena in quantum materials. These include fractional quantum Hall effect where the quasi-particles carry a fraction of the elec- tron charge and quantum spin liquid (QSL) where the quantum fluctuations prevent magnetic order down to absolute zero temperature . The Kitaev spin model on a honey- comb lattice is an exactly solvable example in which spin dynamics fractionalizes into itinerant Majorana fermions and Ising gauge-field excitations. The experimental realization for this model was initially proposed in quasi-2D iridates A2IrO3 , where the bond directional Ising interactions arises from spin-orbit-assisted jeff = 1/2 state in an edge-sharing envi- ronment. Recent focus has gradually shifted to the honey- comb lattice α-RuCl3 . Despite the apparent appearance of long-range magnetic order, both inelastic neutron scattering and Raman spectroscopy [9–12] have detected a broad scat- tering continuum in α-RuCl3. This continuum aligns with the predicted presence of itinerant Majorana fermion and is inter- preted as indicating that α-RuCl3 is situated in close proxim- ity to the QSL state. Additionally, anomalous thermal Hall properties are observed in the QSL state with applied in-plane magnetic fields [13–16]. Below TN = 7 K, α-RuCl3 exhibits a zigzag spin struc- ture [17–19] like what was observed in honeycomb iridates [20–22]. The static spin configuration is quite fragile and sus- ceptible to various perturbations including in-plane magnetic field , hydrostatic pressure [25–27], stacking dis- order , and chemical substitution [29–31]. In the latter case, partial substitution of Ru3+ with magnetic Cr3+ ions destabilizes the zig-zag long-range magnetic order and favors a spin-glass state . Alternatively, the inclusion of non- magnetic ions such as Rh3+ and Ir3+ seems to only suppress the zigzag order without any signature of freezing into a spin glass state. Furthermore, inelastic neutron scatter- ing studies have found that the key character of fractionalized excitations is maintained in a wide range of Ir concentration even when the long-range spin order is absent . This is particularly intriguing as it reveals the robust nature in the dy- namical channel and provides a viable route to achieve the long-sought-after quantum spin liquid state in the absence of applied magnetic field. The impact of chemical substitution on the crystal and mag- netic structures of α-RuCl3 has not been thoroughly stud- ied before partially due to the availability of sizable single crystals. In this work, the growth, magnetic properties, nu- clear and magnetic structures of Ru1−xRxCl3 (R = Ir, Rh) single crystals are reported. With a moderate concentration of x = 0.1, the transition temperature TN is suppressed to around 6 K. A large hysteresis about 70 K is present between the room temperature (T) monoclinic C2/m and the low-T trigonal R ̄3 crystal structures likely due to the presence of stacking disorder. As observed in α-RuCl3, both systems re- vert to the room temperature monoclinic structure after ther- mal cycling without sign of stacking disorder evident as dif- fuse scattering along the c∗-axis. A significant reduced mo- ment of 0.32(5) μB/Ru is observed in the Ir-substituted α- RuCl3 zigzag spin configuration. The spin moment is in the ac-plane with tilting angle 15(4)◦ away from the a-axis [the direction perpendicular to the Ru-Ru bond]. Both moment size and canting angle are smaller than previous reports in α- RuCl3 with moment size of 0.45-0.73 μB/Ru and canting an- gle of 35-48◦ . EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS Single crystals of Rh- and Ir-substituted α-RuCl3 were pre- pared using self-selecting vapor growth method . The commercial RuCl3 powder from Furuya Metals (Japan) was used in the growths without further purification. Pure RhCl3 and IrCl3 powders were obtained by reacting the transition arXiv:2310.02965v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 4 Oct 2023 2 Ru-substituted α-RuCl3. (a) Low temperature magnetization high- lighting the magnetic ordering temperature. The data were collected in a magnetic field of 1 kOe along an arbitrary direction in ab-plane. (b) High temperature magnetization highlighting the structural tran- sition at high temperatures. The measurement is performed with a ramping rate of 2 K/min in a magnetic field of 10 kOe applied per- pendicular to the plate. metal oxides with AlCl3-KCl salt . Plate-like crystals with a typical in-plane dimension of 5-10 mm and thickness up to 1 mm can be obtained. Magnetic properties were measured with a Quantum Design (QD) Magnetic Property Measure- ment System in the temperature range 2.0-300 K. The compo- sitions of the crystals were determined using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) with a Hitachi TM3000 scanning elec- tron microscope and Bruker Quantax70 spectrometer. EDS suggests the transition metal/chlorine ratio is 1:3. However, the significant overlap of peaks prevents a reliable determina- tion of the real composition. Therefore, nominal composition is used in this work. Magnetic measurements were used to screen crystals for further characterizations. We noticed some variation of magnetic and structural transitions among crys- tals from the same batch, indicating the variation of substi- tution content. Therefore, magnetic and neutron diffraction measurements were performed on the same piece of crystals for each composition. Neutron diffraction experiments of 10% substituted compo- sitions were carried out using the single crystal diffractome- ter CORELLI at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS) to study both the crystal and magnetic structures and the corre- sponding structural transition. Individual crystals were glued to a thin aluminum plate and loaded inside a closed-cycle re- frigerator with a base temperature of 5 K. The neutron diffrac- tion data are first collected at 200 K (above the structural tran- sition) with 360 degrees of rotation about the vertical axis. After samples were cooled to base temperature, another full map was collected to investigate the magnetic structure. The crystals were then warmed back to 200 K to probe possible structural change after thermal cycling. During initial cooling and subsequent warming, characteristic Bragg peaks that are unique to the specific space group of the crystal were closely monitored as function of temperature with a ramping rate of 1 K/min. A similar single crystal neutron diffraction experiment of 20% Rh-substituted samples were also performed on the TOPAZ diffractometer at SNS. Crystals were at- tached via GE varnish to thin aluminum posts with the mon- oclinic a∗ axis oriented vertically. Sample temperature was controlled by a Cryomech P415 pulse tube cryocooler and data were collected using sample orientations optimized for coverage with the CrystalPlan software . Data were taken above the structural transition at 250 K as well as below the structural transitions at base temperature of 15 K. Crystals were cooled and heated at a rate of 2 K/min and the transi- tions were tracked studying the nominal (1, 1, 3) Bragg peak of the low temperature R ̄3 structure. intensity for (a) 10% Rh-substituted and (b) 10% Ir-substituted α- RuCl3 showing large hysteresis in structure transformation between high-temperature C2/m monoclinic and low-temperature R ̄3 trig- onal structure. The first order transition is complete and does not exhibit remnant phase coexistence at low temperature. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The temperature-dependent magnetization of 10% Ru- and Ir-substituted α-RuCl3 crystals used for neutron diffraction study at CORELLI is shown in Fig. 1. Both samples ex- hibit a long-range magnetic order with similar TN = 6 K. The different magnitudes of the magnetization drop below TN may result from different in-plane field directions. A weak hump around 10 K is observed for the Ir-substituted crystals, indicating the presence of stacking disorder in this piece of crystal. The higher temperature magnetization shown in 1(b) highlights the structure transition. For both compositions, the transition occurs around 60 K upon cooling and 150 K upon 3 sity of (1, 1, 3) reflection of 20% Rh-substituted α-RuCl3. Magnetic data were collected with a ramping rate of 2 K/min in a magnetic field of 1 T applied perpendicular the crystal plate. No long range magnetic order is observed above 2 K while the structure transition is still present. warming, resulting in a wide loop in the temperature depen- dent magnetization. The presence of the structure transition is further confirmed by neutron diffraction study. Structural refinement indicates that the substituted α-RuCl3 systems crystallize in a mono- clinic C2/m space group at room temperature and transforms to trigonal R ̄3 space group at low temperature consistent with other reports in crystals without doping . Figure 2(a) shows the T-dependence of the nuclear reflection (1, 1, 3) in- dexed in the low-T R ̄3 space group upon cooling and warm- ing. The abrupt increase in intensity near 75 K of this peak on cooling and sudden disappearance at 150 K on warming confirms the transition is first order and is consistent with pre- vious investigation on the pure α-RuCl3 where the temper- ature difference of the structural transition between cooling and warming critically depends on the degree of stacking dis- order . A narrower hysteresis window typically implies the single crystal contains smaller amount of stacking disor- der. The large hysteresis windows observed in Figs. 1 and 2 might reflect increased stacking disorder. It is yet to be investi- gated whether the stacking disorder comes from inappropriate growth parameters or chemical substitution. In parent α-RuCl3, the structure transition occurs around 170 K upon warming. In contrast, our observations in this study indicate a transition temperature roughly 20 K lower for 10% Rh or Ir substituted compositions. This reduction in the structure transition temperature appears to be a consequence of chemical substitution. Figure 3(a) shows the temperature dependence of magnetization of 20% Rh-substituted RuCl3. No long range magnetic order was observed above 2 K for this composition. The thermal evolution of the (1, 1, 3) peaks shown in Fig. 3(b) indicates the structure transition occurs around 50 K upon cooling and 130 K upon warming. Both temperatures are consistent with those obtained from mag- netic measurements. It is worth noting that the transition tem- perature upon warming is further reduced compared to those for 10% Rh or Ir-substituted compositions. This indicates that the nonmagnetic substitution in the honeycomb plane af- fects not only the in-plane magnetic interactions but the inter- layer coupling. Despite the apparent difference in the thermal hysteresis, the structural parameters among all substituted α- RuCl3 samples from structure refinement remains unchanged compared to the parent compound. The lattice constants, bond distances, and bond angles are nearly the same within uncer- tainty (see Appendix). This could be expected as the effective ionic radii of and Rh3+ is 0.665 ̊A, similar to Ir3+ and Ru3+ that are identical at 0.68 ̊A . The difference between the room temperature monoclinic C2/m phase shown in Fig. 4(a) and low-T trigonal R ̄3 phase shown in Fig. 4(b) can be visualized in the reciprocal space mappings that are displayed Fig. 4(c)-Fig. 4(h). Lattice pa- rameter determination from observed structural Bragg peaks indicates room temperature monoclinic cell parameters with base centering conditions. At low temperature, a hexagonal cell is observed with peaks indexed with rhombohedral lat- tice centering. Each space group can be confirmed through detailed analysis of the Bragg intensities using least squares refinement. More details about the structure refinements and Bragg integration are given in the Appendix. In the room tem- perature phase, the honeycomb layers are stacked in an ar- rangement corresponding to a simple translation along the c- axis with displacement vector perpendicular to the armchair of the honeycomb bond that is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). In the case of the low-T trigonal phase, the stacking sequence is different as shown in Fig. 4(b). Viewing from the direction perpendicu- lar to the basal plane, the neighboring layers are separated by an in-plane displacement vector of [2/3a, 1/3a] which is 60◦ from the armchair bond. for both crystals at 200 K (pristine), 5 K (cooled), and 200 K (warmed) conditions. The C2/m → R ̄3 structural transi- tion induces notable structural diffuse scattering in the low- temperature phase. The line-cuts across a Bragg peak along the c∗-direction in Figs. 4(d) and 4(g) for Rh-doping and Ir- doping, respectively, show clear Lorentzian profile with a full width half maximum approximately 0.1 reciprocal lattice unit indicating a correlation length of 155±5 ̊A. However, the samples fully recover the original states after thermal cycling evidenced by the sharp Bragg reflections and the lack of rod- like feature along the c∗-direction. For the crystal with Rh- doping, this is shown in Figs. 4(c) and 4(e) that can be com- pared to the crystal with Ir-doping shown Figs. 4(f) and 4(h). Two distinct sets of Bragg intensities are in the low temper- ature trigonal phase: one strong and the other weak. The strong set is from the major structural domain which fulfills the rhombohedral obverse setting (−h + k + l = 3n). The weaker set originates from a twinned domain generated by a two-axis rotation about the [1, ̄1, 0]-direction of the major do- main in the reverse setting (h − k + l = 3n). This type of 4 crystals are indexed using monoclinic C2/m space group at high temperature while the low-T data are indexed in the hexagonal R ̄3 space group. Note both systems recover to the pristine state showing absence of structural diffuse scattering after thermal cycling back to 200 K. For the Ir-substituted sample, the appearance of an additional domain can be indexed using a twin with 120◦ rotation about the c∗-axis. This domain recovers after thermal cycling. The inset shows selected line-cuts along the c∗-axis with sharp Bragg peaks in the monoclinic phase and broad peaks with diffuse scattering along c∗ in the trigonal setting. netic satellite peaks with propagation wavevector (0, 0.5, 1) for the 10% Ir-substituted α-RuCl3 at T = 5.0 K. Two structural domains correspond to obverse/reverse twinning with volume ratio of 77:23. Structural peaks from the major domain are highlighted in dashed white circles. The magnetic twins associated with the major struc- tural domain are evident with 120◦ rotation along c∗ and marked in closed white circles. Note that the axes are skewed according to the 60◦ angle between a∗ and b∗. (b) The intensity slice in the (0, k, l) plane. Magnetic reflections are present at k = ±0.5 with l = ±1, ±2 and ±4. The line-cut across k = 0.5 shows a distinct distribution of intensities corresponding to the two structural domains. obverse/reverse twinning is found to occur in the R ̄3 space group . The population ratio is 77:23. A proper identifi- cation of this ratio is important for determining the spin con- figuration that relies on an accurate account of all structural and magnetic domain contributions. Both 10% substituted compositions enter a magnetic or- RuCl3 at T = 5.0 K. The magnetic moments are aligned in the ac plane with a canting angle of 15(4)◦ away from the basal plane. (b) The temperature dependence of the integrated intensity of the (0, 0.5, 1) magnetic reflection. The dashed line is guide to eye. The inset shows selective cuts across the magnetic transition. dered state at low temperature. The characteristic propaga- tion vector (0, 0.5, 1) is the same as that reported in the par- ent α-RuCl3 but different from the sample that re- tains a low-T monoclinic structure . A complete recipro- cal space map is necessary to elucidate the coexisting struc- tural and magnetic domains for a reliable determination of the magnetic structure. Figure 5(a) shows the (h, k, l = 1) slice of the 10% Ir-substituted sample at 5 K. For the major struc- tural domain, there could exist three magnetic twins that are 5 120◦ apart along the c∗-axis, since the magnetic wavevector breaks the three-fold symmetry. For this domain, two strong magnetic reflections located at (0, 0.5, 1) and (0.5, −0.5, 1) are visible and highlighted in closed circles. A third magnetic domain originating from the major structural domain is hardly visible at the expected (−0.5, 0, 1) peak position. By contrast, the minor structural domain shows one distinct magnetic peak at (0, −0.5, 1). Figure 5(b) shows the (h = 0, k, l) slice where the magnetic satellite peaks are present at k = ±0.5. The line-cut along the [0, 0, l]-direction shows markedly strong in- tensities at l = −2, 1 and 4, while the weak reflections at remaining l values come from the minor structural domain. Two structural domains are also observed in the 10% Rh- substituted sample at 5 K. The magnetic reflections can also be indexed with the same (0, 0.5, 1) wavevector, but the mag- netic signal is too weak due to lower counting statistics for proper extraction of the magnetic intensities needed for struc- ture refinement. More details related to 10% Rh-substituted sample are given in the Appendix. The magnetic space group compliant with the wavevector (0, 0.5, 1) and Ru-ion at the 6c site in the parent R ̄3 space group is PS−1 (#2.7 BNS setting). Although the magnetic cell doubles the unit cell along the b-axis, there is only one magnetic site with a- and c-axis components to be determined for the zigzag spin structure. Given that magnetic intensity measurements probe the spin component perpendicular S⊥ to the momentum transfer Q [S⊥ = ˆQ×(S× ˆQ)], a comprehen- sive examination of out-of-plane l components in the surveyed magnetic reflections (0, 0.5, l = 1 + 3n) further constrains the spin canting angles. A sizable intensity at l = 4 implies the spin component is directed closer to the ab-plane. To- gether with magnetic reflections from other twinned magnetic domains, magnetic structure refinement of the Ir-substituted sample using Fullprof results in a zigzag structure with spin canting angle slightly away from the basal plane. The goodness of fit remains relatively flat for the canting angle between -15◦ to 15◦ but increases sharply beyond these val- ues. This sets an upper boundary for the canting angle. A more detailed analysis is given in the Appendix. The ordered moment is determined to be 0.32(5) μB/Ru at 5 K and the resulting spin configuration is illustrated in Fig. 6(a). The thermal evolution of the integrated (0, 0.5, 1) peak intensity is shown in Fig. 6(b) where the N ́eel temperature is observed near 6 K and is consistent with the magnetic susceptibility study in Fig. 1(a). An earlier study of pure α-RuCl3 re- ported an ordered moment of 0.73 μB/Ru at 4 K with canting angle of 48◦ from the a-axis. The moment at 5 K from this report based on the change in magnetic Bragg peak is esti- mated to be 0.69 μB/Ru. In a separate independent study, the moment size at 4.2 K is determined to be 0.45(5) μB/Ru with canting angle 35◦ away from the honeycomb plane . This indicates the magnetic moment size of the Ir-substituted α-RuCl3 sample observed in this study is smaller than that reported in the parent compound α-RuCl3. The spin direction is crucial to understand the strength of relative interactions and nature of the zigzag order. Since the discovery of α-RuCl3 as one of the promising candi- dates realizing Kitaev quantum spin liquid, extensive efforts have focused on identifying a proper microscopic model that is capable of capturing the essential features of the inelastic neutron scattering and bulk property data [43–49]. A com- bined analysis of various experimental observations has con- verged on a minimal generalized Kitaev-Heisenberg Hamil- tonian (K-J-Γ-Γ′-J3) encompassing Ising-like Kitaev inter- action K, Heisenberg exchange J, symmetric off-diagonal exchange coupling Γ, Γ′, and the third-neighbor Heisenberg coupling J3 [50–57]. The Kitaev term K for α-RuCl3 is gen- erally considered to be ferromagnetic and it is believed the zigzag order is stabilized by either longer-range antiferromagnetic couplings J3 or anisotropic off-diagonal Γ and Γ′ terms . A sufficiently strong anisotropic term Γ leads to a moment locked in the ac-crystallographic plane while the introduction of Γ′, usually small and originating from trigonal compression, lowers the critical threshold of Γ required to stabilize the moment. The canting angle α away from the honeycomb plane can be analytically expressed as tan 2α = 4/ √ . The canting angle obtained in this study serves as a valuable constraint for understanding the relative strength of the terms K, Γ, and Γ′ in further studies of the microscopic models of substituted α-RuCl3. Furthermore, our structure investigation reveals minimal al- teration of the lattice parameters and average local RuCl6 en- vironment when compared to the parent compound α-RuCl3 (see Appendix). The trigonal crystal electric field arising from compression of the RuCl6 octahedra, plays a pivotal role in stabilizing the zigzag order evidenced from the strong anisotropic magnetization , akin to observations in iri- dates . The absence of significant changes in these struc- tural parameters suggests the suppression of both the tran- sition temperature and ordered moment comes factors other than chemical pressure or alterations of crystalline elec- tric field. One possible contributing factor could be the disruption of exchange pathways due to the dilution of the honeycomb lattice. On the other hand, the inelastic neu- tron scattering spectra have shown that the spin liquid state in Ru1−xIrxCl3 is robust against iridium doping; the low- T characteristic upper excitation feature associated with the fractionalized excitations is present in a wide range of non- magnetic iridium doping even when the static spin order is completely absent . This is in line with the recent theoreti- cal study where the introduction of nonmagnetic vacancy con- centrations preserves most of the spin-liquid behavior . The vacancies contribute to a pileup of Majorana modes accu- mulated in the density of states, which can be experimentally verified by future low-T specific heat measurements. SUMMARY In summary, we use neutron single crystal diffraction to determine the crystal and magnetic structure of honeycomb 6 lattice α-RuCl3 with Ru partially substituted by nonmagnetic Rh3+ and Ir3+ ions. Similar to α-RuCl3, both 10% substi- tuted samples exhibit a zigzag magnetic order with an identi- cal characteristic magnetic wavevector below TN, undergo a first-order structural transition from room-temperature C2/m to low-temperature R ̄3 phase, fully revert to their original C2/m state after undergoing thermal cycling. An examina- tion of the nuclear structure suggests that the substitution of Ir/Rh does not introduce any significant alterations in either the average structure or the local environment of the RuCl6 octahedra. However, both the magnetic order and the struc- tural transition upon warming are observed to occur at lower temperatures in these chemically substituted samples, indicat- ing the nonmagnetic impurities affect both the in-plane mag- netic interactions and the interlayer coupling. The magnetic structure refinement conducted in the Ir-substituted sample has revealed a reduction in both the magnetic moment size and canting angle when compared to the values reported ear- lier for α-RuCl3. These findings provide valuable constraints for future theoretical investigations into the magnetic Hamil- tonian in substituted α-RuCl3. Chemical substitution with nonmagnetic ions of similar atomic radii presents an attractive approach for tailoring the magnetic properties of materials in close proximity to a quantum spin liquid state. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS IY was supported by an appointment to the Oak Ridge Na- tional Laboratory (ORNL) Next Generation STEM Internship Program (NGSI) Program, sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy and administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education. This research was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Na- tional Quantum Information Science Research Centers, Quan- tum Science Center and used resources at the Spallation Neu- tron Source, a DOE Office of Science User Facility operated by ORNL. All drawings of crystal and magnetic structures were obtained using VESTA software . This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract No. DE-AC0500OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. APPENDIX Structural Analysis Nuclear Bragg peaks of the sample are integrated in recip- rocal space and corrected with Lorentz and spectrum correc- tions . Using a best-fitting three dimensional ellipsoid en- velope, the resulting intensities are corrected for wavelength- dependent absorption of the sample using an equiva- lent sphere analytical correction with chemical formula Ru0.9R0.1Cl3 (R = Ir, Rh), unit cell Z-parameter and vol- ume. The Mantid software is used throughout the data reduc- tion process . In the Jana crystal structure refinements, the twin law corresponding to obverse/reverse twinning is in- troduced with variable domain population. A wavelength- dependent secondary spherical extinction correction model is applied . Structure refinement of the calculated structure factors to the corrected Bragg intensities from the complete re- ciprocal space maps are used to refine the positions of the Ru and Cl-sites. Determination of the exact doping level is dif- ficult due to the typical broadening of Bragg peaks observed in van der Waals materials. In addition, the scattering length of Rh is somewhat closer to Ru than Ir. For the 10%-samples measured at CORELLI, the compositions are determined to be 6-7% for Ir-doped sample and 11% for Rh-doped sample. Subsequent refinements to obtain the bond distances and an- gles are done with composition fixed at x = 0.1. For the TOPAZ Rh-doped sample with the nominal composition of x = 0.2, the sample composition is determined to be 22% Rh.. for the doped α-RuCl3 compared to un-doped one. Note uncertain- ties of lattice constant are standard errors. Lengths are in angstroms and angles are in degrees C2/m 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent a b c β R ̄3 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent a c ature C2/m and low temperature R ̄3 phases. The parame- ters for all compositions appear similar. For the monoclinic case, a reference sample previously measured on CORELLI at 200 K is reported . In the case of the trigonal phase, the parameters at 5 K from are used for comparison. For clarity, the R ̄3 space group has a hexagonal unit cell with R rhombohedral lattice centering. Structural refinement anal- ysis is performed using Jana2020 to obtain the refined site fractional coordinates. Typical bond-distances, and angles of the RuCl6 octahedra are reported in Table II. In this table, the superscript indicates a symmetry operator of the site that forms the bond. No superscript indicates the identity operator (x, y, z). There does not appear to be a significant difference among all samples studied. The low temperature reference values for the trigonal case are also from at 5 K. Magnetic Structure Analysis The zigzag magnetic structure corresponds to irreducible representation Γ1. The basis vectors from representation anal- ysis are shown in Table III for the Ru ion and used in the Full- Prof refinement . Magnetic peaks from the Ir-substituted sample are integrated in a similar fashion to the structural 7 temperature phases for the doped α-RuCl3 compared to un-doped one. Note uncertainties are standard errors. Lengths are in angstroms and angles are in degrees. C2/m 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent Ru1-Cl1 Ru1-Cl2 Ru1-Cl2ii R ̄3 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent Ru1-Cl1 Ru1-Cl1III C2/m 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent Cl1-Ru1-Cl1i Cl1-Ru1-Cl2 Cl1-Ru1-Cl2i Cl1-Ru1-Cl2ii Cl2-Ru1-Cl2ii Cl2-Ru1-Cl2iii Cl2ii-Ru1-Cl2iii R ̄3 10%-Rh 20%-Rh 10%-Ir parent Cl1-Ru1-Cl1I Cl1-Ru1-Cl1III Cl1-Ru1-Cl1V Cl1III-Ru1-Cl1IV Superscript indicates symmetry operator. Unlabeled refers to (x, y, z). V(x − y + 1/3, x − 1/3, −z + 2/3) magnetic structure with the Ru 6c site. Γ1 ψ1 ψ2 ψ3 Ru (0, 0, z) (1, 0, 0) (0, 1, 0) (0, 0, 1) Ru (0, 0, ̄z) ( ̄1, 0, 0) (0, ̄1, 0) (0, 0, ̄1) that minimizes the χ2 from 12 magnetic peaks. The solid red line is guide to the eye. (b) Dependence of fitted χ2 per degree of freedom with canting angle comparing observed integrated intensities to cal- culated structure factors for the 10% Ir-substituted sample. Canting angle shows a clear minimum near 15◦ denoted with the dashed red line. Bragg peaks. Six magnetic peaks from each structural domain are integrated. The primary domain with 77% contribution contains the magnetic reflections that are offset from indexed nuclear peaks in the rhombohedrally centered obverse setting. The secondary domain with 23% has peaks indexed from the reverse twin as discussed in the text. To determine the moment size, the magnetic peaks are refined with the Bragg reflections to obtain the scale factor. The observed magnetic intensities are compared to the ex- pected values for the refined structure are shown in Fig. 7(a) for the Ir-substituted sample with canting angle 15◦. The χ2 goodness of fit per degree of freedom (dof) with variable canting angle from the magnetic structural model is shown in Fig. 7(b) and shows a clear minimum near 15◦. Above 15◦ (and below −15◦), the χ2 deviates drastically. Hence, 15◦ is the upper bound of the canting angle. As the change in χ2 is small about zero canting angle within ±15 does not rule out smaller canting angles within uncertainty. The order parameter of the Ir-substituted (0, 0.5, 1) mag- netic satellite peak integrated intensity is compared to refer- ence data for the parent compound in Fig. 8. The intensities of the reference data are scaled by a factor to the guide line. For reference with un-substituted crystal structure determined in space group R ̄3, it is estimated that the moment size of the parent compound at 5 K data will be about 0.69 μB/Ru which is associated with an approximately 10 % drop in intensity from the value at 4 K estimated from the in- tensity reduction of the order parameter. A reduction of inten- sity by a factor is associated with a corresponding change of moment size by the square root of that factor since intensities scale with the square of the magnetic structure factor. Simi- larly, for reference with magnetic structure determined in parent space group C2/m, the associated drop in intensity is approximately 5% at 5K indicating a minor change in moment size (approximately 0.46 μB/Ru). This suggests the magnetic moment size of the Ir-substituted sample is smaller than these previous reports. As the Rh-doped sample has a similar reverse/obverse structural twinning with one major and minor domain, the ap- pearance of magnetic peaks follows a similar trend with the Ir-doped sample. The (0, k, l) intensity slice from the Rh- doped sample at 5 K is displayed in Fig. 9 and shows magnetic peaks appearing at similar positions as the Ir-doped sample out to l = ±4 which include (0, 0.5, ±1), (0, 0.5, ±2), and (0, 0.5, ±4). Magnetic peaks can also be observed along the [0, −0.5, l] direction. Due to counting statistics, the magnetic peaks are too weak for reliable integration and magnetic struc- ture refinement. X. Du, I. Skachko, F. Duerr, A. Luican, and E. Y. Andrei, Frac- tional quantum Hall effect and insulating phase of Dirac elec- trons in graphene, Nature 462, 192 (2009). K. I. Bolotin, F. Ghahari, M. D. Shulman, H. L. Stormer, and P. Kim, Observation of the fractional quantum Hall effect in graphene, Nature 462, 196 (2009). 8 Comparison of the thermal evolution of the 10% Ir- substituted (0, 0.5, 1) magnetic satellite peak to order parameters from references corresponding to un-substituted α-RuCl3. The intensity values of the reference data are scaled to the guide line. The transition of the present data appears lower than the parent ma- terial. The intensity slice in the (0, k, l) plane from the 10% Rh-substituted sample. Magnetic reflections are present but appear weaker than observed in 10% Ir-doping at k = ±0.5 with l = ±1, ±2 and ±4. L. Balents, Spin liquids in frustrated magnets, Nature 464, 199 K. Kitagawa, T. Takayama, Y. Matsumoto, A. Kato, R. Takano, Y. Kishimoto, S. Bette, R. Dinnebier, G. Jackeli, and H. Tak- agi, A spin–orbital-entangled quantum liquid on a honeycomb lattice, Nature 554, 341 (2018). A. Kitaev, Anyons in an exactly solved model and beyond, Annals of Physics 321, 2 (2006). G. Jackeli and G. Khaliullin, Mott Insulators in the Strong Spin- Orbit Coupling Limit: From Heisenberg to a Quantum Com- pass and Kitaev Models, Physical Review Letters 102, 017205 K. W. Plumb, J. P. Clancy, L. J. Sandilands, V. V. Shankar, Y. F. Hu, K. S. Burch, H.-Y. Kee, and Y.-J. Kim, α-RuCl3: A spin- orbit assisted Mott insulator on a honeycomb lattice, Physical Review B 90, 041112 (2014). H. Takagi, T. Takayama, G. Jackeli, G. Khaliullin, and S. E. Nagler, Concept and realization of kitaev quantum spin liquids, Nature Reviews Physics 1, 264 (2019). L. J. Sandilands, Y. Tian, K. W. Plumb, Y.-J. Kim, and K. S. Burch, Scattering Continuum and Possible Fractionalized Ex- citations in α - RuCl 3, Physical Review Letters 114, 147201 J. Nasu, J. Knolle, D. L. Kovrizhin, Y. Motome, and R. Moess- ner, Fermionic response from fractionalization in an insulating two-dimensional magnet, Nature Physics 12, 912 (2016). A. Banerjee, C. A. Bridges, J.-Q. Yan, A. A. Aczel, L. Li, M. B. Stone, G. E. Granroth, M. D. Lumsden, Y. Yiu, J. Knolle, S. Bhattacharjee, D. L. Kovrizhin, R. Moessner, D. A. Tennant, D. G. Mandrus, and S. E. Nagler, Proximate Kitaev quantum spin liquid behaviour in a honeycomb magnet, Nature Materials A. Banerjee, P. Lampen-Kelley, J. Knolle, C. Balz, A. A. Aczel, B. Winn, Y. Liu, D. Pajerowski, J. Yan, C. A. Bridges, A. T. Savici, B. C. Chakoumakos, M. D. Lumsden, D. A. Tennant, R. Moessner, D. G. Mandrus, and S. E. Nagler, Excitations in the field-induced quantum spin liquid state of α-RuCl3, npj Quantum Materials 3, 1 (2018). Y. Kasahara, T. Ohnishi, Y. Mizukami, O. Tanaka, S. Ma, K. Sugii, N. Kurita, H. Tanaka, J. Nasu, Y. Motome, T. Shibauchi, and Y. Matsuda, Majorana quantization and half- integer thermal quantum Hall effect in a Kitaev spin liquid, Na- ture 559, 227 (2018). T. Yokoi, S. Ma, Y. Kasahara, S. Kasahara, T. Shibauchi, N. Ku- rita, H. Tanaka, J. Nasu, Y. Motome, C. Hickey, S. Trebst, and Y. Matsuda, Half-integer quantized anomalous thermal Hall ef- fect in the Kitaev material candidate α-RuCl3, Science 373, J. A. N. Bruin, R. R. Claus, Y. Matsumoto, N. Kurita, H. Tanaka, and H. Takagi, Robustness of the thermal Hall effect close to half-quantization in α-RuCl3, Nature Physics (2022). P. Czajka, T. Gao, M. Hirschberger, P. Lampen-Kelley, A. Banerjee, N. Quirk, D. G. Mandrus, S. E. Nagler, and N. P. Ong, Planar thermal Hall effect of topological bosons in the Kitaev magnet α-RuCl3, Nature Materials 22, 36 (2023). S.-Y. Park, S.-H. Do, K.-Y. Choi, D. Jang, T.-H. Jang, J. Schefer, C.-M. Wu, J. S. Gardner, J. M. S. Park, J.-H. Park, and S. Ji, Emergence of the Isotropic Kitaev Honeycomb Lattice with Two-dimensional Ising Universality in α-RuCl3, H. B. Cao, A. Banerjee, J.-Q. Yan, C. A. Bridges, M. D. Lums- den, D. G. Mandrus, D. A. Tennant, B. C. Chakoumakos, and S. E. Nagler, Low-temperature crystal and magnetic structure of α-RuCl3, Physical Review B 93, 134423 (2016). C. Balz, L. Janssen, P. Lampen-Kelley, A. Banerjee, Y. H. Liu, J.-Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, M. Vojta, and S. E. Nagler, Field- induced intermediate ordered phase and anisotropic interlayer interactions in α - RuCl3, Physical Review B 103, 174417 S. K. Choi, R. Coldea, A. N. Kolmogorov, T. Lancaster, I. I. Mazin, S. J. Blundell, P. G. Radaelli, Y. Singh, P. Gegenwart, K. R. Choi, S.-W. Cheong, P. J. Baker, C. Stock, and J. Tay- 9 lor, Spin Waves and Revised Crystal Structure of Honeycomb Iridate Na2IrO3, Physical Review Letters 108, 127204 (2012). F. Ye, S. Chi, H. Cao, B. C. Chakoumakos, J. A. Fernandez- Baca, R. Custelcean, T. F. Qi, O. B. Korneta, and G. Cao, Di- rect evidence of a zigzag spin-chain structure in the honeycomb lattice: A neutron and x-ray diffraction investigation of single- crystal Na 2 IrO 3, Physical Review B 85, 180403 (2012). J. Chaloupka, G. Jackeli, and G. Khaliullin, Zigzag Magnetic Order in the Iridium Oxide Na2IrO3, Physical Review Letters J. A. Sears, Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, J. W. Lynn, and Y.-J. Kim, Phase Diagram of α-RuCl3 in an in-plane Magnetic Field, Physical Review B 95, 180411 (2017). S.-H. Baek, S.-H. Do, K.-Y. Choi, Y. S. Kwon, A. U. B. Wolter, S. Nishimoto, J. van den Brink, and B. B ̈uchner, Evidence for a Field-Induced Quantum Spin Liquid in α - RuCl3, Physical Review Letters 119, 037201 (2017). B. Wolf, D. A. S. Kaib, A. Razpopov, S. Biswas, K. Riedl, S. M. Winter, R. Valent ́ı, Y. Saito, S. Hartmann, E. Vinokurova, T. Doert, A. Isaeva, G. Bastien, A. U. B. Wolter, B. B ̈uchner, and M. Lang, Combined experimental and theoretical study of hydrostatic He-gas pressure effects in α - RuCl3, Physical Review B 106, 134432 (2022). X. Wang, F. Zhu, N. Qureshi, K. Beauvois, J. Song, T. Mueller, T. Br ̈uckel, and Y. Su, Hydrostatic pressure effects in the Kitaev quantum magnet RuCl3: A single-crystal neutron diffraction P. Bhattacharyya, L. Hozoi, Q. Stahl, J. Geck, and N. A. Bog- danov, Sweet spot in the RuCl3 magnetic system: Nearly ideal jeff =1/2 moments and maximized K/J ratio under pressure, R. D. Johnson, S. C. Williams, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Singleton, V. Zapf, P. Manuel, I. I. Mazin, Y. Li, H. O. Jeschke, R. Valent ́ı, and R. Coldea, Monoclinic crystal structure of α-RuCl3 and the zigzag antiferromagnetic ground state, Physical Review B P. Lampen-Kelley, A. Banerjee, A. A. Aczel, H. B. Cao, M. B. Stone, C. A. Bridges, J.-Q. Yan, S. E. Nagler, and D. Mandrus, Destabilization of Magnetic Order in a Dilute Kitaev Spin Liq- uid Candidate, Physical Review Letters 119, 237203 (2017). G. Bastien, M. Roslova, M. H. Haghighi, K. Mehlawat, J. Hunger, A. Isaeva, T. Doert, M. Vojta, B. B ̈uchner, and A. U. B. Wolter, Spin-glass state and reversed mag- netic anisotropy induced by Cr doping in the Kitaev magnet α−RuCl3, Physical Review B 99, 214410 (2019). G. Bastien, E. Vinokurova, M. Lange, K. K. Bestha, L. T. C. Bo- horquez, G. Kreutzer, A. Lubk, T. Doert, B. B ̈uchner, A. Isaeva, and A. U. B. Wolter, Dilution of the magnetic lattice in the Ki- taev candidate α - RuCl3 by Rh3+ doping, Physical Review Materials 6, 114403 (2022). J.-Q. Yan and M. A. McGuire, Self-selecting vapor growth of transition-metal-halide single crystals, Physical Review Mate- rials 7, 013401 (2023). J.-Q. Yan, B. C. Sales, M. A. Susner, and M. A. McGuire, Flux growth in a horizontal configuration: An analog to vapor trans- port growth, Physical Review Materials 1, 023402 (2017). F. Ye, Y. Liu, R. Whitfield, R. Osborn, and S. Rosenkranz, Im- plementation of cross correlation for energy discrimination on the time-of-flight spectrometer CORELLI, Journal of Applied Crystallography 51, 315 (2018). A. J. Schultz, M. R. V. Jørgensen, X. Wang, R. L. Mikkelson, D. J. Mikkelson, V. E. Lynch, P. F. Peterson, M. L. Green, and C. M. Hoffmann, Integration of neutron time-of-flight single- crystal bragg peaks in reciprocal space, Journal of Applied Crystallography 47, 915 (2014). L. Coates et al., A suite-level review of the neutron single- crystal diffraction instruments at oak ridge national laboratory, Review of Scientific Instruments 89 (2018). J. Zikovsky, P. F. Peterson, X. P. Wang, M. Frost, and C. Hoff- mann, Crystalplan: an experiment-planning tool for crystallog- raphy, Journal of Applied Crystallography 44, 418 (2011). S. Mu, K. D. Dixit, X. Wang, D. L. Abernathy, H. Cao, S. E. Nagler, J. Yan, P. Lampen-Kelley, D. Mandrus, C. A. Polanco, L. Liang, G. B. Hal ́asz, Y. Cheng, A. Banerjee, and T. Berlijn, Role of the third dimension in searching for Majorana fermions in α - RuCl 3 via phonons, Physical Review Research 4, 013067 H. Zhang, M. A. McGuire, A. F. May, J. Chao, Q. Zheng, M. Chi, B. C. Sales, D. G. Mandrus, S. E. Nagler, H. Miao, F. Ye, and J. Yan, Stacking disorder and thermal transport prop- erties of α-RuCl3, 2023, 2303.03682. R. D. Shannon, Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides, Acta Cryst A 32, 751 (1976). R. Herbst-Irmer and G. M. Sheldrick, Refinement of ob- verse/reverse twins, Acta Cryst B 58, 477 (2002). J. Rodr ́ıguez-Carvajal, Recent advances in magnetic structure determination by neutron powder diffraction, Physica B: Con- densed Matter 192, 55 (1993). K. Ran, J. Wang, W. Wang, Z.-Y. Dong, X. Ren, S. Bao, S. Li, Z. Ma, Y. Gan, Y. Zhang, J. T. Park, G. Deng, S. Danilkin, S.-L. Yu, J.-X. Li, and J. Wen, Spin-Wave Excitations Evidencing the Kitaev Interaction in Single Crystalline α-RuCl3, Physical Review Letters 118, 107203 (2017). S. M. Winter, K. Riedl, P. A. Maksimov, A. L. Chernyshev, A. Honecker, and R. Valent ́ı, Breakdown of magnons in a strongly spin-orbital coupled magnet, Nature Communications L. Wu, A. Little, E. E. Aldape, D. Rees, E. Thewalt, P. Lampen- Kelley, A. Banerjee, C. A. Bridges, J.-Q. Yan, D. Boone, S. Patankar, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, D. Mandrus, S. E. Nagler, E. Altman, and J. Orenstein, Field evolution of magnons in α - RuCl3 by high-resolution polarized terahertz spectroscopy, Physical Review B 98, 094425 (2018). T. Cookmeyer and J. E. Moore, Spin-wave analysis of the low- temperature thermal Hall effect in the candidate Kitaev spin liq- uid α - RuCl 3, Physical Review B 98, 060412 (2018). P. Lampen-Kelley, S. Rachel, J. Reuther, J.-Q. Yan, A. Baner- jee, C. A. Bridges, H. B. Cao, S. E. Nagler, and D. Mandrus, Anisotropic susceptibilities in the honeycomb Kitaev system α - RuCl 3, Physical Review B 98, 100403 (2018). I. O. Ozel, C. A. Belvin, E. Baldini, I. Kimchi, S. Do, K.- Y. Choi, and N. Gedik, Magnetic field-dependent low-energy magnon dynamics in α – RuCl 3, Physical Review B 100, J. A. Sears, L. E. Chern, S. Kim, P. J. Bereciartua, S. Francoual, Y. B. Kim, and Y.-J. Kim, Ferromagnetic Kitaev interaction and the origin of large magnetic anisotropy in α-RuCl3, Nature Physics 16, 837 (2020). J. Chaloupka and G. Khaliullin, Magnetic anisotropy in the Kitaev model systems Na2IrO3 and RuCl3, Physical Review B H.-S. Kim and H.-Y. Kee, Crystal structure and magnetism in α - RuCl 3 : An ab initio study, Physical Review B 93, 155143 S. M. Winter, Y. Li, H. O. Jeschke, and R. Valent ́ı, Challenges in design of Kitaev materials: Magnetic interactions from com- peting energy scales, Physical Review B 93, 214431 (2016). 10 Y. S. Hou, H. J. Xiang, and X. G. Gong, Unveiling magnetic interactions of ruthenium trichloride via constraining direction of orbital moments: Potential routes to realize a quantum spin liquid, Physical Review B 96, 054410 (2017). W. Wang, Z.-Y. Dong, S.-L. Yu, and J.-X. Li, Theoretical inves- tigation of magnetic dynamics in α - RuCl 3, Physical Review C. Eichstaedt, Y. Zhang, P. Laurell, S. Okamoto, A. G. Eguiluz, and T. Berlijn, Deriving models for the Kitaev spin-liquid can- didate material α - RuCl 3 from first principles, Physical Re- view B 100, 075110 (2019). P. A. Maksimov and A. L. Chernyshev, Rethinkingα-RuCl3, Physical Review Research 2, 033011 (2020). P. Laurell and S. Okamoto, Dynamical and thermal magnetic properties of the Kitaev spin liquid candidate α-RuCl3, npj Quantum Materials 5, 2 (2020). L. Wu, A. Little, E. E. Aldape, D. Rees, E. Thewalt, P. Lampen- Kelley, A. Banerjee, C. A. Bridges, J.-Q. Yan, D. Boone, S. Patankar, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, D. Mandrus, S. E. Nagler, E. Altman, and J. Orenstein, Field evolution of magnons in α - RuCl 3 by high-resolution polarized terahertz spectroscopy, Physical Review B 98, 094425 (2018). Y. Kubota, H. Tanaka, T. Ono, Y. Narumi, and K. Kindo, Suc- cessive magnetic phase transitions in α - RuCl3 : XY-like frus- trated magnet on the honeycomb lattice, Physical Review B 91, H. Gretarsson, J. P. Clancy, X. Liu, J. P. Hill, E. Bozin, Y. Singh, S. Manni, P. Gegenwart, J. Kim, A. H. Said, D. Casa, T. Gog, M. H. Upton, H.-S. Kim, J. Yu, V. M. Katukuri, L. Hozoi, J. van den Brink, and Y.-J. Kim, Crystal field splitting and correlation effect on the electronic structure of A2IrO3, Physical Review Letters 110, 076402 (2013). W.-H. Kao, J. Knolle, G. B. Hal ́asz, R. Moessner, and N. B. Perkins, Vacancy-Induced Low-Energy Density of States in the Kitaev Spin Liquid, Physical Review X 11, 011034 (2021). K. Momma and F. Izumi, VESTA 3 for three-dimensional vi- sualization of crystal, volumetric and morphology data, J Appl Cryst 44, 1272 (2011). T. M. Michels-Clark, A. T. Savici, V. E. Lynch, X. Wang, and C. M. Hoffmann, Expanding Lorentz and spectrum corrections to large volumes of reciprocal space for single-crystal time-of- flight neutron diffraction, J Appl Crystallogr 49, 497 (2016). V. F. Sears, Neutron scattering lengths and cross sections, Neu- tron News 3, 26 (1992). C. W. Dwiggins, Rapid calculation of X-ray absorption correc- tion factors for spheres to an accuracy of 0.05%, Acta Cryst A O. Arnold et al., Mantid—Data analysis and visualization pack- age for neutron scattering and μ SR experiments, Nuclear In- struments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Ac- celerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment P. J. Becker and P. Coppens, Extinction within the limit of va- lidity of the Darwin transfer equations. II. Refinement of ex- tinction in spherical crystals of SrF2 and LiF, Acta Cryst A 30, V. Petˇr ́ıˇcek, L. Palatinus, J. Pl ́aˇsil, and M. Duˇsek, Jana2020 – a new version of the crystallographic computing system Jana, Zeitschrift f ̈ur Kristallographie - Crystalline Materials 238, 271