Soft-Chemical Synthesis, Structure Evolution, and Insulator-to-Metal Transition in a Prototypical Metal Oxide, λ-RhO2 Juan R. Chamorro,∗,† Julia L. Zuo,† Euan N. Bassey,† Aurland K. Watkins,† Guomin Zhu,† Arava Zohar,† Kira E. Wyckoff,† Tiffany L. Kinnibrugh,‡ Saul H. Lapidus,‡ Susanne Stemmer,† Rapha ̈ele J. Cl ́ement,† Stephen D. Wilson,† and Ram Seshadri∗,† †Materials Department and Materials Research Laboratory, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA ‡X-ray Science Division, Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave, Argonne, Illinois 60439, USA E-mail: jrchamorro@ucsb.edu; seshadri@mrl.ucsb.edu 1 arXiv:2310.07053v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 10 Oct 2023 Abstract λ-RhO2, a prototype 4d transition metal oxide, has been prepared by oxidative delithiation of spinel LiRh2O4 using ceric ammonium nitrate. Average-structure stud- ies of this RhO2 polytype, including synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction and elec- tron diffraction, indicate the room temperature structure to be tetragonal, in the space group I41/amd, with a first-order structural transition to cubic Fd ̄3m at T = 345 K on warming. Synchrotron X-ray pair distribution function analysis and 7Li solid state nuclear magnetic resonance measurements suggest that the room temperature struc- ture displays local Rh–Rh bonding. The formation of these local dimers appears to be associated with a metal-to-insulator transition with a non-magnetic ground state, as also supported by density functional theory-based electronic structure calculations. This contribution demonstrates the power of soft chemistry to kinetically stabilize a surprisingly simple binary oxide compound. 2 Introduction In the presence of strong spin-orbit coupling, as expected in 4d and 5d transition metals, a d5 electronic configuration can give rise to an effective j = 1/2 ground state with enhanced correlations, paving the way for exotic long-range macroscopic quantum states such as in α-RuCl3,1–5 Sr2IrO4,6–9 Sr3Ir2O7,10–12 and A2IrO3 (A = Li, Na).13–20 Compounds containing tetravalent rhodium (Rh4+, 4d5), which is isoelectronic to Ru3+ and is the 4d analogue of Ir4+, should possess electronic and magnetic properties similar to those observed in other d5 compounds. However, studies of the chemistry and physics of Rh4+ in the solid state phase space remain rather limited due to the relatively greater stability of the trivalent state (Rh3+, 4d6). In RhO6 octahedra (the most common coordination environment in rhodium oxides, owing to cation size effects), Rh3+ assumes the low-spin d6 configuration, with fully filled t2g states. This stable electronic configuration results in an enhancement of the Rh-O bond strength that is comparatively destabilized in Rh4+, which instead possesses a hole in the low-energy t2g manifold. A search of the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database (ICSD) yields a total of around 266 oxide compounds containing Rh3+, versus 30 unique oxides containing Rh4+. The difficulty in synthesizing oxide compounds with Rh4+ originates from the high oxidative potential required to oxidize Rh3+ to Rh4+, as well as the predilection for RhO2 to vaporize.21,22 These issues have been addressed by performing syntheses under high oxygen pressures that can stabilize higher oxidation states and arrest volatilization, and have yielded a num- ber of rhodium(IV) oxides such as ARhO3 (A = Ca, Sr, and Ba),23–25 Sr3Rh2O7,26 and Sr4Rh3O10.27 In fact, the synthesis of RhO2 in either its rutile28 or cubic29 forms requires high oxygen pressure in order to form. Of the few reported Rh4+ oxide compounds in the literature, only a small number have been demonstrated to possess phenomena similar to other aforementioned d5 mate- rials, such as in the correlated electron metal Sr2RhO4,30–32 spin-glass Li2RhO3,33–35 and the mixed-valent, Rh3+/Rh4+ spinel LiRh2O4.36–38 In contrast to other d5 systems, however, 3 spin-orbit coupling appears to play a near negligible role in establishing the ground state of Rh4+ oxides, and other single-ion instabilities, such as Jahn-Teller distortions, often play a much larger part. This is the case for mixed-valent LiRh2O4, which crystallizes at room tem- perature in the prototypical cubic Fd ̄3m spinel structure, but distorts at low temperature into a tetragonal cell owing to a Jahn-Teller instability of the Rh4+ octahedra, and then to an orthorhombic cell on further cooling due to charge-ordering.37,38 While many rhodium oxide spinels exist, including CoRh2O4,39,40 NiRh2O4,41,42 and CuRh2O4,40,43 LiRh2O4 is the only one possessing any Rh4+. The Rh cations in LiRh2O4 form a three-dimensional pyrochlore network, and thus in- teractions between them can be destabilized by geometric frustration. A total topotactic delithiation of LiRh2O4 to Rh2O4 would result in a pyrochlore network of exclusively Rh4+, which would be a potential j = 1/2 Rh analog of the RE2Ir2O7 (RE = Y, Pr−Lu) pyrochlore iridates. Some of these pyrochlore iridates display metal-to-insulator transitions44–46 aris- ing from strong interactions between Ir cations, and possess non-trivial band topologies that give rise to various exotic states such as Weyl semimetal47–50 and Luttinger liquid51–53 states. In order to synthesize Rh2O4, we sought to topotactically remove Li+ cations from LiRh2O4 using electrochemical cells and chemical agents. Initial tests using these cells and common solution-based delithiating oxidants such as Br2 and I2 in acetonitrile did not re- veal obvious changes to the crystallographic structure, as determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). We therefore turned to other chemical oxidants with oxidation potentials greater than those of Br2 and I2, in order to overcome the aforementioned Rh3+ → Rh4+ redox barrier. In this work, we report the topotactic, oxidative delithiation of LiRh2O4 to form a new rhodium (IV) oxide, λ-RhO2. Fashioned after λ-MnO2, which was also obtained via soft, chemical delithiation of LiMn2O4 spinel in acid,54 we have employed the use of ceric am- monium nitrate (NH4)2Ce(NO3)6 to remove nearly all of the lithium cations in LiRh2O4 topotactically, retaining the parent spinel architecture. 7Li solid-state nuclear magnetic 4 resonance (NMR) measurements indicate that the nominal lithium content is 84(1)% re- duced as compared to the parent compound. To our knowledge, this is the first reported application of ceric ammonium nitrate, a powerful shelf-stable oxidizer with an oxidizing potential superior to that of elemental chlorine, for the topotactic oxidative delithiation of an extended solid. Our results indicate that λ-RhO2 is a metal at high temperatures in excess of T = 350 K and crystallizes in the cubic Fd ̄3m space group, while it undergoes a hysteretic metal-to-insulator transition on cooling that reduces the average structure to tetragonal I41/amd. This transition is accompanied by the formation of short-range Rh-Rh dimers, formed through direct metal-metal bonding, and results in a non-magnetic ground state. This work expands the ARh2O4 rhodium oxide spinel phase space to the extreme limit where A is occupied by a vacancy. Results and Discussion Topotactic Oxidative Delithiation Reactions Oxidative delithiation of LiRh2O4 was performed using ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN), a reagent commonly used in other fields of synthetic and industrial chemistry,55–58 but rarely used in synthetic solid state chemistry. It is a powerful, one electron oxidizing agent that is driven by the single electron process Ce4+ + e− → Ce3+, which has a reduction potential of E◦ = 1.61 V.55 This potential is higher than that of other commonly used powerful oxidizers for the topotactic deintercalation of extended solids, such as Cl2 and Br2 (E◦ = 1.36 and 1.08 V, respectively),59 and is on par with permanganates (MnO4−, 1.51−1.67 V). CAN is a non-hygroscopic, shelf-stable compound that can be readily handled in air and is soluble in aqueous and organic solvents. Its use in low temperature chimie douce reactions remains largely unexplored in the synthetic materials chemistry literature, and our findings present a case where CAN can be employed to stabilize a rare, tetravalent oxidation state in rhodium. 5 This article is focused primarily on the nearly-fully-delithiated end member of the Li1−xRh2O4 phase space, λ-RhO2 (Li0.1(1)Rh2O4). This compound is synthesized using an excess amount of CAN in water, whereas other Li1−xRh2O4 compounds are synthesized by selecting a target CAN concentration in each solution per mol of LiRh2O4. The proposed chemical equation for the oxidative delithiation reaction is: Based on this reaction, one mole of CAN is needed to fully delithiate LiRh2O4. We prepared samples of Li1−xRh2O4 at x = 0.1 intervals, and performed synchrotron X-ray diffraction measurements at T = 400 K, as discussed in more depth further in this text, in order to track their lattice parameters as a function of targeted delithiation. At this temperature, every sample had a cubic structure, and the cubic lattice parameter as a function of the relative CAN/LiRh2O4 amount is shown in Figure 1(a). tive molar amount of CAN to LiRh2O4 in each reaction. The trend is linear and intercepts with the λ-RhO2 lattice parameter at x = 1.5. (b)-(d) Results of operando X-ray diffraction measurements. The cell voltage and lattice parameter of Li1−xRh2O4 increases on charging (removal of Li+ from the lattice) up to approximately x = 0.45, beyond which the voltage and lattice parameter begins to decrease. The lattice parameter of the cubic Li1−xRh2O4 cell increases approximately linearly with increasing targeted x. However, λ-RhO2, prepared with CAN in excess, has a cubic lattice 6 parameter at T = 400 K that is achieved when using a 1.5CAN:1.0LiRh2O4 molar ratio, suggesting that the above delithiation reaction is incomplete. Further work is required to understand the reaction mechanism, including the thermodynamic and kinetic barriers faced under these strong oxidizing conditions. We also attempted to synthesize Li1−xRh2O4 phases with variable Li content using other reagents and electrochemistry. Reactions in either Br2 or I2 solutions in acetonitrile, common oxidative deintercalation agents,60–63 did not yield any noticeable differences in diffraction patterns of Li1−xRh2O4 targeted samples vs. LiRh2O4, nor significant variations in measurements of the low temperature physical properties. We also prepared an elec- trochemical cell of LiRh2O4 vs. Li-metal in order to test electrochemical delithiation. Cells were discharged to 1 V (lithiation) and then charged to 3 V (delithiation). As shown in with a voltage profile similar to that observed in Mn- and Ni- containing spinels, albeit at a lower voltage.64 The removal of lithium from Li1−xRh2O4 results in an increase in the lattice parameter upon delithiation, marked by a shift in the diffraction peaks to lower an- gles. However, at approximately Li0.55Rh2O4, both the voltage and lattice parameter begin to anomalously decrease, likely due to a breakdown of the cell electrolyte. As such, the electrochemical method employing an LiPF6 electrolyte is insufficient in removing more than 45% Li from the structure. Results from refinements of the operando X-ray diffrac- tion measurements are shown in the supplementary information (Figure S1) and further indicate that λ-RhO2 cannot be obtained electrochemically, as revealed by the absence of XRD reflections associated with the tetragonal λ-RhO2 phase, discussed in more detail below. Average Structure, and Structure Evolution Rietveld refinements were performed on X-ray diffraction data sets collected on λ-RhO2 obtained via chemical delithiation at the 11-BM beamline at Argonne National Laboratory 7 between T = 100 and 400 K. Data and fits for these two temperatures are shown in Figure 2, along with the cubic and tetragonal structures of λ-RhO2. = 100 K, respectively, along with Rietveld refinement fits. (b) The structure of cubic λ- RhO2, demonstrating the three-dimensional pyrochlore network of Rh cations. (d) The low-temperature, I41/amd structure, where only the shortest Rh-Rh distances are shown. Rh cations are shown as displacement ellipsoids to highlight the anisotropy of the refined displacement parameters. At T = 400 K, λ-RhO2 forms in the prototypical cubic Fd ̄3m spinel structure. Refine- ments of anisotropic displacement parameters for rhodium and oxygen do not result in a significant increase of the goodness of fit, implying that in the cubic phase, displace- ment parameters are likely isotropic. A structural phase transition occurs between T = 320 − 340 K which reduces the average structure from cubic to tetragonal I41/amd. Fit parameters can be found in the supplementary information (Tables S1 and S2). A consequence of the cubic-to-tetragonal structural phase transition is the formation of rhodium xy-chains along either a or b. In the cubic phase, the nearest-neighbor Rh−Rh 8 distance is 3.002(1) ̊A, whereas in the tetragonal phase, Rh−Rh intrachain distances be- come 2.898(2) ̊A and Rh−Rh interchain distances become 3.016(3) ̊A. This distortion is likely due to a Jahn-Teller distortion of the low-energy Rh4+ t2g orbital manifold, where the orbital degeneracy is lifted through a lowering of the dxz and dyz orbitals relative to dxy. Refinements of the rhodium anisotropic displacement parameters indicate a predilection for Rh displacements within the xy-chains, with a maximal displacement B22 = 0.862(1) ̊A, as opposed to B11 = 0.287(2) ̊A. Figure 2(d) shows the low temperature tetragonal structure of λ-RhO2, where the xy-chains have been highlighted as well as the anisotropic displacement parameters that are larger within the chain axes vs. any other direction. down to T = 100 K. (b) The phase fractions of both cubic and tetragonal structures of λ-RhO2. Approximately 8.4% of the cubic phase remains at low temperature. The structural phase transition is hysteretic in temperature, as demonstrated in Figure 3. Based on the first derivative of the phase fractions as a function of temperature, the transition is centered around TW = 345 K on warming and TC = 329 K on cooling. The 9 ccubic/acubic = ctetragonal/ √ 2atetragonal ratio at T = 100 K, 1.08, indicates an 8% departure from cubic symmetry across the transition. All samples show a remnant cubic phase at the lowest measured temperatures, on the order of 8-10%, regardless of synthetic conditions. As demonstrated later with complementary solid-state NMR results, this remnant cubic phase could be related to a fraction of the sample that is not delithiated. Long-range structural phase transitions have been observed in other spinel systems with electronic degrees of freedom on cations on the B-site, such as CuIr2S4 65,66 and MgTi2O4.67–69 In these compounds, which possess active spin, orbital, and charge degrees of freedom, structural transitions are observed due to the formation of molecular, non- magnetic units at low temperature, such as Ir3+− Ir4+ octamers in the former70,71 and helical Ti3+− Ti3+ dimers in the latter.68,69 In both of these compounds, a single phase transition occurs as in λ-RhO2 (hysteretic in the former and non-hysteretic in the latter), whereas two phase transitions are observed in LiRh2O4. It is also instructive to compare these findings to those in the spinel magnetite Fe3O4, where a single transition (Verwey transition) is observed near T = 120 K that is also the result from a complex coupling of Fe electronic degrees of freedom.72–74 At the local scale, strong short-range correlations have been observed in both CuIr2S4 75 and MgTi2O4 76 that preceed the long-range struc- tural phase transition that are suggestive of dynamic short range fluctuations arising from electronic correlations. These have also been suggested in LiRh2O4 at temperatures TCO < T, and we discuss these in comparison to λ-RhO2 in more detail in the following local structure section. In order to further study the average structure of λ-RhO2, we employed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) imaging measure- ments on polycrystalline samples, the results of which are shown in Figure 4. Position averaged convergent beam electron diffraction (PACBED) was performed to accurately de- termine the zone axis for high-resolution imaging. The bulk of each crystallite was found to be homogeneous and give rise to a well-defined diffraction pattern (Figures 4(a), (c)), 10 (a) HAADF-STEM image of of a single crystallite of λ-RhO2, demonstrating sample homogene- ity. (b) High-resolution TEM image of the single crystallite near the edge. Inhomogeneities can be observed near the edges of crystallites, possibly due to both cubic and tetragonal substructures owing to disparate Li content. (c) Electron diffraction pattern showing the tetragonal phase along . (d) HAADF image of a single crystallite along the zone axis. with well defined and identifiable crystal planes (Figure 4(d)). The diffraction patterns lack any noticeable features beyond the main Bragg reflections. Near the edges of the crystallites, non-uniformities are observed that depart from the homogeneous bulk. These homgeneities could be due to either an inhomogeneous dis- tribution of Li throughout the particles, or a redistribution of Rh near the edges. The presence of lithium ultimately determines whether the structure is expected to be cubic or tetragonal, especially at room temperature, and the inhomogeneity observed by elec- tron diffraction could arise from an admixture of cubic and tetragonal Li1−xRh2O4 phases near the edges of the crystallites, as in Figure 4(b). This hypothesis is supported by NMR observations discussed below. 11 Local Structure Measurements Total scattering measurements were performed on λ-RhO2 at the 11-ID-B beamline at Argonne National Laboratory between temperatures of T = 100 and 400 K through the use of a liquid nitrogen cryostream. Analyses of this data up to high-Q, in this case Qmax = 18 ̊A, allows for the extraction of the pair distribution function (PDF), which can provide information about atom-atom correlations via a Fourier transform of total scattering data, shown in Figure 5. It offers a window into the local structure in materials and permits the study of distortions and structural transformations at the local bonding scale. (a) Temperature-dependent X-ray pair distribution function measurements, demonstrating a dramatic change in the local structure of λ-RhO2 across the TW = 345 K on warming and TC = 329 K structural phase transition. (b) Measured PDF patterns for λ-RhO2, demonstrating the dimerization peak around 2.64 ̊A that arises on cooling. (c)−(d) Measured vs. simulated PDF patterns for the low and high temperature phases of λ-RhO2. While the Fd ̄3m fit appears to match the data reasonably well at T = 400 K, the I41/amd fit that captures the average structure does not match the local structure well. As can be observed in Figure 5(a), the PDF patterns of λ-RhO2 change intensely across 12 the structural phase transition above room temperature at nearly all r length scales. This is in agreement with a long-range structural phase transition, as the new low temperature cell is expected to possess vastly different atom-atom correlations compared to the high temperature cubic structure. However, as can be readily observed in Figure 5(c), unlike the cubic fit in Figure 5(d), the tetragonal I41/amd cell that reasonably fits the diffraction data cannot properly fit the PDF data. This suggests that the local structure of λ-RhO2 differs from the average structure and suggests the presence of short-range correlations with a limited correlation length. One pronounced difference between the observed low-T PDF pattern (collected at T = 100 K) and the simulated tetragonal PDF pattern (Figure 5(c)) is the presence of a peak that is centered around 2.64 ̊A, as demonstrated in Figure 5(b). A similar peak has been observed in the parent compound LiRh2O4 in the 2.70−2.75 ̊A range,37,38 as well as in CuIr2S4,70,77 and has been attributed in both cases to short-range Rh−Rh dimerization (Ir−Ir in CuIr2S4). In LiRh2O4, in particular, this peak emerges in the PDF patterns even above TJT (where LiRh2O4 is cubic), implying that dimerization is favored at the local scale regardless of the average structure. Dimerization in LiRh2O4 persists on cooling through both the orbital ordering (Jahn-Teller distortion) and charge ordering transitions, though it reaches a constant maximum value below the latter, implying a likely coupling of the spins to the charge degrees of freedom. The dimerization peak observed in λ-RhO2, which can be observed clearly in Figure 5 (b), differs from that in LiRh2O4 in that it does not appear above the long-range phase transition observed in average structure and physical properties measurements, indicating that dimers are not present in the high-temperature cubic structure, as shown in Figure 5(d). This implies that these dimers are primarily the result of the formation of Rh-Rh metal-metal bonds at low temperature, assisted by a Jahn-Teller distortion of the RhO6 octahedra on cooling. Since λ-RhO2 possesses mostly Rh4+ (Rh3.95+ assuming Li0.1Rh2O4), there are no charge degrees of freedom that could give rise to a long-range charge ordered 13 phase such as in LiRh2O4. Given that these dimers appear only in the local structure and not in the average, it is possible they are either dynamically fluctuating or static and disordered. The observation of large anisotropic displacement parameters for Rh in the synchrotron X-ray diffraction data, however, suggests that the dimers are only present at the local scale. In our refine- ments of the global structure, they manifest as large displacement parameters along the xy-chains, and form locally along these chains on cooling. Given that the chains are made of Rh4+ species with an effective spin Seff = 1/2 , they are likely susceptible to an orbitally driven Peierls instability. 7Li solid-state NMR measurements were performed on λ-RhO2 and LiRh2O4 in order to further probe the local structure around Li+, as well as to quantify any remnant amount of Li+ cations within λ-RhO2 after chemical delithiation . The room temperature 7Li NMR spectrum collected on LiRh2O4 exhibits two resonances at 0 ppm (T2-weighted integral 3%) and 50 ppm (97%), as shown in Figure 6(a). The 0 ppm peak is assigned to diamag- netic impurities (e.g., Li2CO3, LiOH, LiNO3, and Li2O) at the surface of the LiRh2O4 par- ticles. The 50 ppm peak likely corresponds to Li in the LiRh2O4 structure, which at room temperature occupies solely the tetrahedrally-coordinated A-site, and therefore gives rise to a single resonance. This relatively large shift may arise from the Knight shift interac- tion, as well as the Fermi contact interaction, between the unpaired electrons on Rh3+/4+ cations and the vacant Li+ s-orbitals.78 Delithiation of LiRh2O4 to λ-RhO2 results in a complex 7Li NMR spectrum comprising at least five overlapping resonances at roughly 0 (46%), 7 (13%), 25 (20%), 52 (11%), and 62 ppm (10%), as shown in Figure 6(b). The peak at 0 ppm is again assigned to diamagnetic species, and the higher intensity of this resonance in the data obtained on λ- RhO2 as compared to LiRh2O4 is expected, as the synthesis likely results in the nucleation of Li salts at the surface of the λ-RhO2 particles during chemical delithiation. The peak at ca. 50 ppm is assigned to Li in an LiRh2O4-like (i.e. a pristine-like) environment. 14 of 60 kHz, corresponding to a sample temperature of 318 K. (c) Variable-temperature 7Li NMR of λ-RhO2 (2.35 T field, MAS speed 60 kHz) between 291 and 349 K. (d) The three local Li environments in λ-RhO2 are indicated, with the Rh−Rh dimer position indicated for the two tetrahedral interstitial sites Lia and Lic, as well as the octahedral interstitial site Lib. (e) Illustration of the migration of Li from the surface-based diamagnetic species into bulk λ-RhO2, with schematic lithiation gradients below, at and above the transition temperature. 15 Integration of this 50 ppm resonance suggests that about 10−11% of the Li in the λ-RhO2 sample occupies tetrahedral A-sites in LiRh2O4-like domains. The three remaining signals at 7, 25, and 62 ppm have approximate integral ratios of 1:2:1, suggesting that the resonances at 7 ppm and 62 ppm correspond to the tetrahedral Li interstitial sites (Wyckoff site 4a), and the shift at 25 ppm corresponds to octahedral Li interstitials (Wyckoff site 8c) in λ-RhO2, respectively. These are shown in Figure 6(d), where Lia and Lic correspond to the tetrahedral Li cations and Lib corresponds to the octa- hedral Li. We propose that the origin of the two unique tetrahedral resonances Lia and Lic stems from the proximity of these sites to the Rh-Rh dimers that form along the xy-chains. By analogy with the shifts of Li species near Ru-Ru dimers in Li2RuO3,79–81 it is expected that Li occupying a tetrahedral site between dimers will experience a smaller shift than Li occupying a site at the edges of the dimers, as the Rh orbitals involved in Rh-Rh metal- metal bond formation are partially spin-quenched, resulting in a smaller effective electron spin moment for the Li nucleus to interact with, while those pointing away from the dimer will contain a larger effective spin moment. The absolute integrals of the 7Li NMR spectra (sample mass-normalized and T2-weighted) obtained on the LiRh2O4 and λ-RhO2 samples suggest that the chemically-delithiated sample contains approximately 16(1)% of the Li in the pristine sample. Variable-temperature NMR measurements were also performed on LiRh2O4 (Figure S2) and λ-RhO2 samples (Figure 6(c)). These measurements were carried out at sample tem- peratures between T = 291 and 349 K. In LiRh2O4, the 50 ppm shift remains temperature- independent, suggesting metallic behavior and a shift that is dominated by the Knight shift interaction (Figure S2(a)). For the λ-RhO2 sample, the extensive overlap between the aforementioned Lia, Lib, Lic, and Li in LiRh2O4 resonances prevents us from tracking subtle chemical shift variations with temperature, but to a first approximation, those shifts do not exhibit a significant temperature dependence. Interestingly, while the overall 7Li NMR signal intensity obtained from the λ-RhO2 sample remains roughly constant with temper- 16 ature, the relative intensities of the Lia, Lib, Lic, Li in LiRh2O4, and diamagnetic resonances vary drastically between 349 K and 327 K (Figure S2(e)). Over this temperature range, the intensity of the Lia resonance increases at the expense of the diamagnetic signal as temperature increases. This suggests Li chemical exchange or a transfer of Li population from the diamagnetic Li-containing salts accumulated at the surface of the λ-RhO2 par- ticles to the bulk, and in particular to the tetrahedrally-coordinated Lia environments of the spinel structure. The onset of this redistribution of Li populations appears to occur be- tween 322 and 331 K, which is concomitant with the phase transformation from I41/amd to Fd ̄3m. Hence, we speculate that the large quantity of Li in diamagnetic surface species (presumably generated during synthesis) is driven into bulk Rh2O4 on heating, resulting in an increased Li content in the outer layers of the λ-RhO2 particles near room temperatures (Figure 6(e)). We also observe a drop in intensity of all signals apart from the diamagnetic Li from 322 to 327 K, which we tentatively ascribe to a shortened T2, analogous to the loss in signal seen in LiCoO2 near the metal-to-insulator transition temperature.82 Whilst the precise origin of this enhanced transverse dephasing of nuclear magnetization is un- clear, it appears connected to this transition; this poses an interesting avenue for future research. We suggest that the origin of the phase transformation from tetragonal I41/amd to cubic Fd ̄3m is mediated by the changing Li composition over this temperature range. Those results are consistent with our observations in TEM measurements, where the bulk of the crystallites appeared homogeneous and with minimal disorder, as opposed to the crystallite edges which appeared greatly disordered and likely containing admixtures of both cubic Li1−xRh2O4 and tetragonal λ-RhO2. In summary, the presence of short Rh-Rh bonds is evidenced in both PDF and NMR, despite the predicted average I41/amd structure for λ-RhO2 that does not accommodate these bonds. Given this disparity between the average and local structures, these dimers are either static and disordered, or dynamically fluctuating on a timescale comparable to the diffraction measurement. In LiRh2O4, this has been suggested in the temperature 17 range of TCO < T < TJT, where a dimerization peak appears in the PDF despite an average tetragonal I41/amd structure.37,38 Alternatively, the presence of a small amount of remaining Li post-delithiation within the λ-RhO2 structure could prevent a long-range phase transition to an ordered state due to the disorder induced by this Li, thus Rh-Rh bonding is only observed in local probes. Physical Properties Measurements. the normalized dimer peak area from PDF measurements. (a) dc magnetic susceptibility collected under an applied field of μ0H = 1 T. (b) Resistivity measurement under zero applied field on cooling and warming. (c) Normalized dimer peak area from PDF mea- surements, demonstrating it to be simultaneous with the metal-to-insulator transition and transition to a non-magnetic state. (d) Heat capacity measurement under zero applied field on cooling and warming, demonstrating the transition. Physical properties measurements were carried out on λ-RhO2 and LiRh2O4, including temperature-dependent magnetic susceptibility, electrical resistivity, and heat capacity, as shown in Figure 7. 18 The dc magnetic susceptibility of λ-RhO2, shown in Figure 7(a), shows a drop at TM−W = 342 K on warming and TM−C = 325 K on cooling, consistent with the transition in diffraction data. This transition is indicative of a transition into a non-magnetic state, such as in LiRh2O4 below the charge ordering transition. In contrast to LiRh2O4, however, λ-RhO2 shows only one, hysteretic transition. The formation of a non-magnetic state is consistent with the formation of Rh-Rh dimers, as the individual S = 1/2 Rh4+ cations pair up to form Seff = 0 singlets. Curie-Weiss behavior was not identified at any temper- ature region, including above T = 400 K (Figure S3 in the supplementary information), suggesting the absence of localized moments. Measurements of electrical resistivity, shown in Figure 7(b), demonstrate a metal-to- insulator transition on cooling across the transition. The resistivity increases by five orders of magnitude below the transition, but cannot be fit to either an exponentially activated or variable range hopping model. Given the fact that λ-RhO2 is a metastable compound, annealing or sintering pellets for measurements at high temperatures is not a possibility. As such, measurements were performed solely on cold-pressed pellets, which likely affects the measurements through poor conductivity across grain boundaries. Nevertheless, as can be seen in the inset, the resistivity increases with increasing temperature above the transition, suggesting a metallic state. A metal-to-insulator transition occurs in LiRh2O4,36 as well as in the spinels CuIr2S4,65,66,83 MgTi2O4,67,84 and LiV2O4 (under pressure and doped).85–87 A mechanism that has been proposed to explain the transition in such compounds is the orbitally-driven Peierls state, whereby strong anisotropic orbital interactions between adjacent sites establish quasi-one- dimensional chains within the pyrochlore lattice.88 These chains are then individually sus- ceptible to a Peierls instability, and the pyrochlore network distorts to form either complex molecular clusters, such as the octamers in CuIr2S4,70 or dimers, such as in MgTi2O4.68,89 This mechanism likely also explains the observed transition in λ-RhO2, though we do not observe a long-range crystal structure with dimers for this compound. Figure 7(c) shows 19 the normalized dimer peak area from PDF measurements, demonstrating that the onset of the metal-to-insulator and the magnetic-to-non-magnetic transitions are concomitant with the formation of short-range dimers. It appears as though dimerization is strongly favored at the local scale through local bonding interactions. However, we do not rule out a lower symmetry average structure that could accommodate either dimers or some larger n-unit non-magnetic cluster arrangement, such as the octamer ground state in CuIr2S4 70 or trimers in RuP.90 In theory, one would expect λ-RhO2 and LiRh2O4 to display behavior closer to CuIr2S4 than to MgTi2O4 and LiV2O4, owing to the general similarity of Rh/Ir chemistry and the comparatively strong spin-orbit coupling in Rh vs. Ti/V. However, in both LiRh2O4 and λ-RhO2, spin-orbit coupling appears to play a smaller role in relation to the Jahn-Teller instability of the low-energy Rh4+ t2g orbital manifold. As such, a cubic-to-tetragonal phase transition occurs in both that establishes a ground state structure with Rh-Rh chains along the a- or b-crystallographic directions (xy-chains). Dimerization can then natu- rally occur along these chains composed of half-filled Rh4+ via an orbitally-driven Peierls state.75,88,91,92 In the following section, we examine the impact of correlations and spin- orbit coupling on the electronic structure via calculations based on density functional the- ory. Electronic Structure Calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) were performed on LiRh2O4 and λ- RhO2 using experimentally-derived structural parameters. λ-RhO2 was treated as having no lithium on the A-site. Calculations were done on both the cubic Fd ̄3m and tetragonal I41/amd cells with and without structural relaxation using the the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange functional.93 Based on PBE-relaxed structures, the energy per formula unit of rutile RhO2 is more than 0.5 eV lower than that of both cubic and tetragonal λ-RhO2. The greater computed 20 thermodynamic stability of the rutile phase is consistent with λ-RhO2 being a kinetically trapped phase accessible only through low-temperature, oxidative delithiation. This is further corroborated by the observation that heating λ-RhO2 in air above T = 500 K results in decomposition to rutile RhO2 and Rh2O3. eV. Orange and blue bands correspond to spin-up and spin-down states, respectively. (b) Density of states plot, demonstrating a gap at the Fermi level along with strong spin- polarization, likely due to the absence of dimers in the calculation. Structural relaxations of the cubic and tetragonal phases of λ-RhO2 were performed with and without Hubbard Ueff values applied to the Rh 4d bands and/or spin-orbit cou- pling (SOC). The results, shown in the supplementary information (Table S3), reveal that the tetragonal structure is only stabilized relative to the cubic one upon inclusion of a Ueff > 1 eV term. However, the inclusion of an SOC term results in a destabilization of the tetragonal phase. These results suggest that the tetragonal phase is enabled by correlations that drive the formation of the xy-chains, which exist on a higher energy scale compared to spin-orbit coupling. A gap in the calculated band structure for the low-temperature tetragonal phase can be observed for Ueff ≥ 3 eV, as demonstrated in the supplementary information (Figure S4). However, these calculations do not include any dimerization, which would naturally provide a gap-opening mechanism. As such, the predicted band structures in the absence of an applied, non-zero U, shown in Figure 8, predict metallicity and substantial spin- 21 polarization. Applying a non-zero Ueff offers an avenue toward localization, though strong spin polarization is still observed. Our findings suggest that the spin polarization observed in our calculations stems from a natural instability toward either dimerization or magnetic order, and that the low temperature insulating state observed in experiment is likely the result of dimer-induced localization. Naturally, our calculations do not incorporate dimers, as these calculations have been performed on the long-range structures derived from fits to average structure measurements. Should a lower-symmetry, long-range structure exist that accomodates for the Rh-Rh dimers in λ-RhO2, calculations of its band structure would likely relieve this apparent inconsistency between DFT and experiment. We conclude our discussion of the structure and properties of λ-RhO2 by considering it in comparison to other spinel compounds, especially CuIr2S4 and MgTi2O4, the only other spinels that have been found to undergo metal to non-magnetic insulator transitions without doping or external pressure, as well as the aforementioned pyrochlore iridates. Naively, one would expect both LiRh2O4 and λ-RhO2 to display similar behavior as in CuIr2S4 rather than MgTi2O4. LiRh2O4, in particular, possesses Rh3+/4+ just as CuIr2S4 has Ir3+/4+. However, SOC plays a much larger role in establishing the single-ion physics of Ir compounds compared to Rh compounds, and as our results suggest, SOC indeed plays a near negligible role in establishing the ground state of λ-RhO2. As such, these systems are closer to MgTi2O4 where SOC plays a minor role in relation to the single-ion orbital instability and gives rise to a long-range dimerized ground state. λ-RhO2, therefore, presents an avenue toward the study of competing interactions in a 4d transition metal with a rare oxidation state. Conclusion λ-RhO2 represents a platform to study the interplay of orbital and spin degrees of freedom of 4d5 cations on a pyrochlore lattice. We have synthesized this new Rh4+ oxide using 22 ceric ammonium nitrate, a heavily understudied, powerful oxidizer with wide-ranging fu- ture applications in the low temperature, oxidative deintercalation of extended solids. Our measurements indicate the presence of short-range Rh-Rh dimers that arise from metal- metal bonding at the local scale that do not crystallize in the long-range average structure. These dimers arise across a hysteretic phase transition at TW = 345 K on warming and TC = 329 K on cooling, which is concurrent to a metal-to-insulator transition and a magnetic to non-magnetic transition. Our results inspire the search for other possible quantum ma- terials in frustrated lattices made up of transition metals with uncommon, high oxidation states. Methods Synthesis. Polycrystalline samples of λ-RhO2 were prepared using soft chemical tech- niques. First, LiRh2O4 spinel precursor was synthesized in evacuated silica tubes using stoichiometric amounts of Li2O2 and Rh2O3, as previously reported.36 Physically separated PbO2, which decomposes at high temperatures via PbO2 → PbO + 1 2O2, was used to gener- ate high oxygen pressures within reaction tubes. Powders were characterized via in-house X-ray diffraction. LiRh2O4 powders were then stirred in aqueous solutions of ceric ammonium nitrate for 48 hours, followed by vacuum filtration and drying in air. Stoichiometric amounts of ceric ammonium nitrate were used to target specific stoichiometries with formula Li1−xRh2O4. A ten-fold molar excess of ceric ammonium nitrate was used to synthesize the end-member, λ-RhO2. X-ray structural characterization. High resolution synchrotron powder X-ray diffrac- tion (XRD) data was collected at the 11-BM beamline at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory, using an incident wavelength of 0.4590443 ̊A. Data were collected at temperatures ranging from T = 100 K to 400 K. Powder XRD data 23 was also collected in-house using a Panalytical Empyrean diffractometer employing Cu Kα X-rays in a Bragg-Brentano geometry. Pair distribution function (PDF) datasets were collected at the 11-ID-B beamline at APS, using an incident wavelength of 0.2116 ̊A. Data were collected at temperatures ranging from T = 100 K to 400 K, and PDF patterns were extracted with a maximum momentum transfer of Qmax = 18 ̊A. Modeling and fitting of the XRD and PDF data was performed using TOPAS Academic. Physical properties measurements. Magnetic susceptibility measurements were car- ried out on powder samples in a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3). Resistivity and heat capacity measurements were performed using a Quantum Design 14 T Dynacool Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS). Resistivity mea- surements were performed via the four probe method on cold pressed pellets of polycrys- talline sample. Transmission Electron Microscopy. TEM samples were made by first preparing a suspension through the mixing of λ-RhO2 powder in water, and then drop casting the particle suspension on a TEM grid. The grid was subsequently dried in air below 80 ◦C for approximately 2 minutes before being inserted in a Spectra 200 ThermoFisher Scientific transmission electron microscope equipped with an ultra-high-brightness gun source (X- CFEG) and six-fold astigmatism probe aberration corrector. The operating voltage is 200 kV, with a probe convergence semi-angle of 30 mrad. The detector semi-angle was set between 25 mrad to 200 mrad (camera length: 160 mm). 7Li solid state nuclear magnetic resonance. Powder samples of LiRh2O4 and λ-RhO2 were loaded into 1.3 mm diameter ZrO2 magic angle spinning (MAS) rotors. 7Li NMR spectra were referenced to liquid LiCl in H2O (1 M) at 0 ppm and acquired on a Bruker AVANCE (2.35 T) using a Bruker 1.3 mm MAS probe, a π/2 pulse length of 0.45 μs, and an MAS frequency of 60 kHz for “room temperature” spectra (i.e., no external heating or cool- ing applied) or 50 kHz for variable-temperature spectra. Rotor-synchronized Hahn-echo 24 pulse sequences (π/2–τ– π–τ–acq.) were used to obtain spectra, the intensities of which were scaled by sample mass and number of scans. The recycle delay (2.5s; at least 5T1) was set such that the bulk, paramagnetically shifted signal was recorded quantitatively and the diamagnetic signal due to surface-based impurities was suppressed; additional spectra with a longer recycle delay (25s) were recorded such that the diamagnetic signal was also recorded quantitatively. Sample temperatures were obtained from internal calibration of the 79Br shift of KBr.94 Electrochemistry and operando X-ray diffraction. Electrochemistry experiments were performed by casting electrodes made from a 80:10:10 (wt %) ratio of LiRh2O4 : conductive carbon (TIMCAL Super P) : polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). The PVDF was first dissolved in N-methylpyrrolidone and mixed in a FlackTek speed mixer at 2000 rpm for 5 minutes. The conductive carbon and LiRh2O4 were ground in a mortar and pestle for 10 minutes and then added to the viscous mixture, forming a slurry. The slurry was mixed in the speed mixer for 10 minutes and later cast using a 200 μm blade. After 3 hours, the cast slurry was dried in a vacuum oven at 80 ◦C overnight. The electrodes were punched into 10 mm diameter disks with loading between 2 and 3 mg cm−2. The electrodes were brought into an Ar-filled glovebox (H2O < 0.1 ppm and O2 < 0.1 ppm) and assembled into Swagelok cells or Hohsen coin cells for electrochemical testing. A glass fiber separator (Whatman GF/D) was soaked in 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC 50/50 v/v (Sigma- Aldrich) electrolyte, and a polished Li foil was used as the counter and reference electrode. Cells were discharged to 1 V and charged to 3 V using BioLogic potentiostats (VMP1 and VMP3). All measurements were carried out at room temperature. Operando X-ray diffraction measurements were collected using a custom Swagelok- type cell with a Be window approximately 250 μm thick, allowing X-ray penetration into the cell while cycling. A pattern was collected every 20 minutes during cycling at a C/15 rate. Density functional theory. First-principles electronic structure calculations were per- 25 formed using the Vienna ab Initio Simulation Package (VASP) version 5.4.4. All calcula- tions employed the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) functional and projector-augemented wave potentials based on the v5.4 recommendations (Rh pv, O). The plane-wave energy cutoff was set to 520 eV and a 9 × 9 × 9 Γ-centered k-point mesh was used to avoid incompatibility problems associated with the primitive cells of body-centered tetragonal structures. Electronic band structure and density of states calculations were performed on both the experimentally-derived structure (unrelaxed) and geometrically-optimized struc- tures (relaxed) in which forces were converged within 10−5 eV/ ̊A. A k-point path for the band structure was generated using the AFLOW online tool. All calculations had an energy convergence better than 10−6 eV. Acknowledgement J.R.C. acknowledges support through the NSF MPS-Ascend Postdoctoral Fellowship (DMR- 2137580). J.R.C, S.S., and S.D.W acknowledge support by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering under Grant No. DE-SC0020305. E.N.B. and R.J.C. acknowledge and are grateful to the Spectroscopy Facility at UC Santa Barbara. S.S. and G.Z. acknowledge support by the U.S. Department of Energy under Grant No. DEFG02-02ER45994. The research reported here made use of the shared facilities of the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at UC Santa Barbara: NSF DMR-2308708. The UC Santa Barbara MR- SEC is a member of the Materials Research Facilities Network (www.mrfn.com). Use was made of the computational facilities administered by the Center for Scientific Comput- ing at the CNSI and MRL (an NSF MRSEC; DMR-2308708) and purchased through NSF CNS-1725797. This work was also supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) through Enabling Quantum Leap: Convergent Accelerated Discovery Foundries for Quan- tum Materials Science, Engineering and Information (Q-AMASE-i): Quantum Foundry at 26 UC Santa Barbara (DMR-1906325). This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science user facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-