Measurement of competing pathways in a shock-induced phase transition in zirconium by femtosecond diffraction Saransh Singh1,∗, Martin G. Gorman1, Patrick G. Heighway2, Joel V. Bernier1, David McGonegle2,3, Hae Ja Lee4, Bob Nagler4, Jon H. Eggert1, Raymond F. Smith1 The traditional picture of solid-solid phase transformations assumes an ordered parent phase transforms into an or- dered daughter phase via a single unique pathway. Zir- conium and its prototypical phase transition from hexag- onal close-packed (hcp) to simple hexagonal (hex-3) struc- ture has generated considerable controversy over several decades regarding which mechanism mediates the trans- formation. However, a lack of in situ measurements over the relevant atomistic timescales has hindered our ability to identify the true pathway. In this study, we exploit femtosec- ond X-ray diffraction coupled with nanosecond laser com- pression to give unprecedented insights into the complexi- ties of how materials transform at the lattice level. We ob- serve single-crystal zirconium changing from hcp to a hex-3 structure via not one but three competing pathways simul- taneously. Concurrently, we also observe a broad diffuse background underlying the sharp Bragg diffraction dur- ing the transition. We corroborate our observation of the diffuse signal with multimillion-atom molecular dynamics simulations using a machine-learned interatomic potential. Our study demonstrates that the traditional mechanistic view of transitions may fail for even an elemental metal and that the mechanisms by which materials transform are far more intricate than generally thought. Solid-solid phase transitions have been an active area of scien- tific inquiry for the last hundred years (1–7). The lattice-level restructuring brought on by applying sufficient heat or pres- sure is conventionally measured using X-ray diffraction tech- niques, yielding direct interatomic separation and coordination measurements. Ultrabright sources such as X-ray free-electron lasers (XFELs) make it possible to realize such measurements in situ in solids dynamically compressed to extreme, planetary- scale pressures over mere nanoseconds. Recent research efforts have focused increasingly on using diffraction to pin down not only the structure of exotic high-pressure phases but the atom- istic pathway by which that phase is reached (8–10). The conventional picture of the atomistic pathways is based upon atomic mapping from an ordered parent phase to an or- dered daughter phase via lattice strain and atomic shuffles. Each transition pathway is differentiated by the orientation with which it leaves the daughter phase relative to its parent. Thus, by measuring the orientation relationship (OR) between spe- cific crystallographic planes and directions within the parent and daughter phases using diffraction, one can experimentally constrain the atomistic transition mechanism. ∗Corresponding author Email address: saransh1@llnl.gov (Saransh Singh) 1Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA 2Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Ox- ford, UK 3Oxford Centre for High Energy Density Science, Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 4Linac Coherent Light Source, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, CA, USA Due to the commercial and technological importance of zir- conium (Zr), titanium (Ti), and their alloys, the transformation mechanism between the ductile α−phase (hcp) and the brittle high-pressure ω−phase (simple hexagonal) has been the sub- ject of intense theoretical and experimental scrutiny (11–29). Existing literature suggests that two distinct mechanisms can mediate the α → ω phase transition. The majority of shock- compression studies on recovered samples have observed what we will call the variant I OR (17–19). In contrast, the major- ity of static-compression and high-pressure torsion studies re- port variant II (11–13, 22–24) (see supplementary materials Ta- ble S1). However, several studies deviate from this trend (14– 16) for reasons that remain unclear. A complete understanding of this model phase transition thus remains elusive. In this study, we approach the α → ω phase transition from a new direction by combining uniaxial laser-shock com- pression of high-purity, well-oriented single-crystal Zr with in-situ diffraction measurements using a high-brightness fem- tosecond X-ray free electron laser (XFEL) source. We produce near-instantaneous snapshots of atoms in the high-pressure shocked state as the material is transforming using the fem- tosecond probe duration, revealing lattice-level details of the phase transition mechanism. We performed laser-driven shock- compression experiments at the Matter in Extreme Conditions (MEC) endstation of the Linac Coherent Light Source (LCLS) (32, 33). We compressed eight targets with peak pressures rang- ing from 5.3 to 21.3 GPa. We show a schematic of the exper- imental setup and target design used at MEC in Fig. 1a. The target consisted of a plastic ablator and a 40-μm-thick Zr sin- gle crystal with the direction parallel to the sample nor- mal (shock direction). We used an ultrabright XFEL pulse in- cident normal to the target to perform volume-integrated X-ray diffraction. We used Cornell-Stanford Pixel Array Detectors (CSPADs) to record the scattered X-rays from the shocked Zr sample in transmission geometry (30). In Fig. 1a, we show the 2D orthographic view of diffrac- tion data for a shock pressure of 10.6 GPa (marginally above the phase transition pressure). While the Zr sample loses its simple single crystalline nature upon shock-compression, it re- tains a highly oriented microstructure, as seen in the localized intensity around the Debye-Scherrer diffraction rings. At this pressure, we observe diffraction signals from both the com- pressed α and ω−phases. We do not measure any diffraction from the uncompressed material ahead of the shock front due to the highly oriented nature of the zirconium foil (supplementary materials Fig. S1). We also observe a diffuse background signal superimposed on top of sharp Bragg peaks. This diffuse signal (marked by dashed lines in the Fig. 1b inset) in the intervening regions between the Bragg peaks is observed to be non-uniform azimuthally and has an angular period of 60◦ indicating a six- fold symmetry. The azimuthally localized diffuse signal reveals itself only in our single-crystal scattering configuration; we do not observe it in our polycrystalline Zr diffraction data (see sup- Preprint submitted to Nature Materials November 1, 2023 arXiv:2310.07035v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 31 Oct 2023 1600 1500 1400 1300 1200 1100 1000 900 800 700 600 500 !"#"" ! $$#"" ! $!#$$ " Single crystal Zr Shock compressed Zr Velocimetry Laser Laser XFEL Scattered X-rays 2q f CSPad detectors 10.6 GPa $!#$! ! !-phase "-phase a Shock Pressure = 10.6 GPa Intensity (a.u.) 50 0 100 10.6 GPa Intensity (arb. units) 60 50 40 30 20 Diffraction Angle (degrees) 100 100 0 Azimuthal Angle ° 20 40 60 -150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150 Azimuthal Angle (degrees) Diffraction Angle ° b !""" ! ##"" ! #!#" " #!## " Diffuse #!#! ! -100 -50 0 50 100 -100 -50 0 50 100 !-phase !"#!" ! !"#!! " "-phase Localized diffuse intensity 100 -100 0 22 24 26 28 Diffraction Angle ° Fig. 1 | Experimental setup for X-ray diffraction measurements of shock-compressed single-crystal Zr samples. a. The 10 keV, 50 fs output of the LCLS-XFEL probed the shock-compressed Zr and produced an X-ray diffraction signal as recorded on CSPad detectors (30). Here, the diffraction angle (2θ) increases radially, with azimuthal angle (φ) defined around the Debye-Scherrer cones. This data provides information on crystal structure, sample density, and microstructural texture, while velocimetry measurements provided information on shock timing and pressure uniformity during the X-ray probe period (31). The diffraction data shown [10.6 GPa] is consistent with multiple reflections from the compressed α phase (red arrows) and a single intense peak from the ω−phase (cyan arrows). b. We present the same diffraction data in polar coordinates. The Debye-Scherrer rings appear as straight lines in this view. We show the φ-averaged lineout in the lower panel, where the green curve represents the detector background. The peaks from the α and ω−phase are shaded with red and cyan colors, respectively. We reproduce an enlarged view of the lower diffraction-angle region in the inset. The lineout to the right of the inset shows the azimuthal variation of the diffuse signal between the Bragg peaks noted by the dashed vertical lines. plementary materials Fig. S2 and accompanying text). We show the azimuthally averaged lineouts at five pressures above the α−ω phase boundary in Fig. 2a. We have shaded the peaks originating from the α−phase in red and the ω−phase in cyan. The α−phase, which dominates the diffraction signal at 10.6 GPa, gradually recedes in intensity with increasing pres- sure. The diffraction signal at 18.1 GPa is almost exclusively from the high-pressure ω−phase. We also observe a reduction in the integrated diffuse signal (hatched area) with an increase in pressure. To accurately account for the observed intensity distribution in each Debye-Scherrer ring, we constructed a forward model to calculate the expected diffraction signal for our experimen- tal geometry. This model accounts for X-ray beam energy and direction, detector positions, and crystallographic information about the sample, such as crystal structure, unit cell dimensions on compression, phase volume fraction, and crystallographic texture of each phase (see Methods section for details). We present the results of the forward model calculation for the 15.2 GPa shot in Fig. 2b. We determined the phase fractions of the ω−phases to be close to 100% for this shot. The azimuthal in- tensity distribution is consistent with the presence of ω−phase orientations from three distinct phase transition pathways: vari- ants I, II, and III. For clarity, we only show the variant contri- butions to two reflections. While variants I and II have been re- ported in numerous studies, variant III has never been observed experimentally. We present the pressure dependence of the phase-fraction evolution, the relative abundance of the different phase transition ORs within the ω−phase, and the integrated diffuse background signal in Fig. 2c. The phase fraction of the α−phase decreases with increasing pressure as expected. In the ω−phase volume, we observe three competing phase transition pathways vying for dominance. variant III dominates at lower pressures and is eventually superseded by variant II as the pres- sure increases. We refer the readers to supplementary materi- als Fig. S3 for our semi-quantitative method of determining the phase fractions of different phases and the relative abundance of the various phase transition ORs and Fig. S4 for a compre- hensive collection of the forward model results with increasing pressure. The azimuthally localized yet diffuse diffraction alludes to further complexity during the phase transition. To investigate the origin of this diffuse signal, we performed large-scale clas- sical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of -oriented Zr single crystals with initial dimensions of 40 × 40 × 100 nm3 shocked to 14 GPa using LAMMPS (35). We modeled the in- teratomic interactions using the machine-learned potential of Zong et al. (29), which was tailored to model allotropy in Zr 2 Diffraction Angle ° 40 60 20 40 60 15.2 GPa !""# ! !!!" ! #!#" ! ##"" ! !!!# ! #!#! " ##"# ! #!#! " 10.6 GPa -150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150 Azimuthal Angle (degrees) -150 -100 -50 0 50 100 150 Azimuthal Angle (degrees) 20 40 60 !""" " ##"" " #!#% / "!"! " 12.3 GPa %!%# ! ""'! ! !!!# ! ##"# ! !""" " ##"" " #!#" ! 60 50 40 30 20 Diffraction Angle (degrees) 60 50 40 30 20 Diffraction Angle (degrees) Diffraction Angle (°) !-phase "-phase b c Texture Model Data Variant-III Variant-I 20 30 100 0 Azimuthal Angle (°) 15.2 GPa -100 40 20 30 40 Variant-II Normalize integrated disorder intensity Fractional contribution Regime (i) (ii) (iii) a-phase w-phase V-II V-I V-III 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 Fractional contribution 18 16 14 12 10 8 Pressure (GPa) Normalized integrated disorder intensity Pressure (GPa) Fractional Contribution 1.0 0.6 0.2 Normalised Disorder Intensity 18 16 14 12 10 8 Pressure (GPa) Pressure (GPa) 8 10 12 14 16 18 0.2 0.6 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 r97-ref, 0 GPa r96, 10.4 GPa r93, 10.6 GPa r97, 12.3 GPa r94, 15.2 GPa r91, 18.1 GPa α-phase ω-phase 60 50 40 30 20 Diffraction Angle (degrees) !"#!! ! Disorder "$#$$ " !!#$$ " !"#!" " !"#!$ ! "$#$! ! """$ ! !"#!$ ! !!#$$ ! !!#$! ! &"#&! ! $$#'" ! a 20 40 60 Diffraction Angle (°) Fig. 2 | Evolution of diffraction signal as a function of shock pressure. a. Waterfall plot of azimuthally averaged lineouts from single crystal Zr targets. The diffuse scattering signal decreases with increasing pressure, with a corresponding increase in the number of peaks observed for the ω−phase. b. Experimental and modeled diffraction patterns from shock-compressed single-crystal zirconium at 15.2 GPa. We modeled the crystallographic texture of the ω−phase as the sum of unimodal distributions centered around the 12 orientations of the variant I OR, 3 orientations of variant II OR, and 6 orientations of the variant III OR. We show the region with diffraction from the {10 ̄10}α, {10 ̄11}ω and {11 ̄21}ω planes. Contributions to the {10 ̄11}ω diffraction from the ORs of variants I and III are azimuthally separated and indicated by the cyan and blue arrows, respectively. Diffraction from the {11 ̄21}ω plane originates entirely from variant II OR. c. Volume fraction of each OR formed within the ω−phase shows a strong pressure dependence. We observe the dominance of variant III OR at low pressures, which variant II OR eventually supplants at higher pressures. at pressures of up to 30 GPa. These simulations allow us to see in microscopic detail the dynamics unfolding in the wake of the shock and to analyze the structure factor of the complex atomistic configuration that results. We show in Fig. 3a a visualization of the computational cell 18 ps into the simulation, with atoms colored according to their local phase (above) and shear stress (below). The shock is led by an elastic precursor, behind which the pressure and shear stress are elevated to 10.0 GPa and 3.5 GPa, respectively, but the crystal retains a strained α−phase structure. Trailing this precursor is a phase transition front that raises the pressure to 14 GPa while relaxing the shear stress to 0.9 GPa, heralding the onset of the α → ω transition. The parent α phase first transforms to a short-lived (∼10 ps) intermediate β (bcc) phase before taking one of two pathways: the β nano-grains either promptly transform to the ω structure via a displacive mecha- nism (14), or they rapidly amorphize and subsequently reconsti- tute into an anisotropic yet non-crystalline structure via slower diffusive motion. The resulting clusters of partially disordered atoms form 10% of the cell by mass and occupy the interstices between the larger ω−grains (which constitute 60%). Though non-crystalline, the atomistic structure of these nano-clusters shows orientational order and a structure factor qualitatively similar to that of the ω−phase (see supplementary materials Fig. S5 for the radial and angular distribution functions and Fig. S6 for the structure factors of the ω and non-crystalline structures). In Fig. 3b, we show synthetic diffraction generated by the phase-transformed region of the simulation cell with 10 keV X- rays. Sharp diffraction peaks attributable to ω grains with the variant II OR are visible at Bragg angles similar to those mea- sured in the experiment and at identical azimuthal angles. The difference in peak intensities is due to the strong sensitivity of the Bragg condition to the ω phase’s c/a ratio, which at 14 GPa takes values of 0.605 and 0.621 in the experiment and simula- tion, respectively. In addition to these Bragg peaks, we observe a diffuse diffraction signal centered at 29◦ akin to that seen in the data. Like the experimental signal, this diffuse diffraction is anisotropic and exhibits the same sixfold modulations around the Debye-Scherrer ring. While it is tempting to attribute the diffuse scattering to the partially disordered nano-clusters, the truth is subtler: both the crystalline ω−phase and disordered material contribute to the diffuse signal. Moreover, their con- tributions do not decompose additively, suggesting they diffract coherently. The signal in question is diffuse because the ac- tive scattering vectors are situated far from the sharp maxima in the aggregate’s structure factor. Our simulations suggest that we are measuring tenuous interpeak scattering intensity that is dwarfed by intense Bragg diffraction in a conventional poly- crystal experiment. The new variant III OR we observe in our experiments has never been observed in quenched ω−Zr captured from recov- ery experiments. This observation is in contrast to numerous experimental static and dynamic compression studies reporting variant I and variant II ORs (11–15, 17–19, 22–24). In a re- covery study of shock and pressure released Zr, samples that completely transformed to the ω−phase during shock loading retained between 0 to 48% of the high-pressure phase in recov- ered samples (36). The lack of any experimental observation of the variant III OR in recovered samples could be related to an 3 Fig. 3 | Molecular dynamic simulations with machine learning potential. a. Visualization of a Zr single crystal with initial dimensions of 40 × 40 × 100 nm3 shock-compressed along to 14 GPa, with atoms colored according to their local phase (above) and shear stress (below) after 18 ps, performed using ovito (34). Below is the time evolution of the α, β, ω, and non-crystalline phase fractions (the last group includes both partially disordered nano-clusters and atoms on grain boundaries). The circular inset shows the local arrangement of atoms in a region of phase coexistence, viewed in a plane normal to the shock. b. Synthetic diffraction generated 158 ps into the simulation using 10 keV X-rays. The top panel shows the full diffraction pattern in polar coordinates, with a semitransparent mask added to simulate gaps in the CSPad detectors. The lower panel compares azimuthally averaged lineouts from the simulation (14 GPa) and experiment (15.2 GPa). The right panel shows the azimuthal variation of the simulated diffuse signal centered at 2θ ∼ 30◦, with averages taken over the windowed region (red-boxed region). We overlay the azimuthal distribution of the azimuthally localized diffuse signal from the experimental data (shot 93) in blue. OR dependence of the ω → α reverse phase transition. Upon pressure release, we hypothesize a complete reversion of the variant III ω−phase orientations to the α−phase, but hysteresis for the other variants. In our MD simulations, the vast majority (99%) of the ω−phase assumes the variant II OR, with only trace amounts of variant I present. This prediction contrasts with the multi- mechanism picture painted by the experiment. However, the simulation properties can rationalize this behavior. Zong et al. (29), in their MD study using the identical interatomic potential as our study, have reported a switch in the ω−phase OR from variant II to variant I upon artificially reducing shear stress in their simulations. We posit that variant I is made rare by the artificially high shear-stress environment created in these ideal- istic simulations in perfect, defect-free crystals. In the presence of defects, some plasticity before the phase transition will bring about the low shear-stress environment that favors variant I OR over variant II. Recent static high-pressure diffraction measure- ment by Singh et al. (37) on highly oriented Zr also supports this physical model. In contrast to other static-compression ex- periments (11–13, 22–24), the authors in that study observed variant I OR under static-compression when neon was used as a pressure medium to ensure purely hydrostatic conditions. We believe the absence of variant III in our simulations results from the interatomic potential’s inability to accurately model the en- ergy landscape of Zr along the variant III pathway. As this transformation pathway was undiscovered until now, its con- figuration space did not form part of the database on which the potential was trained. Exploration of this new pathway via first- principles atomistic simulations is warranted. Our MD simulations predict a small amount of the interme- diate bcc β−phase in the tens of ps timescale. Our forward diffraction model predicts that the {220}β reflection should be observable in our experiments for the expected Burger’s OR (6) between the hcp α−phase and the bcc β−phase. Although not conclusive, our diffraction data hints at the presence of this in- termediate bcc phase. We refer the readers to the supplementary materials Fig. S7, S8 and accompanying text for more details. In summary, the dynamic behavior of the elemental metal Zr under shock compression is far more intricate than previ- ously thought, involving multiple competing phase transition pathways and a partially disordered state in a single ns shock volume. While we initially attempted to use the more conven- tional EAM potential for Zr, only the machine-learned inter- 4 atomic potential partially reproduced our experimental obser- vations. Our experiments and analysis highlight the importance of in situ measurements on highly oriented crystals in validat- ing our best theoretical models at extreme conditions. While our results focus on zirconium, we expect our results to apply to the transformation dynamics of other material systems at high pressure and temperature.