Field-controlled dynamics of skyrmions and monopoles Jung-Shen B. Tai1, Andrew J. Hess1, Jin-Sheng Wu1 and Ivan I. Smalyukh1,2,3* 1Department of Physics and Chemical Physics Program, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA 2Department of Electrical, Computer, and Energy Engineering, Materials Science and Engineering Program and Soft Materials Research Center, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA 3Renewable and Sustainable Energy Institute, National Renewable Energy Laboratory and University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA * Correspondence to: ivan.smalyukh@colorado.edu Magnetic monopoles, despite their ongoing experimental search as elementary particles, have inspired the discovery of analogous excitations in condensed matter systems. In chiral condensed matter systems, emergent monopoles are responsible for the onset of transitions between topologically distinct states and phases, like in the case of transitions from helical and conical phase to A-phase comprising periodic arrays of skyrmions. By combining numerical modeling and optical characterizations, we describe how different geometrical configurations of skyrmions terminating at monopoles can be realized in liquid crystals and liquid crystal ferromagnets. We demonstrate how such complex structures can be effectively manipulated by external magnetic and electric fields. Furthermore, we discuss how our findings may hint at similar dynamics in other physical systems, and their potential applications. 2 Introduction Magnetic monopoles, hypothetical elementary particles, which are the point sources of magnetic fields, are the holy grail of particle physics. Despite promising restoration of duality symmetry in the electromagnetic theory and various theoretical predictions, the experimental discovery of magnetic monopoles has remained elusive(1, 2). Like in the case of macroscopic magnets, the sources and sinks of magnetic field could not be found separated from each other at the level of elementary particles. However, structures analogous to monopole-like excitations have been recently discovered in various condensed matter systems, including spin ices(3), Bose-Einstein condensates(4) and magnetic solids(5). Such excitations are particularly useful in understanding emergent behavior of these condensed matter systems and physically resemble the elementary- particle counterparts of magnetic monopoles beyond topological classification (as a matter of fact, monopoles as topological objects are rather common). In magnets, π!(S!) topological point defects are monopoles not just in the magnetization field m(r), but also in the emergent magnetic field, (B"#)$ ≡ ħε$%&m ⋅ (∂%m × ∂&m) , a fictitious field describing the interaction between conduction electrons and the underlying spin texture(6–8). Emergent monopoles in chiral ferromagnets play an important role during a phase transition between topologically distinct phases, serving as nucleation points for the inception of topological transformation(5). In liquid crystals (LCs) and LC ferromagnets, two- and three-dimensional topological point defects are ubiquitous(9, 10). Topological defects in LCs also serve as a means to embed topological solitons of lower dimensions in the topologically trivial background of a higher dimensional space(11). A few examples include embedding π!(S!) skyrmions in the three-dimensional space as torons and π'(S') twist walls in the two-dimensional space as one of the common cholesteric finger structures and recently observed configurations of Möbiusons(11, 12). 3 In this article, using externally applied magnetic and electric fields, we demonstrate the dynamical control of π!(S!) skyrmions and the accompanying π!(S!) topological defects, monopoles in the emergent field. We show that, much like the skyrmion A-phase, periodic lattices of skyrmions can also form in LCs when embedded within either a uniform or a helical background. Moreover, we find that skyrmions and monopoles can be effectively controlled by external fields while the motions of the monopoles are directly observed with an optical microscope with which observations benefit particularly from in-plane configurations of skyrmions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that in a chiral LC material, the vertical skyrmion terminating at monopoles (the so- called torons) can be hosted in a helical or uniform field background with controllable inter-soliton interaction, modulated by the applied voltage. While the analogy of our skyrmions and monopoles to their high-energy-physics counterparts like Dirac monopoles(13) and π((S() Skyrme solitons(2), which in particle-physics models describe subatomic particles with different baryon numbers, is distant, the observed findings closely mimic what was found in chiral magnets (5) where even its Hamiltonian can have a form similar to that of a chiral LC, so that LCs could potentially serve as model systems and provide useful insights. The diversity of observed geometrically distinct but topologically equivalent torons, or monopole-terminating skyrmions, points to possible topology-preserving switching between them, in analogy to the recently studied inter-transformation between geometrically distinct states of hopfions(14). Finally, we discuss the fundamental implications of monopole control in LC systems and their potential technological applications. Results π!(S!) point defects are monopoles in emergent field that embed π!(S!) skyrmions in 4 topologically trivial backgrounds Ubiquitously observed in the order-parameter field n(r) of condensed matter systems, a hedgehog point defect and a hyperbolic point defect are both topological point defects classified by the π!(S!) homotopy group and have a topological charge of unity (Fig. 1, A and B). In the emergent magnetic field, despite the distinct difference in their geometrical field configurations, both hedgehog and hyperbolic defects are monopoles – radial sources of emergent magnetic fields (Fig. 1, A-C). In LCs, LC ferromagnets, and solid-state magnets, torons are π!(S!) skyrmions terminating at hyperbolic point defects of the same π!(S!) field topology, often observed in a uniform field background with a perpendicular boundary condition (Fig. 1D)(10, 15–17). Note that since all n(r) structures discussed in this work can be consistently vectorized even when the order parameter of the system has nonpolar head-tail symmetry, namely n(r) ≡ − n(r) and the corresponding order-parameter space is π!(S!/Z!), we focus on vectorized n(r) exclusively for simplicity(18). The two chiral hyperbolic point defects – deformable from the hyperbolic defect in Fig. 1B (or its oppositely-charged counterpart by reversing n(r) direction) and is thus topologically equivalent – act as a topological switch that transitions between regions of trivial uniform background (Fig. 1, D and E). Here N)& is the skyrmion number of the 2D n(r) field with the definition, N)& ≡ ' *+ ∫ d!r n ⋅ (∂,n × ∂-n). The emergent field B"# derived from n(r) of a toron shows the corresponding two defects in B"# are a pair of a monopole and an anti-monopole, acting as the source and sink of the emergent field (Fig. 1F). The B"# flux streaming from the monopole to the anti-monopole is reminiscent of Dirac’s string in Dirac monopole(13). Therefore, the emergence of a skyrmion with non-trivial π!(S!) field topology in a trivial field background is mediated by the π!(S!) defects, which are a pair of monopoles in B"#. 5 In-plane skyrmions and monopoles can be stabilized in a uniform or helical background In chiral materials such as chiral LCs and chiral magnets, skyrmions are often recognized as axi- symmetric whirling configurations that smoothly transition into a uniform far-field n.. Such uniform-far-field skyrmions can be approximated analytically by the hedgehog ansatz n(r) = f(0) = π and f(∞) = 0, θ is the polar angle of the 2D spatial coordinate r, and γ = π/2 for right-handed chiral material. The corresponding B"# (or equivalently, skyrmion number density) derived from the ansatz also possesses the axial symmetry (Fig. 2, A and C). Such skyrmions in a uniform background are often found in the horizontal mid-plane perpendicular to n. in chiral LCs and chiral LC ferromagnets between substrates with a perpendicular (homeotropic) boundary condition, where torons emerge as a result of geometrical frustration between the material’s chirality and the substrate’s surface alignment (Fig. 1, D-F)(11). A somewhat less commonly familiar configuration of skyrmions is that with a helical field background; in this case, the corresponding n(r) can be thought of as splitting and splicing the uniform-background skyrmion while extending the region of helical configuration into a uniformly helical background with constant helical axis χ., which defines the axis that n(r) twists around in the far field (Fig. 2, B and D)(19). Helical skyrmions constructed as such show distinct symmetry in the distribution of skyrmion number density where it is localized at two lobes around the so-called λ disclination lines (often also referred to as fractional skyrmions and merons), the singular line defects in the helical-axis field that remain nonsingular in n(r) (20). Note in the case of helical skyrmion configurations, which in LC literature are sometimes referred to as Lehman clusters, the helical background is also topologically trivial and allows for compactification of the configuration space 6 R! to S! and thus the classification of the observed configuration within π!(S!) topology. The richness in geometrical configurations of skyrmions expands the confinement and alignment conditions that can host the solitons and associated monopoles. In particular, torons and skyrmions can also emerge in cells with planar alignment, where their stability could be established by frustration induced by cholesteric compression/dilation or by coupling to externally applied electric and magnetic fields. Computer simulations based on Frank-Oseen free-energy minimization show skyrmions stabilized both in a uniform-field background and in a helical-field background, respectively (Fig. 2, E and H). The π!(S!) topological defects in n(r) mediate the embedding of skyrmions into the field backgrounds (Fig. 2, F and I), and are sources and sinks of B"# where the streamlines of B"# run along the in-plane direction parallel to the substrates, representing monopoles of opposite charges (Fig. 2, G and J). Despite the dissimilar n(r) configurations around the defects, interestingly, they are classified by the π!(S!) homotopy group and correspond to consistent charges of monopoles in B"#. Compared to the more commonly realized skyrmions in perpendicular-alignment cells, in-plane skyrmions and monopoles allow the same topology to be realized in a geometry where they could reconfigure in the direction parallel to the confining substrates; this allows better accessibility for optical characterization and freedom of dynamics for monopoles. In-plane skyrmion emergence under applied electric field and their 1D lattices To observe in-plane skyrmions experimentally, we confined chiral LCs between substrates with planar anchoring in LC cells with a thickness-to-pitch ratio of d/p = 1. Under such conditions, the uniformly helical (cholesteric) state with far-field helical axis χ. perpendicular to the substrates is the global ground state and no stable skyrmions or monopoles are observed. Upon 7 heating and quenching from the isotropic state to the cholesteric state, dark fragments of stripe- like patterns seen under a polarizing optical microscope (POM) between crossed polarizers can be stabilized when a voltage across the substrates of U ≈ 1.4 V is applied to the LC with positive dielectric anisotropy (Fig. 3A). To reveal unambiguously the n(r) of these fragments, we employed a nonlinear fluorescence polarizing imaging (3PEF-PM, Methods) where the generated patterns can be compared with those from n(r) simulations. The results obtained using different polarizations of excitation are consistent with n(r) of in-plane skyrmions terminating at monopoles in a helical background (Fig. 3B). The in-plane helical skyrmions are stabilized by an electric field E because of the skyrmion’s energetically favored vertical n(r) along E, which is not present in the uniformly helical background (Fig. 2H). Besides spontaneous emergence after quenching, in-plane skyrmions can also nucleate from sample edges or be controllably generated by local melting and reorienting of LCs using laser tweezers when an electric field is applied (Methods). As the skyrmions increase in number and fill the sample, they form a 1D lattice in the direction perpendicular to the direction of planar alignment (Fig. 3, C and D). Defects of the skyrmion lattice as quasi-dislocations can be observed readily in a large lattice, where skyrmions terminating at monopoles locally disrupt the periodic arrangement (Fig. 3E). 3PEF-PM images show changes in N)& in the vertical cross-sections mediated by monopoles, where the presence of a monopole is associated with a change in N)& by unity. Specifically, Fig. 3G shows the effect of topological switching mediated by monopoles: N)& increases from -3 to -2 by a monopole, and decreases from -2 to -3 by an anti-monopole (Fig. 3, E-G). The 1D skyrmion lattice in chiral LCs is analogous to the 2D skyrmion A-phase in chiral magnets, where both form as a result of energy competition between material’s free energy minimization and coupling to externally applied fields. Notably, the unwinding of the chiral 8 magnetic A-phase into ferromagnetic phase is also mediated by monopoles(5) . The energetics of the emergence of skyrmions/torons mediated by monopole-antimonopole nucleations in this geometry competes with that of the formation of undulations of chiral LC’s quasilayers, where they, for certain material parameters in a similar experimental geometry, can emerge as a transformation that preserves the trivial topology of the helical background (21). In-plane skyrmions can also be realized in a uniform-field background (Figs. 2E and 3H,I). For a confined chiral LC with planar anchoring and d/p ≈ 1, an in-plane electric field ~1 V/μm unwinds the helical n(r) configuration and makes the uniform state n. ∥ E the ground state. Uniform-background in-plane skyrmions and monopoles can thus be created spontaneously through quenching or controllably by laser tweezers. Compared to the case of helical-background skyrmions, the stabilization of uniform-background skyrmions with an electric field requires high voltages (at least ~ 1000 V) because of the large lateral dimensions compared to the thickness in our LC samples. However, more sophisticated sample geometry such as those with patterned electrodes that reduce the gap size should alleviate the need for high voltages. External fields control dynamics of skyrmions and monopoles in LCs and LC ferromagnets Stabilization of in-plane skyrmions by an electric field E is enabled by the balance between elastic energy and dielectric coupling energy, where dielectric coupling energetically favors n(r) ∥ E in a material with positive dielectric anisotropy. In the case of helical-background skyrmions, E ∥ ẑ promotes vertical n(r) orientations and the expansion of skyrmions, which counters the shrinking tendency due to mismatch between twist deformation in the skyrmion and molecular pitch p. Beyond simply stabilizing n(r) configurations, modulation of E can also be used to control the dynamics of monopoles on which the skyrmions terminate. Here we focus on in-plane helical- 9 background skyrmions because of their ease of manipulation and observation, though the same field-controlled dynamics can be straightforwardly applied to other geometrical configurations. For a pair of a monopole and an anti-monopole at the ends of a skyrmion fragment, we define the separation velocity as the rate in the change of their distance of separation. Away from the equilibrium voltage at U < 1.4 V, the dielectric coupling is not strong enough to compensate for the cost in elastic energy in the skyrmion, and the skyrmion shrinks (Fig. 4A and movie S1). Whereas at U > 1.4 V, it becomes favorable in the overall free energy for the skyrmion to grow and acquire larger regions of vertical orientations in the system (Fig. 4B and movie S1). Thus, the separation velocity becomes positive and the width of the skyrmion, as determined in POM by the region deviating away from the helical background, is also visibly larger. The dependence of separation velocity on U is plotted in Fig. 4C. The magnitude of this separation velocity ≈ −60 μm/s is largest when the skyrmion shrinks at U = 0 V, while at U = 1.6 V, the monopole pair separate at 20 μm/s. In the range U < 1.6 V, the skyrmions connecting monopole pairs remain approximately linear in shape. Above U = 1.6 V, distortion in the helical background takes place in the form of undulations(21), resulting in deformation of the linear shape of the skyrmion and obstruction in the separation of monopoles. We note that when U < 1.4 V, the skyrmion shrinks and the monopole pair come together and annihilate, indicating the absence of an energy barrier between the monopole pairs. This contrasts with topological solitons, where n(r) is continuous and topologically nontrivial; erasing them requires generation and annihilation of singular defects, leading to an energy barrier and the so-called topological protection(20). The dynamics and stability of skyrmions and monopoles can also be controlled by magnetic fields in chiral LC ferromagnets where magnetically monodomain nanoplates are uniformly dispersed at high concentrations in the hosting chiral LC (22). By forming a monodomain in the 10 magnetization m(r) of ferromagnetic nanoplates and introducing strong homeotropic surface anchoring of LC molecules to the nanoplates (Methods), m(r) follows n(r) and physically vectorizes n(r) from a director field into a vector field. When an external magnetic field H is applied, H and m(r) couple linearly and compete with free-energy contributions from elastic and dielectric interactions. Figure 4, D and E, show the magnetic control of skyrmions and monopoles with H applied in different directions. When H is parallel to the average m(r) within a skyrmion, m), which is also the magnetization at the top and bottom substrates (Fig. 2H), the linear magnetic coupling promotes the expansion of skyrmions and separation of monopoles (Fig. 4D). The width of the skyrmions also become visibly wider. When H is antiparallel to m), skyrmions contract and eventually monopole pairs annihilate (Fig. 4E). Compared to electric-field control of monopoles, the coupling between H and m(r) is linear and polar, and can be applied with less constraint pertaining to sample geometry, enabling an orthogonal dimension in controlling monopole dynamics. Electric field controls interaction and assembly of vertical torons by modulating energetic landscape around solitons Thus far, we have focused on in-plane skyrmions and monopoles because of their accessibility for manipulation and observation. However, vertical skyrmions along the normal of substrates and terminating at monopoles in a cell with homeotropic boundary conditions, also known as torons, also display manipulable interaction and assembly modulated by an electric field. In a homeotropic cell, when the confined chiral LC has an elastic anisotropy such that K((/K!! ≤ 1, i.e., the energetic penalty of bend deformation is smaller than that of twist deformation, the background n(r) can be switched between the helical state and the uniform state by an electric field. For a 11 material with positive dielectric anisotropy, the background is helical at no field and can be unwound to the uniform state when an electric field is applied (14, 23). Vertical skyrmions stabilized in a helical background with no field display attractive pair-wise interaction and form a close-packed hexagonal lattice when several of them are in close proximity (Fig. 5A). This is in stark contrast to the repulsive interaction between vertical skyrmions stabilized in a uniform background(15, 18). When an electric field across the thickness of an LC cell was applied to unwind the helical background into a uniform background, the skyrmion-skyrmion interaction switched from attractive to repulsive (Fig. 5B). Computer simulations based on free-energy minimization reveal the detailed n(r) transformation when the background state changes between the helical state and the uniform state (Fig. 5, C and D). Before and after the transformation of the background state, the monopole pairs and skyrmion number in the horizontal cross-sections are conserved, preserving their respective π!(S!) topology. However, the energetic landscape in the lateral dimensions changes. When the background is helical at no electric field, the free energy density at the periphery of the skyrmion is higher than that of the background; when the background is unwound by an electric field, the free energy density at the periphery of the skyrmion becomes lower than that of the background (Fig. 5E). To minimize total free energy, skyrmions (in a helical background) with a high-energy periphery comes closer together to share and reduce the volume with a high energy density, leading to an attractive interaction, whereas skyrmions (in the uniform background) with a low-energy periphery stay away from each other to increase the space with low energy density, leading to repulsion. We note that, in noncentrosymmetric chiral magnets, skyrmions in a uniformly polarized background are commonly observed, and skyrmions with attractive interaction have also been demonstrated in a conical background(24). In LCs, the switching of pair-wise interactions between skyrmions 12 through background modulation can be recorded in real time due to their unparalleled experimental accessibility. Discussion and Conclusion In this work, we have presented the magnetic and electric control of the equilibrium configuration of π!(S!) topological configurations, namely skyrmions and monopoles (with their composite structures referred to as torons), and their dynamics in chiral LC materials. We found that π!(S!) point defects at the termini of skyrmions are indeed monopoles in the emergent magnetic field. We further demonstrated that LC skyrmions can take on versatile geometrical configurations under different boundary conditions and applied fields. Notably, in-plane skyrmions in planar-confined cells offer exceptional accessibility for observation and manipulation by external fields. Compared to vertical skyrmions in a homeotropically aligned cell (torons), in-plane skyrmions offer the opportunity of controlling the separation of monopoles in the lateral dimensions, whereas the separation between the monopoles in vertical skyrmions is limited due to confinement by the substrates, though their lateral spatial extent can be controlled by fields(10, 25). To enhance the dynamical range of the electric control of skyrmions and monopoles, dual frequency LCs may be used to allow the sign of LC dielectric anisotropy to be adjustable, such that positive (negative) dielectric anisotropy that promotes expansion (contraction) can be used in the same material(26). The linear coupling enabled by magnetic fields, distinct from the quadratic nature of dielectric coupling to electric fields, could also potentially allow for orientational control of solitons and monopoles. Additionally, we showed that the pair-wise interaction between vertical skyrmions can be switched between attractive and repulsive, by altering the background configuration that embeds 13 them through applying electric fields. We expect that similar switching can be achieved as well in LC ferromagnets using magnetic fields, where the far-field m(r) can be polarized by H applied to the sample. Crossover between different pair-wise interactions of LC skyrmions has been observed between vertical and in-pane skyrmions in homeotropically aligned cells, albeit it was done differently through changing the dimension of the confined LC or anchoring(27). The field- controlled pair-wise interaction of LC skyrmions could potentially further couple with their recently observed squirming motion, activated by a modulated electric field, to facilitate versatile control and manipulation of LC topological solitons and defects(28). On the application side, the high degree of distortion in the alignment field around the monopole and the central isotropic core are elastic energy traps for micro- or nanoparticles(29, 30). Thus, potential technological applications could arise from dynamical control of skyrmions and monopoles, such as electro/magneto-optic devices, microfluidic devices, optical logic devices, etc. The widespread electro-optic applications of LCs typically rely on switching between topologically trivial states that are homeomorphic one to another, but our findings point to the possibility of realizing controlled conditions for achieving novel electro-optic effects either by morphing topologically nontrivial configurations or even by changing topology, for example, through the monopole-mediated skyrmion nucleation and reconfiguration. Lastly, the study of dynamics and control of LC skyrmions and monopoles could shed light on the physics of topologically equivalent solitonic structures in other ordered systems, such as in the solid-state magnetic(5), ferroelectric(31), or optical fields(32). 14