Excitonic effects in nonlinear optical responses: Exciton-state formalism and first-principles calculations Jiawei Ruan1,2, Y.-H. Chan3,4*, Steven G. Louie1,2† 1 Department of Physics, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA 2 Materials Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 3 Physic Division, National Center of Theoretical Physics, Taipei 10617, Taiwan 4 Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei 10617, Taiwan * yanghao@gate.sinica.edu.tw † sglouie@berkeley.edu Abstract: Nonlinear optical (NLO) responses have garnered tremendous interest for decades due to their fundamental and technological interests. The theory and calculations of NLO responses including electron-hole interactions, which is especially crucial for reduced-dimensional materials, however, remain underdeveloped. Here, we develop an ab initio approach to calculate second-order nonlinear responses (such as second harmonic generation (SHG) and shift current) with excitonic effects in an exciton-state basis, going beyond the independent- particle approximation. We compute SHG in monolayer h-BN and MoS2 employing exciton states from GW-Bethe-Salpeter equation (GW-BSE) calculations and show both materials exhibit huge excitonic enhancement. The physical origin of the enhancement is directly understood through the coupling amplitudes among exciton states, assisted with diagrammatic representations. Our method provides an accurate and ab initio description of second-order NLO responses, capturing self-energy and electron-hole interaction effects. Main text: In low-dimensional semiconductors, strongly correlated electron-hole pairs known as excitons (either strongly bound or in resonance with the two-particle continuum) dominate the low-energy excitations and play a key role in light-matter interactions. Understanding excitonic effects in various optical responses is essential for developing optoelectronic devices and applications for quantum information and sensing, as well as energy harvesting. It is by now established that strong excitonic enhancement in light absorption in linear response in low- dimensional materials is a consequence of quantum confinement and reduced screening [1–4]. Going beyond linear response, our understanding of excitonic effects in higher-order optical responses is less complete owing to the correlated nature of the excitonic states and intricate light-matter interactions. Second harmonic generation (SHG) is a typical nonlinear optical (NLO) response where the emitted light frequency is twice that of the incident light . The material response is described by a susceptibility tensor defined as the ratio of polarization density P(2ω) and the are Cartesian directions. SHG spectroscopy has been widely used in characterizing the crystal structure of materials and strain effects owing to the sensitivity of the SHG susceptibility tensor to crystal symmetry [7–9]. Although strong SHG signals are observed in 2D materials (compared to the bulk) such as monolayer MoS2 and WSe2, the detailed role of excitonic effects on such enhancement is unclear partly owing to the lack of an efficient first-principles method [10–16]. Direct current (DC) generation from second-order optical responses (without p-n junction, called the bulk photovoltaic effect) is another topic of great fundament and practical interests such as in photovoltaic devices. Shift current is an intrinsic mechanism for the bulk photovoltaic effect and has drawn much attention through the years [17–28]. Recent work reported strong shift current in low dimensional materials, such as 2D materials and nanotubes . In particular, evidence of large excitonic effects in shift current generation in monolayer systems has been shown through direct real-time simulations of current densities, including electron-hole interactions . Ab initio methods for calculating second order optical responses such as SHG and shift current within the independent particle (IP) approximation are well-established . In contrast, approaches including excitonic effects are still in their infancy. Based on the time- dependent perturbation theory, several studies have derived the so-called "sum-over-exciton- states" expressions for second order optical responses, using either the length gauge or the velocity gauge for light-matter interactions [31–36]. In particular, the length-gauge methods are free from unphysical low-frequency divergences . However, they have not yet been formulated using diagrammatic approaches or applied from first principles. An ab initio real-time propagation of wavefunction approach has been implemented to study excitonic effects on SHG on a variety of low-dimensional materials . A time-dependent adiabatic GW (TD-aGW) approach with real-time propagation of the interacting density matrix has also been developed and used to study excitonic effects on shift current and SHG . Real-time propagations can provide simultaneously information on multiple higher-order responses and at higher field intensity; however, they demand high computational costs. An efficient approach for NLO responses at the GW plus Bethe–Salpeter equation (GW-BSE) level from first principles, within the weak field limit, is therefore highly desirable. Motivated by these considerations, we develop in this work an ab initio approach based on an exciton-state formalism to study second order optical responses such as SHG and shift current at the GW-BSE level. As examples, we apply this approach to investigate SHG of monolayer h-BN and MoS2. We show that both materials exhibit strong excitonic enhancement in SHG, while the origin of the enhancement is different for the two materials. Through an analysis assisted by Feynman diagrammatic representations, we identify that the large excitonic enhancement for monolayer h-BN is because of the concurrence of bright 1s and 2p exciton states in the same material; on the other hand, in monolayer MoS2, it is due to the existence of multiple bright C-series excitons and the strong inter-exciton coupling among them. Applying a perturbative approach to the equation of motion of the interacting density matrix , we solve the TD-aGW equation as given in Ref. and obtain expressions for NLO responses including excitonic effects in the exciton-state basis. To second order, we arrive at our main result for the susceptibility tensor for SHG, χ!,"#(2ω ; ω , ω ) = e& 2ε'V 4 5 R'( ! R() " R)' # (2ħω − E( + iη)(ħω − E) + iη) (,) + R'( " R() # R)' ! + R'( # R() ! R)' " (1) where e is the electron charge and V is the total volume of the crystal. The notation (λ ↔ ν) means an exchange of the two Cartesian directions. E( is excitation energy of the n-th exciton state |S(()⟩, which is expressed as BS(()C = ∑ A,-k ,-k (() |vck⟩ with |vck⟩ being pairs of valence and conduction band states and A,-k (() being the envelope function of the exciton. We define an optical matrix elements (sometimes called the dipole matrix element which originates from the light-matter interaction term −eE(t) ∙ r in the length gauge for uniform illumination of long wavelength optical light) in the exciton basis, R(,' " = ∑ A-,k " -,k , where r-,k " is the single-particle matrix element of the electron coordinate r between electronic states |ck⟩ and |vk⟩. Treating the inter-band and intra-band matrix element of r separately, the inter- exciton coupling matrix elements are expressed as R() " " + Q() " , where Y() " = ∑ O∑ A-,k " A-!, k ()) -!0- − ∑ A-,k (()∗ A- ,! k ()) r,!,k " ,!0, P -,k and Q() " = i ∑ A-,k (()∗D"OA-,k ())P -,k . In the expression of Q() " matrix elements, we introduce the generalized derivative operator D"(O-,k) = ∂1#O-,k − i(r--k " − r,,k " )O-,k, with r((k " being intraband Berry connections. This generalized derivative operator appears naturally due to the intraband coupling in the length gauge . We note that R() " can be viewed as inter-exciton and intra-exciton optical coupling matrix elements, depending on whether n equals to m or not. The expression for shift current in the exciton-state basis is given in Supplementary Materials . We note that Eq. 1, derived within a length gauge framework making use of the Berry phase formalism, does not contain a divergent prefactor (like powers of 1/ω) and is free from numerical instabilities as ω → 0. This is in contrast to expressions derived using a velocity gauge framework, which need special treatments in the ω → 0 limit . The terms in Eq. 1 can be visualized using Feynman diagrams. The Feynman diagram approach for NLO responses was systematically introduced in Refs. at the single- particle level. Here, we extend this approach to describe nonlinear optics with excitonic effects. As shown in Fig. 1, the matrix elements R() or R(,' are associated with the photon-exciton vertices (denoted by the dots) which describe a photon that couples two exciton states or connects an exciton with the ground state. The solid lines are the propagators for quantum states including excited states and the ground state. The plotted diagram in Fig. 1 depicts the first term in Eq. 1, and by cyclic permutation of the {0, m, n} labels for the quantum states and exchange of the Cartesian directions λ and ν, we can obtain all terms in Eq. 1. It is clear from Eq. 1 and the diagram that second order optical responses involve three consecutive couplings, where two of them (R',( and R),') couple the ground state to exciton states and one of them (R()) couples two exciton states. We compute the susceptibility tensor χ!"# by first solving the GW-BSE equation to obtain the excitons’ excitation energy and envelope functions as implemented in the BerkeleyGW package . The derivative of envelope functions with respect to k in optical coupling matrix elements R() is calculated based on a locally smooth gauge (see Ref. and Supplementary Materials for details). We have performed benchmark calculations for monolayer GeS, as previously studied in Ref. , and found a good agreement between the exciton-state formalism and the TD-aGW method (see Supplementary Materials ). As a demonstration, we first study the SHG responses of monolayer h-BN, which is a large bandgap semiconductor with strong excitonic effects . In Fig. 2(a), we show the yyy component of SHG susceptibility tensors computed with different theories. In general, χ23- as a tensor in 2D has 8 components; however, for our system with D&4 symmetry, χ555 = −χ566 = −χ665 = −χ656, with all other components equal to zero . The GW-BSE results are obtained by summing up exciton states with n, m indices up to 27,648 and a broadening parameter of η = 0.2 eV (see Supplementary Materials for more details). The SHG susceptibility at the GW-BSE level shows two sets of double peak structure, one at the energy of the 1s-like and 2p-like exciton states and the other at half of their energies. (The two absorption peaks in the linear response spectrum due to the 1s-like and 2p-like exciton states are denoted as peak I and peak II, respectively. We thus denote the corresponding peaks at half energy as peak I1/2 and II1/2 .) These four peaks can be understood from the two-photon resonance and the single-photon resonance due to the denominators in Eq. 1. Overall, our results agree reasonably well with previous first-principles calculations using a time propagation method . In the following, we investigate in more details the part of the spectrum with frequencies being half of the linear optical transition energies. This frequency region, in which the peaks denoted with 1/2 occur, is commonly focused on in SHG experiments . Comparing results from different level of theories and methods, we observe strong excitonic enhancement to both peak I1/2 and peak II1/2. To understand this, we focus on the dominated term (the first term) in the square bracket of Eq. 1 and analyze the matrix elements appeared in the numerator. We define a product coupling amplitude N78 = ∑ ∑ 9)|;$<;%= R',(R()R),' . Here the indices i and j refer to the specific exciton energy E7 and E8, which can have multiple degenerate states, and all the degenerate exciton states associated with these energies are included in the calculation of N78. For our analysis of the yyy component, we have dropped the Cartesian direction y in the exciton optical transition matrix elements R() 5 and R),' 5 for notational simplicity. The first term of the summation in Eq. 1 now can be rewritten as ∑ N78(2ħω − E7 + iη)@A`ħω − E8 + iηa @A 78 . Due to the presence of the denominator 2ħω − E7 + iη, there would be a large SHG intensity when ω is near half of exciton energy E7, as long as there exist large coupling amplitudes N78 in the set {N78, j = all}. This argument is visualized in Fig. 2(b). In the figure, the absolute values of N78 are represented by a series of dots with different radii. The lower orange bracket in the figure indicates that peak I1/2 is mainly related to the set of coupling amplitudes dN78|i = 1s, j = allf. In this set, N7<AB,8<CD and N7<AB,8<AB have a particularly large magnitude and they are the main source for the large intensity of peak I1/2. Similarly, peak II1/2 is related to the set dN78|i = 2p, j = allf, which is indicated by the upper orange bracket. Let’s focus on the largest coupling amplitude N7<AB,8<CD indicated by the red arrow in Fig. 2(b) to get some physical insight of the excitonic enhancement in the SHG process of this system. In monolayer h-BN, this coupling amplitude involves two degenerate 1s-like singlet exciton states (one from the K, the other from the K’ valley) and two degenerate optically bright 2p-like singlet states (one from the K, the other from the K’ valley). The two optically dark 2p-like singlet states (See Ref. for details) are not involved in this coupling amplitude. One can show that the inter-exciton dipole coupling between a 1s-like state and a 2p-like state from the opposite valleys are symmetry forbidden. On the other hand, the 1s-like state and 2p- like state from the same valley can be coupled by the r operator, since their angular momenta differ by 1. As a result, two coupling paths, 0 → 2pE → 1sE → 0 and 0 → 2pE! → 1sE! → 0, with nonvanishing amplitude contribute to N7<AB,8<CD, as indicated by Fig. 2(c). The coupling between 1s-like states and 2p-like states is not sufficient to yield a large coupling amplitude for N7<AB,8<CD. The oscillator strength of the 2p-like states (i.e., excitation from the ground state) should be large as well, which is not common in conventional materials with dipole-allowed interband transitions. It was found that monolayer h-BN is quite unusual because one of the 2p-like excitons are also optically bright besides the 1s excitons. This unusual brightness for the 2p excitons is attributed to the large degree of trigonal wrapping in this system . Indeed, the 2p-like excitons have envelope functions that are significantly distorted from a circular shape (shown in Fig. 2(d)) and their dipole coupling to the ground state is large, with BRCD,'B ≈ 0.5BRAB,'B. We thus show that the large excitonic enhancement seen in peak I1/2 is due to the concurrence of bright 1s-like and 2p-like states together with the large inter-exciton coupling between them. The excitonic enhancement in SHG at low frequencies of monolayer h-BN is however not a general feature of other materials. It is well-known that peak A in the monolayer MoS2 absorption spectrum originates from the 1s excitons at the K and K′ valley. Above the band gap, peak C, which consists of electron-hole pairs near Γ, K and K′ valleys, is the most pronounced peak . Both A and C excitons feature large linear optical transition matrix elements due to strong excitonic effects. Therefore, one would expect similar enhancement on both peaks in the SHG intensity. However, we find that peak A1/2 in monolayer MoS2 does not show strong SHG enhancement while the peak C1/2 intensity is tremendously enhanced. In Fig. 3(a), we show the yyy component of SHG susceptibility tensor of monolayer MoS2 computed from different theories. We assign the peak at 0.86 eV and 1.18 eV from GW-BSE results as peak A1/2 and C1/2 since they are at half of the energy of peak A and peak C in the absorption spectrum. The corresponding peaks in the IP calculation are located at 0.9 eV and 1.3 eV, respectively. We find that the peak A1/2 intensity is close to the value of the low- frequency SHG intensity from an IP calculation, while there is more than a three-fold excitonic enhancement in the intensity of peak C1/2. The dominance of peak C1/2 agrees with experimental findings and calculations based on real-time propagation studies and tight-binding model results . To understand the distinctive enhancement effects on peak C1/2 and A1/2, we again analyze the exciton optical coupling matrix elements and the product coupling amplitude N78 for monolayer MoS2. Figure 3(b) is the plot of the absolute value of N78. Similar to the case in monolayer h-BN, the intensity of peak A1/2 is mainly contributed by the set dN78|i = 1s, j = allf, as depicted by the lower orange brackets in Fig. 3(b). Among this set, N7<AB,8<CD is the dominant one, denoted by the green arrow in Fig. 3(b). However, its magnitude is not large. This is because one of its constituent elements RCD,' is small, whose amplitude is only 0.06 times that of RAB,' in the same material, as indicated in Fig. 3(c). The smallness of RCD,' is related to the small degree of trigonal warping in monolayer MoS2 , as shown in Fig. 3(d). The peak C1/2, on the other hand, is related to a larger set of coupling amplitudes, as depicted by the upper orange brackets in Fig. 3(b). We find that many coupling amplitudes N78 in this set have values which are one order of magnitude larger than N7<AB,8<CD, as shown in the orange dashed circle in Fig. 3b. This can be understood as follows. Two bright excitons (say |C)⟩, |C(⟩) in the series C can be coupled strongly by the r operator because their envelope functions exhibit a large degree of trigonal warping and are distributed in a similar region in reciprocal space (see Supplementary Material ). As a result, the three coupling elements (RF$,', RF$F&, RF&,') can be simultaneously large, leading to a substantial product coupling amplitude, as indicated in the diagram in Fig. 3(e). Since there are multiple bright C exciton states, many large-valued coupling amplitudes associated with different C states can constructively add. Consequently, this gives rise to a giant excitonic enhancement at the peak C1/2. In conclusion, we have developed an efficient method based on an exciton-state basis formulation to compute nonlinear optical responses with excitonic effects from first principles. Applying this method to monolayer h-BN and MoS2, we have elucidated the microscopic origin of excitonic enhancements on their SHG responses. A comparison of the two materials suggests strong trigonal warping is essential for large excitonic enhancement in this class of hexagonal 2D materials . Acknowledgements This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under grant DMR-2325410 which provided the exciton basis density matrix perturbation theory formulation, Feynman diagram studies, and symmetry analyses of exciton couplings, and by the Center for Computational Study of Excited State Phenomena in Energy Materials (C2SEPEM) funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineering Division under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, as part of the Computational Materials Sciences Program which provided GW-BSE calculations, exciton- basis coupling matrix elements, and advanced codes. We acknowledge the use of computational resources at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported by the Office of Science of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. The authors acknowledge the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin and National Center for High-performance Computing (NCHC) for providing HPC resources that have contributed to the research results reported within this paper. Jiawei Ruan and Y.-H. Chan contribute equally to this work.