Precise Fermi level engineering in a topological Weyl semimetal via fast ion implantation Manasi Mandal,1, 2, † Abhijatmedhi Chotrattanapituk,1, 3, † Kevin Woller,2 Haowei Xu,2 Nannan Mao,3 Ryotaro Okabe,1, 4 Artittaya Boonkird,1, 2 Thanh Nguyen,1, 2 Nathan C. Drucker,1, 5 Takashi Momiki,6 Ju Li,2, 7 Jing Kong,3 and Mingda Li1, 2, ∗ 1Quantum Measurement Group, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 3Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 4Department of Chemistry, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 5School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA 6Aisin Technical Center of America, Inc, CA 95110, USA 7Department of Materials Science and Engineering, MIT, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA (Dated: October 13, 2023) The precise controllability of the Fermi level is a critical aspect of quantum materials. For topological Weyl semimetals, there is a pressing need to fine-tune the Fermi level to the Weyl nodes and unlock exotic electronic and optoelectronic effects associated with the divergent Berry curvature. However, in contrast to 2D materials, where the Fermi level can be controlled through various techniques, the situation for bulk crystals beyond laborious chemical doping poses significant challenges. Here, we report the meV-level ultra-fine-tuning of the Fermi level of bulk topological Weyl semimetal TaP using accelerator-based high-energy hydrogen implantation and theory-driven planning. By calculating the desired carrier density and controlling the accelerator profiles, the Fermi level can be fine-tuned from 5 meV to only ∼0.5 meV (DFT calculations) away from the Weyl nodes. The Weyl nodes are preserved, while the carrier mobility is largely retained. Our work demonstrates the viability of this generic approach to tune the Fermi level in semimetal systems and could serve to achieve property fine-tuning for other bulk quantum materials with ultrahigh precision. The precise controllability of the Fermi level and carrier doping in a solid-state material holds paramount significance in condensed matter physics and materials science. In mi- croelectronics such as high-electron-mobility transistors, the ability to fine-tune the Fermi level is crucial to control the operation thresholds and high-frequency responses [1–3]. In strongly correlated systems such as high-temperature cuprate superconductors, achieving optimal hole doping is essential for enhancing the superconducting critical temperature [4– 6]. As for energy harvesting applications such as thermo- electrics, a well-adjusted Fermi level strikes a delicate bal- ance between electrical conductivity and thermopower, which leads to an optimized power factor [7–10]. A particularly noteworthy utilization for Fermi level fine-tuning lies in topo- logical materials, where only a precisely positioned Fermi level can unveil the topological properties. For instance, in topological insulators, dissipationless electronic states such as quantum anomalous Hall states can only manifest when the Fermi level is located precisely within the small surface bandgap. This can only be achieved through a strategic blend of chemical doping [11–13] and electrostatic gating in thin heterostructures [14–17]. For topological Weyl semimetals (WSM), exotic phenomena like large charge-to-spin intercon- version , strong higher-order photoresponse , anomalous Nernst effect , and quantized thermoelec- tric Hall effect emerge due to a divergent Berry cur- vature, which can only happen when the Fermi level is tuned to be exactly at the Weyl nodes. † These authors contribute to this work equally. ∗ manasim@mit.edu; mingda@mit.edu However, unlike in lower dimensional materials, in which the Fermi level can be continuously fine-tuned through a vari- ety of accessible techniques like electrostatic and ionic gating, achieving this level of control in three-dimensional bulk ma- terials has presented a longstanding challenge. Chemical dop- ing can only be performed during the synthesis and offers lim- ited precision, which does not meet the stringent requirement for topological semimetals. The electronic states in topologi- cal semimetals, such as from the Weyl and Dirac bands, have a linear dispersion with zero density-of-states at the topological singularities, making the Fermi level location extremely sen- sitive to the carrier concentration . Therefore, there is an urgent need to attain enhanced fine-tunability of topo- logical semimetals for more practical energy and information applications. In this work, we use high-energy, accelerator-based hydro- gen implantation to achieve ultra-fine carrier doping in WSM of tantalum phosphide (TaP) . Although hydrogenation and low-energy ion implantation have been used to tune ma- terials properties [28–33], there are a few key distinct features presented in the current setup. Foremost, the fine controlla- bility of the advanced accelerator technique enables an ultra- fine tuning of the Fermi level down to the meV regime, far beyond the previous approaches. In addition, the high en- ergy beam also enables the doping of a bulk crystal beyond a thin film with tens of nanometers . Moreover, thanks to the rapid development of the accelerator technol- ogy with high precision control of the accelerator beam en- ergy and flux of ions, we were able to achieve a priori dop- ing planning through a combination of DFT and Monte Carlo calculations, which eventually shows quantitative agreement with actual experiments. This sets up an example for ultrafine doping planning experiments. The Weyl nodes are preserved arXiv:2310.07828v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 11 Oct 2023 2 a b c d terminal using a low-energy magnet. The ion beam is focused by a magnetic quadrupole lens and the desired ion species are directed into the beamline for the experiment. b) Crystal structure of the Weyl semimetal TaP. c) Fast Fourier transform of the longitudinal magnetoresistance of TaP reveals quantum oscillations with specific frequencies (reproduced from ). d) Illustration of the irradiation effect on the Fermi level of TaP. The red arrow indicates the shift of the Fermi level towards a Weyl node. after doping, as shown from the quantum oscillation measure- ments, while the temperature to reach the charge neutral point is nearly doubled, without lowering much on the carrier mo- bility. a b Ta2P2 H in Ta16P16 level (Ef) of a) pristine TaP, and b) H doped TaP (2 × 2 × 2 TaP supercell with one H insertion). Each plot point represents a Weyl node placed in its energy ascending order from left to right. The inset in b shows the zoom-in view of the Weyl nodes with energy near Fermi level The doping experiment uses the Tandem accelerator located at the Center for Science and Technology with Accelerators and Radiation (CSTAR). The schematic used in our experi- ment is shown in Fig. 1a. This type of accelerator consists of two successive linear accelerators with the same power sup- ply. A cesium sputtering source is used as the ion source to generate negative ions from most of the elements with low va- por pressure (excluding noble gases). This source works by cesium sputtering a solid target, which produces negative ions that are then subjected to electron exchange with neutral ce- sium. Negative ions are initially introduced into the first stage (blue arrow), where they are accelerated toward the positive high-voltage (HV) terminal. Subsequently, depending on the experimental preferences, nitrogen gas can be injected into the HV terminal to strip some of the electrons from the ions, which transforms them into positive ions. As a result, the Tan- dem accelerator enables a remarkable capability to dope tens of different elements in the period table of elements. We have chosen negative hydrogen as the dopant, which offers sev- eral advantages in materials science due to its small atomic size, i.e., it does not significantly alter the structure of pris- tine materials . Electrochemical hydrogenation can also be used for electron doping of semiconductors with good dop- ing regime controllability, but not high-precision doping level control . In addition, hydrogen can exhibit a range of ex- otic properties as a dopant that makes it particularly interest- ing for research and applications, including metal-to-insulator transitions , magnetostriction , enhanced supercon- ductivity , and paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transi- tions . The earlier study highlights TaP as a remarkable topo- 3 a b c d e S3m S3m S3m S3m S3m f g h i j S20m S20m S20m S20m S20m MR (∆MR) of a versus 1/B for a few temperatures that exhibit Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations. This ∆MR is calculated using q polynomial-fitted background subtraction. c) Fast Fourier transform (FFT) of b. d) Example of a Landau level fan diagram analysis which indicates the presence of lower frequencies in b at 5 K than TaP . e) Scatter plot of the oscillation frequencies extracted from b using various background subtraction methods at 5 K. f)-j) are the same as a)-e), but for the S20m sample. logical Weyl semimetal with an inversion symmetry-breaking crystal structure (Fig. 1b). It exhibits a non-saturating ther- mopower, a giant magnetoresistance, and quantized thermo- electric Hall effect. Shubnikov-de Haas oscillations (SdH) are observed in the background-subtracted MR (∆MR) data at temperatures below 25 K. The Fourier transform of ∆MR showed four pockets, with two small carrier pockets, one with a low-frequency Fα = 4 T and the other with Fβ = 18 T indi- cating the presence of the W2 Weyl node, in addition to the electron pocket from the W1 Weyl node contributing to Fβ (Fig. 1c) . Introducing H− ions through irradiation is ex- pected to shift the Fermi level closer to the Weyl node by car- rier doping, as illustrated in the schematic diagram in Fig. 1d. By employing the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP), we conducted density functional theory (DFT) cal- culations. These calculations provide a qualitative insight into the energy redistribution of Weyl node energy levels upon H doping. The energy of the Weyl nodes with respect to the Fermi level (Ef) is shown in Fig. 2a for TaP and Fig. 2b for the doped TaP system (one H in Ta16P16). Here, the hori- zontal axis is the index of the Weyl nodes. The Weyl nodes are ranked according to their energy, so the index itself does not carry additional information. Notably, the doped TaP sys- tem exhibits Weyl nodes that are distributed somewhat con- tinuously. Comparing the doped TaP to the pristine TaP, our calculations indicate that certain Weyl nodes in the doped sys- tem lie merely 0.5 meV away from the Fermi level, whereas, in the pristine system, they are much further at 10 meV from the Fermi level. A theoretical model and ab initio calculations estimating the correlation between hydrogen doping concen- tration in TaP and the shift in the Fermi level are discussed in Supplementary Information (SI). To calculate the implanted ion energy, penetration depth within the crystal, and damage to the target material, the stop- ping and range of ions in matter software (SRIM/TRIM) was employed. The detailed calculations are presented in the SI. Single crystals of TaP were irradiated with 20 keV H− ions with varying durations to achieve the desired doping concen- tration. The summary of different samples with their respec- tive dose of irradiation and time duration is presented in Ta- ble I. The irradiated samples named S3m and S20m exhibit a sig- nificantly high magnetoresistance (MR) on the order of 104% and accompanied by SdH oscillations at temperatures below 15 K (see Fig. 3a, and Fig. 3f, respectively). In contrast, the S2h sample does not display such oscillations even up to 9 T (details in SI). It is important to note that the analysis of car- rier pockets based on quantum oscillations can be influenced 4 by the choice of the background for MR. Therefore, we calcu- lated the background-subtracted MR (∆MR) using different background subtraction methods (details in SI). Fig. 3b, and Sample Dose of irradiation Irradiation time (cm−2) (minutes) S3m 3 S20m 20 S2h 120 ferent durations. a b Pristine S3m S20m Pristine S3m S20m concentrations (nh). b) Temperature-dependent trends of electron (μe) and hole mobilities (μh). The top profiles serve as references for TaP. Our analysis involves the extraction of equivalent profiles from the two-band model fitting, applied to the S3m and S20m samples as annotated in the plots. Fig. 3g illustrate the ∆MR obtained with a polynomial-fitted background subtraction method, while Fig. 3c, and Fig. 3h show the corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) results for S3m and S20m, respectively. These FFT plots reveal a no- ticeably lower oscillation frequency compared to the pristine TaP . Furthermore, Fig. 3d, and Fig. 3i present the results of the Landau level (LL) fan diagram analysis which indicates the presence of more oscillations with lower frequencies. The oscillation frequencies have been repeatedly extracted using various background subtraction methods, and scatter plotted together to show agreement between methods (see Fig. 3e, and Fig. 3j). This finding supports and validates our DFT calcu- lations concerning the continuous energy distribution of Weyl nodes in proximity to the Fermi surface compared to pristine TaP. To find the effect of irradiation on the carrier concentration and the mobility Fig. 4, the longitudinal and transverse con- ductivity data were fitted with a two-band model. The details of the data extraction from these measurements are discussed in the SI. The compensation temperature increased to 160 K and 155 K for S3m and S20m, respectively, whereas it is 110 K for pristine TaP . Fig. 5 shows the normalized carrier concentration nT extracted from the simple extended Kohler’s rule. The consistent temperature-dependent trend observed in our analysis, in accordance with the fitted two-band model, serves as compelling evidence for the accuracy and validity of our findings (see SI for detailed calculation). In summary, we have addressed a novel method for ultra- fine Fermi level tuning in the prototype bulk WSM TaP using high-energy hydrogen implantation facilitated by accelerator- based techniques. Our transport measurements demonstrate a successful increment in the charge neutral point temperature through precise tuning of the Fermi level in proximity to the Weyl nodes. These experimental results are achievable by the guidance from DFT calculations. The approach presented in this study represents a highly controllable and universally ap- plicable technique for fine-tuning the Fermi level and quantum orderings in bulk quantum materials. By enabling precise con- trol over the Fermi level in bulk crystals, the work could open up new possibilities for exploring and manipulating the unique properties of topological WSM and other quantum materials. This advancement holds significant promise for the develop- ment of future quantum technologies and applications. a b S3m S20m malized adjusted parameter nT , as extracted from both the extended Kohler’s rule and the two-band model for a) S3m, and b) S20m. The plots show good agreement between simple extended Kohler’s rule and fitted two-band model.