arXiv:2310.00456v2 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 13 Oct 2023 Quantum Materials Group Annual Report 2022 P. Kumari, S. Rani, S. Kar, T. Mukherjee, S. Majumder, K. Kumari, S. J. Ray∗ Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Patna, Bihta 801106, India Abstract The Quantum Materials group at Indian Institute of Technology Patna is working on a range of topics relating to nanoelectronics, spintronics, clean energy and memory design etc. The PI has past experiences of working extensively with superconducting systems like cuprates , ruthanate , pnictide , thin film heterostructures etc and magnetic recording media etc. In this report, we have summarised the ongoing works in our group. We explored a range of functional materials like two-dimensional materials, oxides. topological insulators, organic materials etc. using a combination of experimnetal and computational tools. Some of the useful highlights are as follows: (a) tuning and control of the magnetic and electronic state of 2D magentic materials with rapid enhancement in the Curie temperature, (b) Design and detection of single electron transistor based nanosensors for the detection of biological species with single molecular resolution, (c) Observation of non-volatile memory behaviour in the hybrid structures made of perovskite materials and 2D hybrids. The results offer useful insight in the design of nanoelectronic architecrures for diverse applications. ∗Electronic address: ray@iitp.ac.in, ray.sjr@gmail.com 1 I. NANOSENSING The discovery of 2D materials has opened up various areas for nanoelectronic applica- tion. A single electron transistor (SET) is a source-quantum dot-drain structure where the quantised conduction through the dot can be controlled by a capacitively coupled gate. The quantised energy levels in the quantum dot (QD) give rise to well defined conductance plateaus, with their positions changing at specific source-drain bias leading to a coulomb blockade state. Due to the larger surface to volume ratio, 2D materials attracted significant attention for sensing applications, which is reflected in its drastic change of resistance on the adsorption of an alien molecule. In the close proximity of an external molecule, the charge carrier concentration on a 2D material changes significantly. This property has been exploited to use 2D layered materials like graphene , borophene and MoS2 for sensing applications. Depending upon the sign of the charge transfer between the molecule and the 2D material, the molecule near the layered material can work as a donor or acceptor. Owing to the 2D nature of such materials, the effect of surface dopants is extremely perceptive which has been demonstrated in achieving extreme detection efficiency upto 1 ppb. In our recent work, we have developed various single electron transistor (SET) devices with 2D materials as island and studied their usefulness as nanosensor. DNA and RNA detection were studied for the case of graphene and hexagonal boron nitride based SET . It was observed that addition of a secondary gate electrode offers better control of the detection efficiency . Earlier, we have designed various SET devices for chemi- cal detection using a variety of layers like graphene, MoS2 , phosphorene , C3N etc and in various engineered nanostructures [18–25]. The biosensing behaviour of a C3N nanoribbon can be found here and Proximity-induced colossal conductivity modu- lation was observed in phosphorene towards the detection of organic molecules . Silicon based single electron devices have been used for electron pumping operation, that is useful for quantum metrology [29–33]. 2 II. SPINTRONICS The discovery of atomically thin two dimensional materials has brought a paradigm shift in the development of 2D nanoelectronic and spintronic devices. Today, a wide variety of such materials ranging from graphene, which is a semi-metal, to semiconductors and insulators have emerged with unique electronic properties. Specifically, graphene and other 2D crystals have already shown their utility in spintronic applications [34–38]. A recent entry into this area has been the class of 2D magnets, which defied the predictions of Mermin- Wagner theorem, which states that finite temperature thermal excitations are enough to destroy magnetic order in two dimension. Despite this, the feasibility of 2D magnets was shown by first-principles calculations in several 2D materials, which can be considered as ground states at absolute zero temperature. Several recent experiments showed the existence of 2D magnetism in several predicted materials such as CrI3, VSe2 and Cr6Ge2Te6. This validity has encouraged exploring the feasibility of magnetic phases in more 2D crystals. However, the majority of the predicted materials exhibit ordering temperatures much below room temperature and a key challenge remains today is to find ways to increase the ordering temperature above room temperature and engineer phases locally. In particular, such control is necessary for device realisation and applicability of the magnetic phases in spintronic and magneto-electronic switches. The conventional strategy involves chemical doping and defect generation in 2D crystals for creating local magnetic moments [39–41]. However, to dynamically establish and control magnetism in materials, it is essential to use physical stimuli such as electric field or strain that can be locally applied at a nanoscopic device scale . In this direction, we have recently uncovered the family of 2D transition metal oxychlo- rides with the general formula MOCl (M = Ti, V, Fe, Cr). This type of magnetic material, while being a semiconductor, is promising for integration into electronic circuits. How- ever, like other 2D semiconductor magnets, ferromagnetism in CrOCl only exists at low temperatures, much below 200 K. This makes it highly interesting to devise new ways of enhancing the interatomic exchange interaction for designing and tuning magnetic phases. While electric field control of the carrier concentration in graphene and other 2D crystals is one way to tune the interatomic exchange, the exceptional resilience of such crystals to strain also provides novel ways to engineer desired electronic structures and enable flexible 3 2D spintronic devices. For CrOCl, we probe the combined effect of two stimuli, through extensive ab-initio calculations and Monte-Carlo simulations of the 2D Ising Model, to un- cover the magnetic response of CrOCl. First, we establish how the application of uniaxial and biaxial strain can lead to room temperature ferromagnetism and the occurrence of a well-defined phase transition. Next, we show how coupling strain with electric field leads to high temperature magnetic ordering, increasing the Tc to almost three times the intrinsic Tc of CrOCl . Further, we have observed spin-selective transport behaviour offering significant spin injection efficiency tunable with applied strain in it . While extending this work for another member of this family CrOBr, we observed similar tunability in elec- tronic, magnetic phases as well as in the spin-transport behaviour . We reported intrinsic magnetism in several new members of the family of TMXYZ system where TM=transition metal and X, Y, Z = Cl, Br, I. It includes robust half-metallicity in two-dimensional VClI2 , ferromagnetic semiconductor VClBr2 , Janus monolayers , two-dimensional magnetic semiconductor VIBr2 etc. The stimuli assisted tuning and control of magnetic and electronic properties were also studied for Cr2Ge2Se6 [53–55] and Cr2Ge2Te6 . III. TWISTRONICS The recent discovery of superconductivity in bilayer graphene has fuelled interest in un- derstanding the role of an interlayer twist in controlling the material properties. When two neighbouring layers of a 2D system are rotated with respect to each others, it results in strong-electron correlation effect resulting in the demonstration of novel quantum effects. In this direction, we have studied several interesting systems to understand the role of in- terlayer twist on the electronic, magnetic and optical properties of various van der Waals heterostructures. Twist-assisted tunability and enhanced ferromagnetism in a 2D Van Der Waal’s Heterostructure made up of CrI3 and Graphene , while Proximity induced ex- change coupling in a Phosphorene heterojunction was reported in the presence of a CrI3 substrate . Interesting effects were observed when a 2D magnet interface was formed with a magnetic topological insulator like MnBi2Te4, where topological features and Dirac to Weyl type of band conversion was observed . Twist-assisted optoelectronic phase control was reported in two-dimensional (2D) Janus heterostructures that exhibit direct bandgap with type-II band alignment at some specific twist angle, which shows potential for 4 future photovoltaic devices . Similar studies were also performed on different TMD heterostructure like MoS2/WS2 heterostructure , MoS2/MoSe2 heterostructure . IV. ENERGY STORAGE The effect of global warming is very prominent and the focus is towards green en- ergy. In this direction, several technologies are in focus like photovoltaics, thermoelectrics, battery storage etc. The use of 2D materials and their heterostructures can have use- ful advantages due to their larger areal coverage in a smaller volume. We have studied MnO2/CoO2 heterostructure as Promising cathode material for the Li and Na ion battery . Ultralow lattice thermal conductivity and thermoelectric performance were reported for twisted Graphene/Boron Nitride heterostructure through strain engineering and two-dimensional KCuX (X= S, Se) . V. RESISTIVE SWITCHING AND NON-VOLATILE MEMORY In the present era, the demand of Non-volatile memory (NVM) is continuously increasing because of its use in portable gadgets and consumer electronics like, laptops, digital cameras, USB storage devices, and smart phones etc. A variety of NVM candidates have emerged such as Flash memory, Phase change memory (PCM), Ferroelectric random access memory (FeRAM), Magnetic random access memory (MRAM), and Resistive random access memory (RRAM) etc. Among them, RRAM is the most promising candidate for the future memory design due to its simple structure, high endurance, good retention, low operating voltage, high power and multi-functionalities like complementary (CRS), unipolar (URS) and bipolar resistive switching (BRS). Choice of material in such structures is very crucial which determines the operational limitations in terms of durability, retention, reliability and switching power etc. Till now, a variety of materials like, binary transition metal oxides, organic materials, graphene deriva- tive, chalcogenides, complex compositional materials and polymers have been used for the resistive switching (RS) purpose. Out of these, the transition metal oxide-based devices have attracted significant attention due to their easy fabrication technique and having a wide range of electrical properties. Among metal-oxides, ZnO has an advantage in terms of 5 cost and stability, offering a wide and direct band gap, controllable electrical behaviour, hav- ing different morphologies and environmental friendly nature which we have studied in the presence of an oxide electrode . Another approach of improving the switching behaviour is through the formation of a hybrid structures made of various 2D materials and perovskite oxides, where we have studied a range of perovskite oxides like LSMO, LBMO, LCMO etc. in the presence of 2D materials like rGO, CuI, Graphene, ZnO etc [71–77]. To understand the temperature effect on the switching study, studies were performed [78–80]. The addition of biological materials as a switching medium also offered useful insight . Recently, we have started looking a supramolecular gel materials for non-volatile memory applications which are found to offer interesting switching properties . VI.