arXiv:2310.10057v3 [physics.optics] 7 Nov 2023 Storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves in a metasurface based on bound states in the continuum by conductivity modulation Toshihiro Nakanishi Department of Electronic Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto 615-8510, Japan In this study, we develop a time-varying metasurface based on the bound states in the continuum (BIC) with variable conductors, to store electromagnetic waves. The storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves are demonstrated numerically through dynamic switching between quasi-BIC and BIC states by modulating the variable conductors. The storage efficiency exhibits oscillatory behavior with respect to the timing of storage and retrieval. These behaviors can be attributed to the interference of a resonant mode and a static mode that is formed by direct current. In addition, the storage efficiency of a single-layer metasurface can reach 35% under ideal conditions. Metamaterials are artificial media composed of sub- wavelength structures, whereas metasurfaces are two- dimensional metamaterials. They have been developed to ex- tend the tunability of medium parameters. The permeabil- ity of metamaterials covers a wide range, including negative values applied to negative refraction . Moreover, the spatial modulation of permittivity and permeability has led to the development of transformation optics , which re- alizes an invisible cloak . Recently, the development of time-varying media and metamaterials, which have properties that can be controlled over time, has attracted considerable at- tention for achieving novel electromagnetic phenomena [5–9] such as non-reciprocal amplification , Fresnel drag , anti-reflection coatings in the time domain , frequency conversion through time refraction [14–19], temporal reflec- tion . The storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves were realized by the temporal modulation of the medium pa- rameters. This was experimentally demonstrated in atomic systems that realize the nonlinear optical effect referred to as the electromagnetically-induced transparency (EIT) effect . The EIT effect was extended to the field of metama- terials [23–26]. The storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves were demonstrated within the microwave region using metamaterials integrated with nonlinear capacitors . An alternative approach is available for realizing the stor- age and retrieval of electromagnetic waves by the dynamic modulation of bound states in the continuum (BIC). The BIC, which is localized modes in a continuous spectrum, was first introduced in the field of quantum mechanics and then ex- tended to general classical waves, including electromagnetic waves . The resonant mode of the ideal BIC, which is completely decoupled from the propagating waves, is typi- cally implemented using symmetric structures. The break- ing of the structural symmetry leads to interactions with the propagating waves [30–32]. The resonances in the BIC and quasi-BIC have extremely high-quality factors due to small ra- diation losses [33–35]. The storage of electromagnetic waves can be achieved by switching between a quasi-BIC state that is weakly coupled to the propagating waves and a BIC state that is a completely localized. The light storage in photonic crystal waveguide was theoretically demonstrated by utilizing Kerr effect . A recent study theoretically demonstrated the BIC-based storage of spherical light waves in a single core- shell resonator by modulating the outer-shell permittivity to approximately zero . In this study, we develop a metasurface composed of pe- riodic planar structures, which are composed of metals and variable conductors with states that can be switched between quasi-BIC and BIC. The storage of plane waves in the BIC state is numerically demonstrated by modulating the conduc- tivity of the variable conductors. Furthermore, the storage ef- ficiency based on a numerical analysis with respect to various storage and retrieval timings, which shows interference phe- nomena, reveals that energy is stored in an oscillating mode and a static mode that is formed by direct current (DC), which is unique to a time-varying system implemented using con- ductivity modulation . which is composed of a pair of complimentary split ring res- onators (cSRRs) with a metallic sheet. The metasurface in- cludes variable conductors as active elements with electric properties that can be dynamically controlled between the in- sulating and high-conductivity states. Asymmetric cSRRs are realized for variable conductors in the insulating state (off- state), and symmetric cSRRs are realized for those in the high-conducting state (on-state), which virtually fill the insu- lating holes with length w. The parameters are designed as p = 280 μm, q = 140 μm, a = 80 μm, b = 120 μm, c = 8 μm, g = 4 μm, and w = 39 μm for operation in the terahertz regime. We assume that the metallic sheet is a perfect electric conduc- tor (PEC) with zero thickness. In addition the variable con- ductors have a thickness of 1 μm and a conductivity of σ = 0 cSRR gaps is located 1 μm above the metal surface. (b) Transmission spectra for the off-state and on-state. 2 for the off-state and σ = 1010S/m for the on-state, thus prac- tically acting as a lossless conductor or PEC. The transmission spectra are calculated using electromagnetic simulation soft- ware, CST Studio Suite. To reduce the simulation cost, we fo- cus on the dotted region obtained by dividing the unit structure into four equal parts, as shown in Fig. 1(a). The PEC bound- aries are imposed on the two sides of the dotted region normal to the x axis and perfect magnetic conductor boundaries are imposed normal to the y axis. Under these conditions, the normal incidence of x-polarized waves can be simulated for periodically arranged unit structures owing to the symmetry of the structure. The metasurface is placed in the middle of a simulation space with a length L = 1000 μm. See Sec. 1 in Supplement 1 for further details. state and on-state, which were calculated using a transient solver. The off-state (insulating state) exhibits a sharp trans- mission peak at 0.607THz, which results from the excitation of the resonance in the cSRR structure. In contrast, for the on-state, the transmission is low over the entire spectral re- gion. In this case, the resonant state in the metasurface is effectively decoupled from the propagating waves, and a BIC is realized. Transition between the BIC state in the symmet- ric structure and the quasi-BIC state in the symmetry-broken structure is a typical characteristic of BIC-based metamateri- als . We identify the resonant mode for the on-state, which cannot be directly excited by the incident waves, using an eigenmode solver, and the resonant frequencies are estimated to be 0.757THz for the BIC state (on-state) and 0.604THz for the quasi-BIC state (off-state). This is in good agreement with the transmission peak shown in Fig. 1(b). The storage of electromagnetic waves in the proposed meta- surface can be demonstrated in the following procedure. First, the metamaterial is prepared in a quasi-BIC state to receive propagating electromagnetic waves, which are tuned to excite the resonance of the cSRRs. Second, the state is switched into the BIC state, and the energy is captured in the metasurface owing to the decoupling of the resonant mode and the outer space. Finally, the state returns to the quasi-BIC state again, and the energy captured in the metasurface is released as prop- agating waves through the coupling. The input electric field at z = −L/2 is a Gaussian pulse with a temporal duration of tw = 10ps and carrier frequency of 0.607THz, which is tuned to the transmission peak of the quasi-BIC state, or off-state, as shown at the bottom of Fig. 2. The time origin t = 0 is set at the center of the Gaussian pulse. The metasurface changes from the quasi-BIC state to the BIC state at ts = 8ps with a transition time of 10fs, and returns to its original state (quasi-BIC state) at te = 108ps with a tran- sition time of 10fs. In this case, the storage duration is ex- pected to be τ = te − ts = 100ps. The calculated reflection signal at the input port z = −L/2 and transmission signal at z = +L/2 are indicated at the middle and top of Fig. 2, respec- tively. The dashed and dash-dotted lines represent t = ts + ∆t and t = te +∆t, where ∆t = L/2c0 = 1.67ps denotes the prop- agation time between the metasurface and each port for the speed of light in a vacuum c0. It is reasonable that both the transmitted and the reflected signals exhibit abrupt changes electric fields for tw = 10ps , ts = 8ps, and te = 108ps. at t = ts + ∆t and t = te + ∆t due to the propagation time ∆t from the metasurface z = 0 to each port z = ±L/2. Moreover, each signal is suppressed, except for the transient reflection signal immediately after ts + ∆t. This is because the energy is captured in the BIC state and decoupled from the outer space. Immediately after te +∆t, the transmission and reflection ports receive completely identical signals, which implies that the captured energy is equally released from the quasi-BIC state in both directions through the coupling between the resonant mode and propagation modes. The electric field distributions in each phase are provided in Sec. 2 in Supplement 1. The total energy released from the metasurface can be es- timated by integrating the squares of the reflection and trans- mission signals after te. The storage efficiency η can be ob- tained by dividing it by the input energy, which can be ob- tained by integrating the square of the input signal. The stor- age efficiency depends on the input signal parameters and modulation timings. We computed the dependence of the storage efficiency on the start time ts for the following pulse widths: tw = 5,10 and 20ps. The results are shown in Fig. 3(a) for a storage time of τ = 100ps. It is deduced that the case of tw = 10ps is the optimal among these three. The life- time of the quasi-BIC state is estimated to be 7.9ps, which is obtained from transmission or reflection signals after t = te, and it is close to the optimal pulse width tw = 10ps. This is because shorter and longer pulses cannot effectively ex- cite the resonance in the quasi-BIC state. In all cases, the storage efficiency oscillates with respect to the start time ts when the metasurface changes from the quasi-BIC state to the BIC state. For example, the efficiency reaches an op- timal value at ts = 8.560ps and a local minimum at ts = 8.175ps for tw = 10ps. The oscillation period is estimated as ∆ts = 2(8.560ps − 8.175ps) = 0.77ps, which is close to half the resonance period of the cSRRs in the quasi-BIC state 1/0.607THz = 1.65ps. This suggests that the storage effi- ciency depends on the phase of the resonance relative to ts, as detailed further in the manuscript. Thereafter, we fixed the pulse width at tw = 10ps and calculated the storage ef- 3 and 20ps. (b) Storage efficiency as a function of τ for ts = 8.175ps and 8.560ps. rameters, ts = 8.560ps and te = 108.935ps (τ = 100.375ps ). The dashed and dash-dotted lines indicate t = ts and t = te, respectively. ficiency as a function of storage time τ for ts = 8.175ps and ts = 8.560ps. (The output power including uncaptured com- ponent is provided in Sec. 3 in Supplement 1.) Both cases exhibit oscillatory behaviors as shown in Fig. 3(b). However, they exhibit different characteristic periods, which are 0.65ps for ts = 8.175ps and 1.3ps for ts = 8.560ps. The optimal stor- age efficiency is 0.35 at τ = 100.375ps for ts = 8.560ps. To explain the oscillatory behaviors shown in Figs. 3(a) and (b), the magnetic field at Point P defined in Fig. 1(a), which is located 1 μm above the metal surface, was calculated as for the optimal case, i.e., the start time ts = 8.560ps and a stor- age time τ = 100.375ps. The y component of the magnetic field is shown at the top of Fig. 4, where t = ts(= 8.560ps) and t = te(= 108.935ps) are denoted by the dashed and dash- dotted lines, respectively. Magnified views around t = ts and t = te are shown at the bottom left and bottom right of Fig. 4. (The calculation in the presence of ohmic loss is provided in Sec. 4 in Supplement 1.) Steady oscillation is maintained dur- ing ts < t < te, thus indicating that the radiation loss of the BIC state is negligible. It is found that the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized at the start time t = ts and the end time t = te of the storage process. Hence, storage efficiency is maximized by switching the states of the variable conduc- tors when the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized. This can be explained as follows. The cSRRs can be regarded as inductor-capacitor circuits, where the inductor is formed by the metal and the capacitor by the holes. During the resonance process, when the energy stored in the inductors is maximized, that stored in the capacitors is minimized. This is the most appropriate moment to switch the variable conductors from insulators to metals because the capacitors do not accumulate charges that can vanish by short-circuiting the holes forming the capacitances. This is why the start time is optimized at ts = 8.560ps, when the magnitude of the magnetic field is maximized. The magnitude of the magnetic field reaches its maximum at half the interval of the resonance period. This is consistent with the period of the efficiency oscillation, which is close to half of the resonance period of the cSRRs in the quasi-BIC state, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). During the storage period ts < t < te, the magnetic field oscillates at 0.78THz, which is up-shifted from 0.607THz through the switching and agrees well with the resonant frequency 0.757THz derived from the eigenmode analysis. Notably, the magnetic-field os- cillation has an offset. This is caused by the direct current (DC) in the metal and the metallized variable conductors. The excitation of the DC mode in the BIC state can be clearly ob- served in Visualization 1, which presents an animation of the magnetic field at the metasurface. This “DC mode” is univer- sally excited at the temporal boundary in a time-varying sys- tem to satisfy the continuous conditions for the electric and magnetic fields . The instant at which the field distribu- tion at the start time ts is reproduced is optimal for the end time te, given that no current flows in the variable conductors, and the reverse process is induced by the transition from the BIC state to the quasi-BIC state. The magnetic field at t = ts is reproduced at the resonance period interval due to the pres- ence of the DC mode. Thus, in the case of ts = 8.560ps in Fig. 3(b), the period of the efficiency oscillation is close to the resonance period of the BIC state 1/(0.757THz) = 1.3ps. The case changes significantly when ts = 8.175ps, where the storage efficiency assumes a local minimum as shown in Fig. 3(a). This implies that the electric field is maxi- mized at ts = 8.175ps and a fraction of the electric energy formed by the accumulated charges at the holes in the cSRR structure is dissipated through short circuiting. In contrast to the case of ts = 8.560ps, DC mode is negligible because 4 the magnetic field around the metasurface is minimized at t = 8.175ps. Without the DC mode, the maximization of the magnetic-field magnitude when no charge accumulates in the holes occurs at the intervals of half the resonance period, i.e., 1/(2×0.757THz) = 0.66ps, which is in good agreement with an oscillation period of 0.65ps as shown in Fig. 3(b). In summary, we numerically demonstrated the storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves by switching between the quasi-BIC and BIC states through the modulation of the vari- able conductors integrated into the metasurface. As demon- strated, the energy is stored not only in the resonant mode but also in the DC mode excited through conductivity modula- tion, which leads to a peculiar interference in the storage effi- ciency. The storage efficiency of the single-layer metasurface was 35% for the optimal case. By increasing the number of layers, the efficiency could be improved, and the propagation direction could be preserved during the retrieval process ow- ing to constructive interference of waves emitted from each layer . We designed the metasurface for the opera- tion in the terahertz regime. However, the modulation of con- ductivity has been realized over a wide range of spectral re- gions using various methods, such as diodes, photocarrier ex- citations in semiconductors, and phase change materials . Experimental demonstrations could be achieved using these active materials. In this study, a lossless metal and variable conductors were assumed to consider ideal conditions under which the radiation loss of the BIC state is negligible, thus re- sulting in a clear observation of the interference between the resonant and DC modes. Compared with previous methods using EIT metamaterials with the two resonant modes operated in the microwave re- gions , the proposed method based on the modulation of a single resonant mode is significantly simpler, and an ex- tension to a higher frequency is expected. It was revealed that the DC mode plays an essential role in the operation of dy- namic metamaterials with conductivity modulation. The find- ings provide new insights for future studies on time-varying optical systems. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI [grant Num- bers 20K05360 and 23K04612]. The author would like to ac- knowledge the helpful discussions with Prof. Yosuke Nakata, Osaka University, and Prof. Fumiaki Miyamaru, Shinshu Uni- versity. J. Pendry, A. Holden, D. Robbins, and W. Stewart, Mag- netism from conductors and enhanced nonlinear phenomena, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 47, 2075 (1999). R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith, and S. Schultz, Exper- imental verification of a negative index of refraction, Science 292, 77–79 (2001). U. Leonhardt and T. Philbin, Geometry and Light: The Science of Invisibility, Dover Books on Physics (Dover Publications, 2010). D. Schurig, J. J. Mock, B. J. Justice, S. A. Cum- mer, J. B. Pendry, A. F. Starr, and D. R. Smith, Meta- material electromagnetic cloak at microwave frequencies, Science 314, 977–980 (2006). A. Shlivinski and Y. Hadad, Beyond the bode-fano bound: Wideband impedance matching for short pulses us- ing temporal switching of transmission-line parameters, Physical Review Letters 121, 204301 (2018). E. Galiffi, Y.-T. Wang, Z. Lim, J. B. Pendry, A. Alù, and P. A. Huidobro, Wood anomalies and surface-wave excitation with a time grating, Physical Review Letters 125, 127403 (2020). X. Wang, G. Ptitcyn, V. S. Asadchy, A. Díaz-Rubio, M. S. Mirmoosa, S. Fan, and S. A. Tretyakov, Nonreciproc- ity in bianisotropic systems with uniform time modulation, Physical Review Letters 125, 266102 (2020). A. V. Marini, D. Ramaccia, A. Toscano, and F. Bilotti, Metasurface virtual absorbers: unveiling operative conditions through equivalent lumped circuit model, EPJ Applied Metamaterials 8, 3 (2021). R. Tirole, S. Vezzoli, E. Galiffi, I. Robertson, D. Mau- rice, B. Tilmann, S. A. Maier, J. B. Pendry, and R. Sapienza, Double-slit time diffraction at optical frequencies, Nature Physics 19, 999–1002 (2023). E. Galiffi, P. A. Huidobro, and J. B. Pendry, Broad- band nonreciprocal amplification in luminal metamaterials, Physical Review Letters 123, 206101 (2019). P. A. Huidobro, E. Galiffi, S. Guenneau, R. V. Craster, and J. B. Pendry, Fresnel drag in space–time-modulated metamaterials, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116, 24943–24948 (2019) V. Pacheco-Peña and N. Engheta, Antireflection temporal coat- ings, Optica 7, 323 (2020). D. Ramaccia, A. Toscano, and F. Bilotti, Light propagation through metamaterial temporal slabs: reflection, refraction, and special cases, Optics Letters 45, 5836 (2020). A. Akbarzadeh, N. Chamanara, and C. Caloz, Inverse prism based on temporal discontinuity and spatial dispersion, Optics Letters 43, 3297 (2018). K. Lee, J. Son, J. Park, B. Kang, W. Jeon, F. Roter- mund, and B. Min, Linear frequency conversion via sud- den merging of meta-atoms in time-variant metasurfaces, Nature Photonics 12, 765–773 (2018). M. R. Shcherbakov, K. Werner, Z. Fan, N. Talisa, E. Chowd- hury, and G. Shvets, Photon acceleration and tunable broad- band harmonics generation in nonlinear time-dependent meta- surfaces, Nature Communications 10, 1345 (2019). N. Karl, P. P. Vabishchevich, M. R. Shcherbakov, S. Liu, M. B. Sinclair, G. Shvets, and I. Brener, Frequency conversion in a time-variant dielectric metasurface, Nano Letters 20, 7052–7058 (2020). Y. Zhou, M. Z. Alam, M. Karimi, J. Upham, O. Reshef, C. Liu, A. E. Willner, and R. W. Boyd, Broadband frequency transla- tion through time refraction in an epsilon-near-zero material, Nature Communications 11, 2180 (2020). F. Miyamaru, C. Mizuo, T. Nakanishi, Y. Nakata, K. Hasebe, S. Nagase, Y. Matsubara, Y. Goto, J. Pérez-Urquizo, J. Madéo, and K. M. Dani, Ultrafast frequency-shift dynamics at temporal boundary induced by structural-dispersion switching of waveg- uides, Physical Review Letters 127, 053902 (2021). H. Moussa, G. Xu, S. Yin, E. Galiffi, Y. Ra’di, and A. Alù, Observation of temporal reflection and broad- band frequency translation at photonic time interfaces, 5 Nature Physics 19, 863–868 (2023). D. F. Phillips, A. Fleischhauer, A. Mair, R. L. Walsworth, and M. D. Lukin, Storage of light in atomic vapor, Physical Review Letters 86, 783–786 (2001). C. Liu, Z. Dutton, C. H. Behroozi, and L. V. Hau, Observation of coherent optical information storage in an atomic medium using halted light pulses, Nature 409, 490–493 (2001). V. A. Fedotov, M. Rose, S. L. Prosvirnin, N. Papasi- makis, and N. I. Zheludev, Sharp trapped-mode resonances in planar metamaterials with a broken structural symmetry, Physical Review Letters 99, 147401 (2007). S. Zhang, D. A. Genov, Y. Wang, M. Liu, and X. Zhang, Plasmon-induced transparency in metamateri- als, Physical Review Letters 101, 047401 (2008). N. Papasimakis, V. A. Fedotov, N. I. Zhe- ludev, and S. L. Prosvirnin, Metamaterial ana- log of electromagnetically induced transparency, Physical Review Letters 101, 253903 (2008). T. Nakanishi and M. Kitano, Implementation of electromagnet- ically induced transparency in a metamaterial controlled with auxiliary waves, Physical Review Applied 4, 024013 (2015). T. Nakanishi, T. Otani, Y. Tamayama, and M. Ki- tano, Storage of electromagnetic waves in a metamate- rial that mimics electromagnetically induced transparency, Physical Review B 87, 161110 (2013). T. Nakanishi and M. Kitano, Storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves using electromagnetically induced transparency in a nonlinear metamaterial, Applied Physics Letters 112, 201905 (2018). C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, A. D. Stone, J. D. Joannopou- los, and M. Soljaˇci ́c, Bound states in the continuum, Nature Reviews Materials 1, 16048 (2016). S. Campione, S. Liu, L. I. Basilio, L. K. Warne, W. L. Langston, T. S. Luk, J. R. Wendt, J. L. Reno, G. A. Keeler, I. Brener, and M. B. Sinclair, Broken symmetry di- electric resonators for high quality factor fano metasurfaces, ACS Photonics 3, 2362–2367 (2016). A. Tittl, A. Leitis, M. Liu, F. Yesilkoy, D.-Y. Choi, D. N. Neshev, Y. S. Kivshar, and H. Altug, Imaging-based molecular barcoding with pixelated dielectric metasurfaces, Science 360, 1105–1109 (2018). V. R. Tuz, V. V. Khardikov, A. S. Kupriianov, K. L. Domina, S. Xu, H. Wang, and H.-B. Sun, High-quality trapped modes in all-dielectric metamaterials, Optics Express 26, 2905 (2018). M. V. Rybin, K. L. Koshelev, Z. F. Sadrieva, K. B. Samusev, A. A. Bogdanov, M. F. Limonov, and Y. S. Kivshar, High- q supercavity modes in subwavelength dielectric resonators, Physical Review Letters 119, 243901 (2017). A. Kodigala, T. Lepetit, Q. Gu, B. Bahari, Y. Fainman, and B. Kanté, Lasing action from photonic bound states in contin- uum, Nature 541, 196–199 (2017). L. Carletti, K. Koshelev, C. D. Angelis, and Y. Kivshar, Giant nonlinear response at the nanoscale driven by bound states in the continuum, Physical Review Letters 121, 033903 (2018) . E. N. Bulgakov, K. N. Pichugin, and A. F. Sadreev, All-optical light storage in bound states in the continuum and release by demand, Optics Express 23, 22520–22531 (2015) . Z. Hayran and F. Monticone, Capturing broadband light in a compact bound state in the continuum, ACS Photonics 8, 813–823 (2021). K. Qu, Q. Jia, M. R. Edwards, and N. J. Fisch, Theory of elec- tromagnetic wave frequency upconversion in dynamic media, Physical Review E 98, 023202 (2018). Y. Nakata, T. Nakanishi, R. Takahashi, F. Miyamaru, and S. Murakami, Hidden symmetry protection and topology in sur- face maxwell waves, https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13637 K. Koshelev, S. Lepeshov, M. Liu, A. Bogdanov, and Y. Kivshar, Asymmetric Metasurfaces with High-Q Res- onances Governed by Bound States in the Continuum, Physical Review Letters 121, 193903 (2018), 1809.00330. J. Yang, S. Gurung, S. Bej, P. Ni, and H. W. H. Lee, Active optical metasurfaces: comprehensive review on physics, mechanisms, and prospective applications, Reports on Progress in Physics 85, 036101 (2022). 1 Storage and retrieval of electromagnetic waves in a metasurface based on bound states in the continuum by conductivity modulation: supplemental document 1. SIMULATION SPACE The simulation space and port setup are shown in Fig. 1. The metasurface is placed in the middle of the simulation space with a length L = 1000 μm. Electromagnetic waves with x polarization are sent from a port at z = −L/2, which is also used to receive reflected waves, and the other port at z = L/2 receives transmitted waves. 2. ELECTRIC FIELD DISTRIBUTION Electric fields in x direction for ts = 8ps, te = 108ps and tw = 10ps, are shown in Fig. 2. Propagating waves including input, reflected, and transmitted waves, can be observed at t = 6ps(< ts) as shown in Fig. 2(a). The electric field at t = 50ps in storage period in Fig. 2(b) is localized around the metasurface, which indicates that the energy is captured in the BIC state. At t = 110ps(> te) shown in Fig. 2(c), propagating waves emitted from the metasurface in both directions can be observed. 3. TOTAL OUTPUT POWER Total output power is obtained by integrating the squares of transmission and reflection signals. It includes not only stored energy observed after the modulation t > te but also energy before t < te, which is not captured in the BIC state. Figure 3 shows the total output power normalized by the input power as a function of storage time τ under the same condition as Fig. 3(b) in the main text. The normalized output energy is always less than unity, which indicates that the system is passive and energy is not amplified by conductivity modulation. For ts = 8.560ps, the normalized output energy approaches unity at τ = 100.375ps, 2 where the storage efficiency is maximized as shown in Fig. 3(b) in the main text. Under this condition, where the energy is almost conserved, the electric and magnetic fields are continuously connected at the modulation timings ts and te. The energy conservation cannot be observed for ts = 8.175ps, which means that the DC mode observed for ts = 8.560ps contributes to the energy conservation and high storage efficiency. 4. RESONANCE DECAY CAUSED BY OHMIC LOSS Ohmic loss, which is not considered in the main text, decreases quality factors of the quasi-BIC and BIC states. In order to estimate the effect of ohmic loss, the magnetic field in y-direction at Point P defined in Fig. 1 (a) in the main text was calculated for the start time ts = 8.560ps, assuming the metallic sheet with sheet resistance of 0.3Ω and the variable conductor with conductivity of 5×105S/m in conducting state. Field decay in the BIC state after the start time ts can be observed for both of the oscillation and DC modes. The storage time would be limited within a few tens of picoseconds under this condition.