arXiv:2311.01399v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 13 Feb 2024 Transient grating spectroscopy on a DyCo5 thin film with femtosecond extreme ultraviolet pulses Victor Ukleev,1, a) Ludmila Leroy,2 Riccardo Mincigrucci,3 Dario Deangelis,3 Danny Fainozzi,3 Nupur Ninad Khatu,3, 4, 5 Ettore Paltanin,3 Laura Foglia,3 Filippo Bencivenga,3 Chen Luo,1 Florian Ruske,1 Florin Radu,1 Cristian Svetina,6, 7 and Urs Staub2, b) 1)Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin f ̈ur Materialien und Energie, D-12489 Berlin, Germany 2)Swiss Light Source, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 3)Elettra - Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., 34149 Basovizza, Trieste, Italy 4)Department of Molecular Sciences and Nanosystems, Ca’ Foscari University of Venice, Scientific Campus, Via Torino 155, 30172 Mestre (Venice), Italy 5)European X-ray Free Electron Laser, Holzkoppel 4, 22869 Schenefeld, Germany 6)SwissFEL, Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland 7)Madrid Institute for Advanced Studies, IMDEA Nanociencia, Calle Faraday 9, Ciudad Universitaria de Cantoblanco, Madrid, 28049, Spain (Dated: 14 February 2024) Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) are excited by femtosecond extreme ultraviolet (EUV) transient gratings (TGs) in a room-temperature ferrimagnetic DyCo5 alloy. TGs are generated by crossing a pair of EUV pulses from a free electron laser (FEL) with the wavelength of 20.8 nm matching the Co M-edge, resulting in a SAW wavelength of Λ = 44 nm. Using the pump-probe transient grating scheme in a reflection geometry the excited SAWs could be followed in the time range of -10 to 100 ps in the thin film. Coherent generation of TGs by ultrafast EUV pulses allows to excite SAW in any material and to investigate their couplings to other dynamics such as spin waves and orbital dynamics. In contrast, we encountered challenges in detecting electronic and magnetic signals, potentially due to the dominance of the larger SAW signal and the weakened reflection signal from underlying layers. A potential solution for the latter challenge involves employing soft X-ray probes, albeit introducing additional complexities associated with the required grazing incidence geometry. I. INTRODUCTION In recent years, significant advancements have been made in transient grating (TG) spectroscopy techniques, leveraging the capabilities of extreme ultraviolet (EUV) and x-rays delivered by free-electron lasers (FELs)1–3. Recent developments in FEL photon sources have en- abled new approaches for probing ultrafast dynamics at the nanoscale, such as TGs, which was recently used to study thermoelastic and magnetic dynamics in condensed matter systems2–10. In EUV TG, coherent FEL beams intersecting at the sample surface give rise to spatially periodic excitation patterns with periods in the 10s of nm range and time duration on the order of tens of femtoseconds11. This allows for exploring dynamics at both nanoscale dimen- sions and ultrafast timescales. EUV TGs can be used for studying nanoscale magnetic dynamics, provided that the probe is tuned to a mag- netic edge, as recently demonstrated in a Gd-Co alloy at the Co M-edge9. This element-specific tool can help in shedding light on the coupling of magnetic and structural dynamics, inherently intertwined through magnetoelastic interactions12. a)Electronic mail: victor.ukleev@helmholtz-berlin.de b)Electronic mail: urs.staub@psi.ch The binary intermetallic DyCo5 alloy belongs to the family of binary rare-earth (RE) - transition metal (TM) compounds, renowned for their magnetic properties that find applications in permanent magnet technologies13, spintronics14, and ultrafast optical switching15. Par- ticularly, DyCo5 exhibits remarkable magnetic proper- ties including a high Curie temperature of approximately 970 K, attributable to the large exchange coupling of Co spins, as well as a high coercive field stemming from a considerably high magnetic anisotropy16,17. Such prop- erties arise from the antiferromagnetic coupling between the Dy and Co sub-lattices, resulting in a nontrivial mag- netic phase diagram which includes a compensation point at 174 K and a spin-reorientation transition at approxi- mately T ∼ 360 K18–20. The presence of a compensa- tion point, a key factor for thermally-assisted magnetiza- tion switching21,22 making DyCo5 a promising candidate for ultrafast optical manipulation. Moreover, thin films and nanostructures of ferrimagnetic Dy-Co alloys com- bine magnetic properties, such as perpendicular mag- netic anisotropy and room-temperature magnetization, which are relevant for applications in magnetic memory storage23–25 and spintronic devices26,27. RE-TM alloys are featured by strong magnetoelastic coupling28,29, making them suited for exploring the in- teraction between the structural and magnetic dynamics induced by EUV TGs. In the present study we used EUV TG in reflection geometry with the probe tuned to the Co M-edge to detect nanoscale magnetic and thermoe- 2 (2 nm)] sample on a Si substrate. The inset is the zoom-in part of the XRR curve, showing the excellent agreement between the measured data and the fitted model. (b) Reconstructed scattering length density (SLD) depth profile obtained from the XRR model in the units of the classical electron radius re = 2.81794·10−5 ̊A. The coordinate z = 0 ̊A corresponds to the Si / Ta interface. (c) X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS, top panel) and x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD, bottom panel) spectra measured from the same sample at room temperature and applied magnetic field of ±2 T by means of the total electron yield. The dashed line in the XAS plot is the step function used in order to correct the spectra for the sum rule analysis. lastic dynamics on the surface of a DyCo5 sample. The analysis revealed a predominance of thermoelastic dy- namics driven by surface acoustic waves (SAW). While no discernible signal from magnetization dynamics was observed. This suggests that the signal associated with the magnetization grating either falls below the detec- tion limit or is dominated by the robust signal gener- ated by coherent surface displacements. Consequently, it is inferred that EUV TG in reflection geometry may not be the optimal choice for detecting magnetic dynam- ics. Nevertheless, the generation and detection of SAWs in thin DyCo5 films hold intrinsic importance. SAWs at nanoscale wavelengths possess various applications in spintronics30, and the application of EUV TG allows ac- cess to this wavelength range without the need for tai- lored nanostructures on the sample. II. MATERIALS AND METHODS A. Synthesis The 20 nm-thick DyCo5 film was grown onto a Si sub- strate with a 5 nm-thick Ta buffer by means of magnetron sputtering at room temperature under Ar atmosphere of 1.5·10−3 mbar (with a base pressure of 10−8 mbar) using the MAGSSY chamber at the Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin (HZB, Germany). The correct stoichiometry of the alloy was achieved by varying the deposition rate of Co and Dy targets in the co-evaporation scheme. The film was capped by 2 nm of Pt to prevent surface oxidation. More details of the sample growth are given in . B. X-ray reflectometry Due to the limited penetration depth of EUV radia- tion in the material, experiments were performed in re- flection geometry, which demands a high-quality (uni- form and low roughness) surface of the sample. To assess the surface quality, a characterization of the DyCo5 film was performed using x-ray reflectometry (XRR) (Figure 1). The XRR measurements were conducted at the X- ray CoreLab facility of the HZB using the PANalytical MPD instrument. The experimental data were obtained in the specular reflection geometry using x-rays with a wavelength λ = 1.54 ̊A and fitted employing the GenX 3 software32 for precise assessment of the surface and the interlayer roughness. Oscillations in the XRR curve, known as Kiessig fringes, were observed up to a high 2θ angle of 12◦, in- dicative of the high quality of the film33 (Figure 1a). Fitting the XRR data yielded insights into the structural quality of individual layers (including their thickness and roughness) and enabled reconstruction of the in-depth electronic scattering length density (SLD) profile33. Fig- ure 1a shows a good agreement between XRR data and the best fit curve, which is achieved by assuming well- defined layers of Ta, DyCo5, and Pt on the Si substrate, each one with densities close to their nominal values. The corresponding in-depth (z) SLD distribution within the sample is displayed in Figure 1b. The model closely matches the anticipated layer thicknesses, while also sug- gesting sub-nanometer roughness at the sample surface. This finding attests a good sample quality, thus laying the ground for successful FEL experiments in the EUV regime. 3 and B (red arrows) are crossed at the sample generating the interference pattern. The probe beam (full blue arrow) transiently diffracted off this pattern in reflection geometry (dashed blue arrow) is the EUV TG signal, which is routed to the CCD detector by the multilayer mirrors. (b) Scanning electron microscopy image of the permanent grating with periodicity of 44 nm permanently generated on the sample surface by the crossed pump beams with the total fluence of 40 mJ/cm2. C. X-ray magnetic circular dichroism The magnetic moment of the sample was probed utiliz- ing soft x-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD) in the total electron yield (TEY) detection mode. The probing depth of the TEY method extends to a few nanometers from the surface34, thereby providing valuable insights into the surface quality and potential oxidation state of the sample. X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) were ac- quired with a 77% degree of right-circular polarization using the VEKMAG instrument at BESSY-II, Berlin, Germany35. Given that the TG experiment was con- ducted using EUV radiation at the Co M edge, our focus is limited to the soft x-ray spectroscopy characterization of cobalt. To extract the magnetic contribution from the XAS data, spectra were measured under saturating mag- netic fields of ±2 T at the Co L2,3 edges. The XAS and XMCD spectra are depicted in Figure 1c. The absence of multiplet features in the XAS spectra indicate the metallic nature of the DyCo5 film and the absence of surface oxidation. The XMCD signal was ob- served at both L2,3 edges (bottom panel in Figure 1), in- dicating the fully polarized ferromagnetic state of cobalt at room temperature. Employing sum rule analysis on the XMCD data, the extracted spin and orbital magnetic moments of cobalt are found to be ms = 1.20(3)μB and ml = 0.16(1)μB, respectively. In agreement with the pre- vious study31, the net moment of Co at the DyCo5 sur- face probed by TEY is considerably reduced compared to the bulk of the film (ms + ml ≈ 1.6μB) as seen in trans- mission and fluorescence XMCD measurements19,31. D. X-ray transient grating spectroscopy The TG experiments were conducted at the EIS- TIMER beamline at the FERMI FEL, Trieste, Italy2,36. The experimental configuration is described in Refs. 5 and 36 and schematically illustrated in Figure 2a, includ- ing a variable magnetic field (B) applied to the sample, whose value, was varied in the 0 to 0.5 T range by adjust- ing the distance between the sample and a permanent magnet. Two circularly polarized pump pulses, designated as Pump A and Pump B in Figure 2a, intersected at the sample surface under an angle of θ = 27.6◦ to generate an interference pattern with a period of Λ = λ/2 sin(θ) = 44 nm, where λ = 20.8 nm is the excitation wavelength. The time-delayed vertically polarized probe pulse at the same wavelength (λpr = 20.8 nm; matching the Co M- edge) was directed onto the sample at an angle of 13◦. In this configuration, the vertically polarized beam is mainly sensitive to the out-of-plane magnetization component37, which, in DyCo5 films at room temperature, corresponds to the magnetization direction23. The probe beam, back-diffracted from the TG, was then reflected by the multilayer mirror onto an in-vacuum two-dimensional charge-coupled device (CCD) detector, using the same setup described in Refs.5,36. The total fluence of the two pump beams at the sam- ple was 10 mJ/cm2. For each time delay, 1000 FEL shots were accumulated to measure the TG intensity. To miti- gate the effects of radiation damage, each time trace was acquired at a different location on the sample. By increasing the FEL fluence above 20 mJ/cm2, a per- 4 (±0.5 ps) where the electronic signal could be expected. Error bars have been calculated using the standard deviation of the signal at negative time delays. (b) Zero-padded Fourier transform of the 20-100 ps part of the spectrum. (c) TG signals measured at zero magnetic field and at B = 0.5 T. The two waveforms were collected in different locations in the sample surface. While the magnitude of the first two oscillations and the signal-to-noise ratio differ from spot to spot, the time dependence of the oscillations at ∆t > 15 ps is independent on the sample position. manent grating was imprinted onto the film, which in- volves structural and magnetic changes of the sample38. The characteristics of the permanent grating were as- sessed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) uti- lizing a Zeiss Merlin instrument at the Correlative Mi- croscopy and Spectroscopy CoreLab of the HZB. The period of the grating observed in SEM, Λ = 44 ± 1 nm, closely aligns with the value calculated from the crossing angle and wavelength of the two pump beams (Figure 2b)39. III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Time-dependent EUV TG signals were acquired by scanning the delay between the EUV TG and probe beams ∆t in increments of 1 ps. Moreover, to encompass the eventual ultrafast electronic and magnetic responses, a detailed investigation of the first picosecond time win- dow (-0.5 to 0.5 ps) was conducted, with a step size of 0.1 ps. Upon sample excitation, the application of EUV TG creates a spatially periodic temperature distribution across the surface of the DyCo5 film, with a period Λ. This excitation triggers the rapid thermal expansion and consequent ultrafast generation of counter-propagating SAWs, as described in . As depicted in Figure 3a, the normalized diffracted intensity, as a function of ∆t, exhibits discernible periodic oscillations with the period of 12 ps. The zero-padded Fourier transform of the time trace in the range ∆t = 20 − 100 ps, where the signal exhibits more regular oscillations, reveals the presence of SAWs. These waves are characterized by two principal phonon harmonics at frequencies ν = 84 GHz and 166 GHz, as depicted in Figure 3b. The lower frequency corresponds to the SAW with a phase velocity of 3700 m/s, comparable to SAW velocities measured in TbCo multilayers41. The double of the fre- quency can be attributed to the quadratic dependence of the diffraction intensity I on the surface displacement5: I(t) ∼ (Sth(t) − A exp (− t τ ) cos (ωt))2 = Sth(t)2 + 2Sth(t)A exp (− t τ ) cos (ωt) + 1 2A2 exp (−2t τ )(cos (2ωt) + 1). Here, Sth(t) describes the exponential decay of the ther- mal grating42, while A, τ, and ω = 2πν are, respectively, the amplitude, decay time, and angular frequency of the SAW. At Λ=44 nm, the SAW oscillations most likely per- sist without decay within a 100 ps timeframe, and the ob- served signal corresponds to the gradual intensity decline of the thermal grating, modulated by the SAW. Surprisingly, within the initial 1 ps time window (as illustrated in the inset of Figure 3a), the ultrafast elec- tronic response from cobalt remains conspicuously ab- sent, as well as the rise of the magnetic response – an observation that contrasts the Gd-Co study conducted in transmission geometry, where electronic and magnetic dynamics are observed within 500 fs after the FEL pulse. This initial response is subsequently followed by a decay- ing TG signal spanning tens of picoseconds. The mag- netic TG signal in the Gd-Co study became evident when comparing data acquired in magnetically saturated and remanent states: the magnetic response was only dis- cernible in the former scenario, attributed to the emer- gence of multiple magnetic domains in zero field9. How- ever, in the present study, no significant response to ex- ternal magnetic fields is observed. In DyCo5, applying a saturation magnetic field of 0.5 T does not cause any noticeable change in dynamics, as shown in Figure 3c. 5 The absence of any magnetic appreciable response in the present EUV study is surprising, since a previous study has demonstrated ultrafast demagnetization via 40 fs infrared (IR) laser pulses with a photon energy of 1.5 eV. At incident laser fluences of a similar magnitude, i.e. 10-15 mJ/cm2, IR photons induced 40% and 80% demagnetization of the Co sub-lattice within the first 2 ps43. On the other hand, an ultrafast magnetic response to the both IR and EUV pumps was observed in Gd- Co, a system rather similar to DyCo5. The absence of the magnetic TG signal in DyCo5 thus deserves further discussion. Indeed, it’s noteworthy that even a modest increase in the total pump fluence is sufficient to induce the permanent imprint of the grating via radiation dam- age after about 20 s exposure. Hence, the pump fluence should also be sufficient to induce the change in magne- tization. Assuming that the fluence level was adequate to drive a magnetization grating, the absence of a detectable sig- nal could be due to the experimental geometry. Indeed, the observed backward-diffracted signal arises from both the spatially periodic perturbation of the material’s re- fractive index, which modulates the EUV reflectivity, and from coherent surface displacements arising from the thermal expansion driven by the thermal grating44. The latter contribution is expected to be relatively weaker in experiments conducted in transmission geometry9 on sample with optimal thickness, since the signal from re- fractive index modulations increases on crossing the ex- cited thickness of the sample. When the probe resonates with a magnetic edge, refractive index alterations come from electronic population modulation affecting core-hole transitions (electronic grating signal), dichroic compo- nent modulation (magnetization grating signal), and den- sity modulation (density grating signal). The latter, featured by longitudinal acoustic phonons but typically weaker due to its dependence on the square of thermal expansion, contrasts with the more pronounced magne- tization grating signal, as seen in previous studies9,10. The transmission geometry is thus advantageous in re- moving the competing signal due to the SAWs, making it in capturing the transient magnetic signal compared to reflection geometry, despite the high structural and mag- netic quality of our sample. In addition, by taking into account absorption of Pt, DyCo5 and Ta at the probe wavelength45, the transmission of the corresponding lay- ers are 70%, 22% and 64%, respectively. The backscat- tered intensity from vacuum/Pt, Pt/DyCo5, DyCo5/Ta, and Ta/Si interfaces are estimated as 2%, 0.98%, 0.016%, and 0.0023% of the intensity upstream the sample, re- spectively, as we estimate by taking into account reflec- tivity of each interface, and absorption of the incom- ing and reflected beams. Hence, the observed scattering mainly originates from the Pt/vacuum interface, which is expected to be not sensitive to the magnetic state of DyCo5 when the probe wavelength is away from Pt edges, whilst intensities from DyCo5/Ta and Ta/Si interfaces are two order of magnitude weaker. Therefore, TG ex- periments in reflection geometry require not only sub-nm roughness of surface and interfaces for ensuring high re- flectivity, but also careful selection of the adjacent layers of the material under study. An alternative approach for isolating in reflection geometry a weak magnetic signal out of a strong SAW signal is to use transient polariza- tion gratings, which is possible by employing a special FEL configuration46. Using L-edge soft x-ray energies to detect the magnetic TG signal could mitigate the issue of absorption losses. However, this approach complicates the experimental geometry since substantial soft X-ray reflectivity is only possible at grazing incidence44,47. IV. CONCLUSION This paper presents a study of the coherent generation of SAWs within DyCo5 thin films through the utilization of femtosecond EUV FEL pulses in a transient grating geometry. SAWs hold significant promise for applica- tions in spintronics, offering potential avenues for, e.g., coherent domain wall nucleation, topological structure manipulation30,48,49, and spin current generation50. Despite the high quality of the sample used in our study, we did not observe any electronic or magnetic sig- nals. This could potentially be attributed to the sig- nificantly larger signal originating from SAWs and the complexities associated with reduces backscattering sig- nal from relevant interfaces within the material. Our findings highlight the challenges encountered when em- ploying EUV TG in reflection geometry, particularly in the context of detecting magnetic dynamics. While this setup potentially expands the applicability of the tech- nique to a wider range of magnetic materials that may not be transparent to EUV radiation, it is essential to carefully consider these factors to ensure the reliable de- tection of magnetic phenomena. Addressing these chal- lenges will be crucial for advancing our understanding of magnetic dynamics using EUV TG in reflection geome- try. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Authors thank FERMI free-electron laser facility for provided beamtime according to the proposal 20214012. The x-ray spectroscopy experiment was carried out at the beamline PM-2 VEKMAG at BESSY II synchrotron as a part of the proposal 231-11957. We kindly acknowl- edge X-ray and Correlative Microscopy and Spectroscopy CoreLabs of HZB for provided instrumentation and Ren ́e Gunder for his assistance with the sample characteriza- tion. We thank C. David, I. Bykova, J. Raabe, R. Abru- dan and N. Jaouen for fruitful discussions. This study was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF), grants no. 200021 165550/1, no. 200021 169017 and and No. 200021 196964 as well as the SNSF Na- tional Centers of Competence in Research in Molecu- 6 lar Ultrafast Science and Technology (NCCR MUST-No. 51NF40-183615). The research leading to these results has received funding from LASERLAB-EUROPE (grant agreement no. 871124, European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme). Authors acknowl- edge financial support of the VEKMAG end station by the German Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF 05K10PC2, 05K10WR1, 05K10KE1) by HZB. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sk�lodowska-Curie Grant Agreement No. AUTHOR DECLARATIONS Conflict of Interest The authors have no conflicts to disclose. Author Contributions V.U., L.L., R.M., D.D., D.F., N.N.K, E.P., L.F., F.B. performed FEL experiments, C.L. and F.Ra. synthesized the sample, V.U., C.L., F.Ru., F.Ra characterized the sample, V.U. and R.M. analyzed the data, V.U., R.M., F.B., U.S. wrote the paper, V.U., R.M., C.S., U.S. jointly conceived the project. DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT Sample characterization and FEL data is available from V.U. upon request. 1F. Bencivenga, R. Cucini, F. Capotondi, A. Battistoni, R. Minci- grucci, E. Giangrisostomi, A. Gessini, M. Manfredda, I. Nikolov, E. Pedersoli, et al., “Four-wave mixing experiments with extreme ultraviolet transient gratings,” Nature 520, 205–208 (2015). 2F. Bencivenga, R. Mincigrucci, F. Capotondi, L. Foglia, D. Nau- menko, A. Maznev, E. Pedersoli, A. Simoncig, F. Caporaletti, V. Chiloyan, et al., “Nanoscale transient gratings excited and probed by extreme ultraviolet femtosecond pulses,” Science Ad- vances 5, eaaw5805 (2019). 3J. R. Rouxel, D. Fainozzi, R. Mankowsky, B. R ̈osner, G. Seniuti- nas, R. Mincigrucci, S. Catalini, L. Foglia, R. Cucini, F. D ̈oring, et al., “Hard x-ray transient grating spectroscopy on bismuth germanate,” Nature Photonics 15, 499–503 (2021). 4A. Maznev, F. Bencivenga, A. Cannizzo, F. Capotondi, R. Cucini, R. Duncan, T. Feurer, T. Frazer, L. Foglia, H.-M. Frey, et al., “Generation of coherent phonons by coherent ex- treme ultraviolet radiation in a transient grating experiment,” Applied Physics Letters 113, 221905 (2018). 5A. Maznev, R. Mincigrucci, F. Bencivenga, V. Unikandanunni, F. Capotondi, G. Chen, Z. Ding, R. Duncan, L. Foglia, M. Izzo, et al., “Generation and detection of 50 ghz surface acoustic waves by extreme ultraviolet pulses,” Applied Physics Letters 119, 6A. Milloch, R. Mincigrucci, F. Capotondi, D. De Angelis, L. Foglia, G. Kurdi, D. Naumenko, E. Pedersoli, J. S. Pelli-Cresi, A. Simoncig, et al., “Nanoscale thermoelasticity in silicon nitride membranes: Implications for thermal management,” ACS Ap- plied Nano Materials 4, 10519–10527 (2021). 7C. Svetina, R. Mankowsky, G. Knopp, F. Koch, G. Seniutinas, B. R ̈osner, A. Kubec, M. Lebugle, I. Mochi, M. Beck, et al., “Towards x-ray transient grating spectroscopy,” Optics Letters 8D. Weder, C. von Korff Schmising, C. G ̈unther, M. Schneider, D. Engel, P. Hessing, C. Str ̈uber, M. Weigand, B. Vodungbo, E. Jal, et al., “Transient magnetic gratings on the nanometer scale,” Structural Dynamics 7, 054501 (2020). 9D. Ksenzov, A. A. Maznev, V. Unikandanunni, F. Bencivenga, F. Capotondi, A. Caretta, L. Foglia, M. Malvestuto, C. Mas- ciovecchio, R. Mincigrucci, et al., “Nanoscale transient magneti- zation gratings created and probed by femtosecond extreme ul- traviolet pulses,” Nano Letters 21, 2905–2911 (2021). 10K. Yao, F. Steinbach, M. Borchert, D. Schick, D. Engel, F. Ben- civenga, R. Mincigrucci, L. Foglia, E. Pedersoli, D. De Angelis, et al., “All-optical switching on the nanometer scale excited and probed with femtosecond extreme ultraviolet pulses,” Nano Let- 11H. J. Eichler, P. G ̈unter, and D. W. Pohl, Laser-induced dynamic gratings (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986). 12J. Januˇsonis, T. Jansma, C. Chang, Q. Liu, A. Gatilova, A. Lomonosov, V. Shalagatskyi, T. Pezeril, V. Temnov, and R. Tobey, “Transient grating spectroscopy in magnetic thin films: Simultaneous detection of elastic and magnetic dynamics,” Sci- entific Reports 6, 1–10 (2016). 13J. Coey, “Perspective and prospects for rare earth permanent magnets,” Engineering 6, 119–131 (2020). 14J. A. Gonz ́alez, J. P. Andr ́es, and R. L ́opez Ant ́on, “Applied trends in magnetic rare earth/transition metal alloys and multi- layers,” Sensors 21, 5615 (2021). 15P. Hansen, S. Klahn, C. Clausen, G. Much, and K. Witter, “Mag- netic and magneto-optical properties of rare-earth transition- metal alloys containing Dy, Ho, Fe, Co,” Journal of Applied Physics 69, 3194–3207 (1991). 16A. Andreev and S. Zadvorkin, “Thermal expansion and sponta- neous magnetostriction of RCo5 intermetallic compounds,” Phys- ica B: Condensed Matter 172, 517–525 (1991). 17R. Radwanski, “The origin of the basal-plane magnetocrystalline anisotropy in 4f Co-rich intermetallics,” Journal of Physics F: Metal Physics 17, 267 (1987). 18Z. Tie-Song, J. Han-Min, G. Guang-Hua, H. Xiu-Feng, and C. Hong, “Magnetic properties of R ions in RCo5 compounds (R=Pr, Nd, Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, and Er),” Physical Review B 19A. Donges, S. Khmelevskyi, A. Deak, R.-M. Abrudan, D. Schmitz, I. Radu, F. Radu, L. Szunyogh, and U. Nowak, “Magnetization compensation and spin reorientation transition in ferrimagnetic DyCo5: Multiscale modeling and element- specific measurements,” Physical Review B 96, 024412 (2017). 20R. Grechishkin, A. Ivanova, A. Grachev, A. Zigert, and R. Eguzhokova, “Domain structure and spin reorientation in TbCo5 and DyCo5 intermetallics,” IEEE Transactions on Mag- netics 53, 1–4 (2017). 21A. Kirilyuk, A. V. Kimel, and T. Rasing, “Ultrafast optical ma- nipulation of magnetic order,” Reviews of Modern Physics 82, 22I. Radu, K. Vahaplar, C. Stamm, T. Kachel, N. Pontius, H. D ̈urr, T. Ostler, J. Barker, R. Evans, R. Chantrell, et al., “Transient ferromagnetic-like state mediating ultrafast reversal of antiferro- magnetically coupled spins,” Nature 472, 205–208 (2011). 23F. Radu, R. Abrudan, I. Radu, D. Schmitz, and H. Zabel, “Per- pendicular exchange bias in ferrimagnetic spin valves,” Nature Communications 3, 1–7 (2012). 24A. ̈Unal, S. Valencia, F. Radu, D. Marchenko, K. Merazzo, M. V ́azquez, and J. S ́anchez-Barriga, “Ferrimagnetic DyCo5 nanostructures for bits in heat-assisted magnetic recording,” Physical Review Applied 5, 064007 (2016). 7 25F. Radu and J. S ́anchez-Barriga, “Ferrimagnetic heterostruc- tures for applications in magnetic recording,” in Novel Magnetic Nanostructures (Elsevier, 2018) pp. 267–331. 26K. Chen, D. Lott, A. Philippi-Kobs, M. Weigand, C. Luo, and F. Radu, “Observation of compact ferrimagnetic skyrmions in DyCo3 film,” Nanoscale 12, 18137–18143 (2020). 27T. S. Seifert, U. Martens, F. Radu, M. Ribow, M. Berritta, L. N ́advorn ́ık, R. Starke, T. Jungwirth, M. Wolf, I. Radu, et al., “Frequency-independent terahertz anomalous hall effect in DyCo5, Co32Fe68, and Gd27Fe73 thin films from DC to 40 THz,” Advanced Materials 33, 2007398 (2021). 28A. del Moral, P. Algarabel, and M. Ibarra, “Magnetoelastic cou- pling and spin reorientation in RECo5 uniaxial magnets (RE= Pr, Dy, Ho and Y). II,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 69, 285–298 (1987). 29J. Kamar ́ad, Z. Arnold, and M. Ibarra, “Magnetic phase transi- tions and magnetovolume anomalies in DyCo2 and GdMn2 com- pounds under pressure,” Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 140, 837–838 (1995). 30J. Puebla, Y. Hwang, S. Maekawa, and Y. Otani, “Perspectives on spintronics with surface acoustic waves,” Applied Physics Let- 31C. Luo, H. Ryll, C. H. Back, and F. Radu, “X-ray magnetic linear dichroism as a probe for non-collinear magnetic state in ferrimagnetic single layer exchange bias systems,” Scientific Re- ports 9, 1–9 (2019). 32A. Glavic and M. Bj ̈orck, “Genx 3: the latest generation of an established tool,” Journal of Applied Crystallography 55 (2022). 33J. Daillant and A. Gibaud, X-ray and neutron reflectivity: prin- ciples and applications, Vol. 770 (Springer, 2008). 34J. St ̈ohr and H. C. Siegmann, “Magnetism,” Solid-State Sciences. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg 5, 236 (2006). 35T. Noll, F. Radu, et al., “The mechanics of the VEKMAG exper- iment,” Proc. of MEDSI2016, Barcelona, Spain , 370–373 (2016). 36R. Mincigrucci, L. Foglia, D. Naumenko, E. Pedersoli, A. Simon- cig, R. Cucini, A. Gessini, M. Kiskinova, G. Kurdi, N. Mahne, et al., “Advances in instrumentation for FEL-based four-wave- mixing experiments,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, De- tectors and Associated Equipment 907, 132–148 (2018). 37L. Paolasini, “Resonant and magnetic x-ray diffraction by po- larized synchrotron radiation,” ́Ecole th ́ematique de la Soci ́et ́e Fran ̧caise de la Neutronique 13, 03002 (2014). 38V. Ukleev, M. Burian, S. Gliga, C. Vaz, B. R ̈osner, D. Fainozzi, G. Seniutinas, A. Kubec, R. Mankowsky, H. T. Lemke, et al., “Effect of intense x-ray free-electron laser transient gratings on the magnetic domain structure of Tm: YIG,” Journal of Applied Physics 133, 123902 (2023). 39D. Naumenko, R. Mincigrucci, M. Altissimo, L. Foglia, A. Gessini, G. Kurdi, I. Nikolov, E. Pedersoli, E. Principi, A. Si- moncig, et al., “Thermoelasticity of nanoscale silicon carbide membranes excited by extreme ultraviolet transient gratings: im- plications for mechanical and thermal management,” ACS Ap- plied Nano Materials 2, 5132–5139 (2019). 40J. A. Rogers, A. A. Maznev, M. J. Banet, and K. A. Nelson, “Optical generation and characterization of acoustic waves in thin films: Fundamental and applications,” Annual Review of Materials Research 30, 117 (2000). 41H. Zhou, A. Talbi, N. Tiercelin, and O. Bou Matar, “Multilayer magnetostrictive structure based surface acoustic wave devices,” Applied Physics Letters 104 (2014). 42O. K ̈ading, H. Skurk, A. Maznev, and E. Matthias, “Transient thermal gratings at surfaces for thermal characterization of bulk materials and thin films,” Applied Physics A 61, 253–261 (1995). 43R. Abrudan, M. Hennecke, F. Radu, T. Kachel, K. Holldack, R. Mitzner, A. Donges, S. Khmelevskyi, A. De ́ak, L. Szunyogh, et al., “Element-specific magnetization damping in ferrimagnetic DyCo5 alloys revealed by ultrafast x-ray measurements,” Physica Status Solidi (RRL)–Rapid Research Letters 15, 2100047 (2021). 44F. Bencivenga, F. Capotondi, L. Foglia, R. Mincigrucci, and C. Masciovecchio, “Extreme ultraviolet transient gratings,” Ad- vances in Physics: X 8, 2220363 (2023). 45A. C. Thompson, D. Vaughan, et al., X-ray data booklet, Vol. 8 (Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California Berkeley, CA, 2001). 46L. Foglia, B. Wehinger, G. Perosa, R. Mincigrucci, E. Allaria, F. Armillotta, A. Brynes, R. Cucini, D. De Angelis, G. De Ninno, et al., “Nanoscale transient polarization gratings,” arXiv preprint 47L. Foglia, R. Mincigrucci, A. Maznev, G. Baldi, F. Capotondi, F. Caporaletti, R. Comin, D. De Angelis, R. Duncan, D. Fain- ozzi, et al., “Extreme ultraviolet transient gratings: A tool for nanoscale photoacoustics,” Photoacoustics 29, 100453 (2023). 48T. Yokouchi, S. Sugimoto, B. Rana, S. Seki, N. Ogawa, S. Ka- sai, and Y. Otani, “Creation of magnetic skyrmions by surface acoustic waves,” Nature Nanotechnology 15, 361–366 (2020). 49C. Chen, T. Lin, J. Niu, Y. Sun, L. Yang, W. Kang, and N. Lei, “Surface acoustic wave controlled skyrmion-based synapse de- vices,” Nanotechnology 33, 115205 (2021). 50D. Kobayashi, T. Yoshikawa, M. Matsuo, R. Iguchi, S. Maekawa, E. Saitoh, and Y. Nozaki, “Spin current generation using a sur- face acoustic wave generated via spin-rotation coupling,” Physi- cal Review Letters 119, 077202 (2017).