Page 1 of 44 Time-reversal-like degeneracies distinguished by the anomalous Hall effect in a metallic kagome ice compound K. Zhao1, 2, *, Y. Tokiwa1, H. Chen3, 4, *, and P. Gegenwart1* 1. Experimentalphysik VI, Center for Electronic Correlations and Magnetism, University of Augsburg, 86159 Augsburg, Germany 2. School of Physics, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China 3. Department of Physics, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1875, USA 4. School of Advanced Materials Discovery, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1875, USA *Corresponding author: kan_zhao@buaa.edu.cn, huachen@colostate.edu, and philipp.gegenwart@physik.uni-augsburg.de Page 2 of 44 In magnetic crystals, despite the explicit breaking of time-reversal symmetry, two equilibrium states related by time reversal are always energetically degenerate. In ferromagnets such time-reversal degeneracy can be manifested by hysteresis loops in the magnetic field dependence of the magnetization and, if metallic, in the anomalous Hall effect. Importantly, both quantities simply change signs but not their absolute sizes under time reversal, which follows from their fundamental definitions. Our integral experimental and theoretical study shows that in the metallic kagome spin ice HoAgGe subject to finite magnetic fields parallel to the kagome plane, an emergent time-reversal-like degeneracy appears between magnetic states that have the same energy and net magnetization, but different sizes of the anomalous Hall effect. These degeneracies are unraveled by finite hysteresis in the field-dependent anomalous Hall effect contrasted with the vanishing hysteresis in the magnetization, which appears only at low-temperatures T<4K when the kagome spin ice is fully ordered into the √3 × √3 state. By explicitly determining the degenerate states and calculating the corresponding physical properties using a tight-binding model, we nailed down the time-reversal-like operation that transforms these degenerate states into each other. The operation is related to the nontrivial distortion of the kagome lattice in HoAgGe and is effective only because of the richness of degenerate states unique to kagome spin ice. Our work points to the powerful role of the anomalous Hall effect to diagnose hidden symmetries in frustrated spin systems. Page 3 of 44 Geometrically frustrated spin systems are a promising platform for novel states of matter1-7. Although magnetic neutron diffraction and magnetometry measurements are direct probes on the spin sector6, 7, when the systems of study are sufficiently conductive, electric transport can often provide an enlightening perspective toward understanding exotic spin ordering and its consequences8-12. This is especially the case when the transport coefficients can be directly related to symmetries of the spin order13-23. A well- known example is the anomalous Hall effect (AHE) observed in pyrochlore iridate Pr2Ir2O7 which provides evidence of time-reversal-symmetry breaking despite the absence of long-range magnetic ordering10. As a fundamental discrete symmetry operation, time reversal T plays a particularly important role in magnetic crystals. Adding T to space group operations leads to the establishment of magnetic space groups which allow systematic classification and investigation of magnetic phases both experimentally and theoretically. Moreover, governed by basic principles of quantum mechanics, almost all measurable physical quantities have definite transformation properties under T, which can often provide system-independent predictions. For example, for magnetic phases that break the T symmetry, two states related by T are energetically degenerate (a macroscopic manifestation of Kramers theorem). If the magnetic phase is characterized by a nonzero net magnetization M, the two phases must have mutually antiparallel M of same size and if the phase displays the AHE8, 9, the AHE must also have opposite signs but same sizes in the two T-related states, a consequence of Onsager reciprocity24-26. Recently it has been demonstrated both theoretically and experimentally that in certain noncollinear antiferromagnets the AHE can distinguish T-symmetry breaking even though M is vanishing, although the AHE for the two T-related states still has the same size13-23. In this work, however, we show that it is possible to use the AHE to distinguish degenerate states related by an emergent discrete symmetry operation X in a metallic kagome spin ice27-37 compound HoAgGe under finite magnetic fields parallel to the kagome plane. Different from T, M is unchanged under X, while the AHE changes its size (Fig. 1a). HoAgGe is an intermetallic compound consisting of stacked kagome lattices with nontrivial distortion formed by Ho3+ ions38. Considering the Ho3+ ions alone, the distortion reduces the D6h symmetry of the kagome lattice to D3h, but does not change the local easy axes of the Ho3+ moments. The strong local easy-axis anisotropy together with ferromagnetic nearest-neighbour coupling of the Ho3+ moments lead to “1-in-2-out” or “2-in-1-out” ice rules on the kagome lattice29-34; the massive degeneracy resulting from the ice rules is weakly lifted by further-neighbour interactions of the RKKY type, leading to a √3 × √3 ground state of the dipolar kagome ice below 4K through a partially-ordered Page 4 of 44 phase with decreasing temperature38. Interestingly, at low temperatures the magnetization versus external magnetic fields parallel to the kagome plane exhibits a series of plateaus, due to the competition between the Ho3+ moments’ coupling with the fields and the further-neighbour interactions among them38. In this work we show that, partly due to the nontrivial distortion of the kagome lattice in HoAgGe39,40, a time-reversal-like X symmetry operation as introduced above becomes effective on the magnetic plateaus. Contrasting hysteretic behavior of the AHE and magnetization HoAgGe crystals were cut into different shapes for magnetic and transport measurements with the demagnetization correction considered. As shown in Fig. S141, the demagnetization correction enables quantitative comparison between different measurements on differently shaped crystals. Fig. 1b displays a phase diagram of HoAgGe under H//b based on magnetic susceptibility (χ), magnetic specific heat (Cmag), and magnetic Grüneisen parameter (Γmag) data. The color coding in Fig. 1b is based on low-temperature magnetic susceptibility (Fig. S3). Meta-magnetic transitions into the two lower-field states labelled by 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus first appear below ~7K (Fig. S2), where the fraction means the ratio between the net magnetization on a given plateau and that in the saturated state. These values can be understood by enforcing the kagome ice rules in a √3 × √3 unit cell. A 1/6 plateau, whose magnetic configuration is still unclear at the moment, is observed around 4K (Fig. S4). Between 1T and 2T, the sharp peak in Cmag around 10K marks the transition from the paramagnetic phase to a partial-ordered phase presumably similar to that under zero field, while the broad peak around 7K corresponds to the transition into a low-temperature metastable phase (1/3 plateau) with Am'm2' symmetry (Fig. 1a and Figs. S5c, d). Above 2T, the sharp peak in Cmag and Γmag around 8K marks the transition from the paramagnetic state to another metastable state (2/3 plateau) with Am'm2' symmetry (Fig. S5e). The intermediate region between the two phase boundaries is expected to consist of both P-6'm2' and Am'm2' components. The metamagnetic transition into the saturated state is accompanied by the disappearance of the magnetic vector (1/3, 1/3, 0) in neutron data, with the magnetic unit cell becoming the same as the structural one. (See Fig. S4 for other thermodynamic data.) Fig. 2 summarizes field- and temperature-dependent magneto-transport data with H//b. The Hall resistivity ρca is measured with currents along c and voltage along a. When H<3.2 T (dashed line in Fig. 2a), both the Hall resistivity and the magnetoresistance (MR) show clear changes at the metamagnetic transitions. The MR also has a pronounced jump at the 1/6 plateau at 2 K. At 2 K, ρca overall increases with the field despite the sudden changes at the metamagnetic transition. At 3T when the system transitions to the fully- polarized state, ρca changes rather abruptly with its sign also being reversed. Such a Page 5 of 44 feature becomes less pronounced and shifts to lower fields with increasing temperature and eventually disappears at ~11 K, in agreement with Fig. 1b. Previous density functional theory calculations (see Fig. S20 of ) indicate that HoAgGe has multiple bands crossing the Fermi energy in the paramagnetic state, which is consistent with a nonlinear-in-H Hall resistivity at 50 K, shown in Fig. S9a. The sign change of ρca around 3T shown in Fig. 2 may therefore be related to significant changes of the band structure near the Fermi energy driven by the change of the magnetic order. More interestingly, Fig. 2 shows that at 2K, the magnetotransport data have clear hysteresis for the 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus, in contrast to the indiscernible hysteresis in the magnetization versus field curves. In the middle of each plateau the physical observables (magnetization, transport coefficients, etc.) have weak dependences on magnetic fields, suggesting that the magnetic order is sufficiently uniform. The hysteretic behavior of ρca, together with the same critical field values of the metamagnetic transitions at two halves of the hysteresis loop, strongly indicate the existence of at least two degenerate states with the same magnetization on each plateau when H is between 1T and 3T. To show that the hysteresis of ρca is inseparable from the finite-magnetic-field ordering derived from the √3 × √3 ground state, we directly compare the thermodynamic and transport data versus H along b at two temperatures (8K and 3K) in Fig. 3. At 8K (Fig. 3a), when there is only one metamagnetic transition to the polarized state, there is one sharp peak in magnetic specific heat, whose position agrees with the zero-crossing of Γmag, due to the entropy accumulation at the phase boundary between the partial-ordered phase and the fully saturated phase. Indeed, the calculated magnetic entropy displays a sharp peak and decreases upon further raising magnetic field. The ρca data at 8K display no hysteresis. At 3K (Fig. 3b) when the √3 × √3 ground state is realized at zero field, the three metamagnetic transitions are clearly observed in Cmag, Γmag, and Smag. Time-reversal-like degenerate states with different AHE sizes The experimental data above suggest that there exist at least two degenerate states on the 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus at low temperatures. First we focus on the 1/3 plateau and discuss the 2/3 plateau later. We have pointed out in that besides the state depicted at the top of Fig. 1a (denoted by S1/3 hereinbelow; also see Fig. S5c), there exists another ice-rule state S′1/3 (Fig. S5d, equivalent to the state depicted below S1/3 in Fig. 1a) with the same net magnetization and the same refinement factors (Fig. S6). An exhaustive search for all √3 × √3 ice-rule states with the same net magnetization confirmed that S1/3 and S′1/3 are the only distinct states on the 1/3 plateau. Fig. 4a shows that the two Page 6 of 44 states can be visualized as a 6-spin ring with opposite chiralities enclosed in a larger 3- spin triangle in a 2-in-1-out state. S1/3 and S′1/3 are distinct since they cannot be made equivalent by any operations in their magnetic space group Am'm2'. Moreover, they have the same energy based on the classical spin model in , which involves up to 4th neighbor exchange couplings and dipolar interactions among the Ho spins (Supplementary Note 6) 41. To see whether S1/3 and S′1/3 can have different AHE, we constructed a toy model respecting the symmetries of HoAgGe and directly calculated the intrinsic contribution to the anomalous Hall conductivity. The toy model (Supplementary Note 4)41 describes s-electrons hopping between nearest-neighboring Ho sites subject to local exchange fields parallel to the ordered Ho moments and to spin-orbit coupling determined by the inversion symmetry breaking with respect to the nearest-neighbor bond centers. Surprisingly, despite the complex lattice structure and magnetic order, the band structures for S1/3 and S′1/3 are completely identical (Fig. 4b). While this may be due to the model being oversimplified, the exact degeneracy of the Bloch band structures implies nontrivial symmetry relations between S1/3 and S′1/3, which will be discussed in detail below. What is more interesting, however, is that the two states generally have different Berry curvatures (summed over occupied bands) at the same positions in the Brillouin zone (Figs. 4b, c). Consequently, integrating the Berry curvature over the Brillouin zone gives different intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivities for S1/3 and S′1/3 (Fig. 4d). Origin of the AHE size difference To understand why the symmetry operation X that connects S1/3 and S′1/3 preserves the band structure but not the anomalous Hall effect, we first note that X can be represented by Rb πD, where Rb π is a usual π-rotation about the b axis by π on both orbital and spin degrees of freedom, and D is a special operation that reverses the distortion of the lattice but keeps the spin degrees of freedom untouched (Fig. 4a; also see Fig. 1a). In the paramagnetic state D is equivalent to a vertical mirror parallel to the b axis, or a π- rotation about the c axis, but cannot be represented by a standard magnetic space group operation when the magnetic order on the 1/3 plateau is taken into account. We note that distortion reversal has been suggested to be included as an additional “color symmetry” operation in crystalline space groups39, 40. In nonmagnetic crystals distortion reversal can usually be made equivalent to other space group operations such as mirror reflection, which transform physical observables in well-defined manner. The effect of D on physical quantities such as the Hamiltonian and the AHE needs to be analysed case-by- case due to its separate actions on orbital and spin degrees of freedom. In Supplementary Page 7 of 44 Note 5 we prove that D leaves all terms in our tight-binding model invariant except for changing the sign of the crystal momentum along c, thereby time-reversal-like. X= Rb πD thus keeps the band structure invariant additionally due to the TRa π symmetry in Am'm2'. We also prove that the classical spin model that successfully captured the various phases of HoAgGe gives identical energies for S1/3 and S′1/3 even with the long-range dipolar interaction considered. Therefore, the two states are degenerate in the same magnetic field range corresponding to the 1/3 plateau. The reason why the size of the anomalous Hall conductivity is not invariant under X is more subtle. In the SI we show that the distortion reversal D critically changes the Berry connection, or the position operator’s matrix elements between Bloch states, due to the shift of sublattice positions under D, which changes the Berry curvature of occupied states and hence the anomalous Hall conductivity. Such a contribution is separate from the transformation of the Hamiltonian under D, and is a manifestation of the fact that the Berry curvature encodes geometric information of the Bloch wavefunctions beyond the Hamiltonian itself. We note that the above mechanism will generally be relevant in structurally distorted magnetic systems in which the distortion reversal operation is not equivalent to a magnetic space group operation. Possible degenerate states on the 2/3 plateau We finally turn to the 2/3 plateau. Despite the same Am'm2' symmetry as the 1/3 plateau states, the 2/3 plateau only has one nondegenerate state S2/3 (arrows in Fig. 4e; also see Fig. S5e). Alternatively, the resulting state by acting X on S2/3 is equivalent to S2/3 under a translation. A possible explanation is that the Ho spins are not exactly Ising38, and below 4K the out-of-plane components of the Ho spins also become ordered28. The quantum spin Hamiltonian of HoAgGe involving the full low-energy CEF multiplet structure and the resulting low-temperature order will be reported in a future work. Here we only show that in the presence of an out-of-plane components order illustrated in Fig. 4e, the two states connected by X become inequivalent and again give different anomalous Hall conductivities (Fig. 4f), although the total energies and band structures are still the same (Supplementary Note 7). Awaiting future experimental and theoretical evidence, the particular finite-wave-vector out-of-plane order considered here28 is reasonable due to the zero out-of-plane net magnetization down to 1.8K (see Fig. S2E of ), suggesting dominant antiferromagnetic couplings between the out-of-plane spin components. A similar out-of-plane order for the 1/3 plateau can also be added to S1/3 and S′1/3 which does not qualitatively change the discussion above (Supplementary Note 7). Page 8 of 44 Discussion and conclusion The existence of degenerate states alone does not explain why there is hysteresis across the whole 1/3 and 2/3 plateaus, since the degeneracy is not lifted by the external magnetic field as in the hysteresis of a ferromagnet. A possible explanation is that the barriers and kinetic pathways between the degenerate states and those on a neighboring plateau are not the same. Starting from a uniform state on a neighboring plateau and gradually changing field, transition to the degenerate state with a lower kinetic barrier will be dominant at low temperatures. The hysteresis at a given plateau will then appear if the transition from a higher-field plateau and that from a lower-field plateau do not favor the same state kinetically. For noncollinear magnetic order the kinetic pathways between nearly degenerate states are expected to be more complex than collinear magnets24, 25. Future studies done with high-resolution magnetic imaging techniques will hopefully reveal more details on the phase boundaries at the metamagnetic transitions in HoAgGe. In conclusion, with the help of electrical transport measurements in the metallic kagome ice compound HoAgGe at low temperatures, we identified an emergent time- reversal-like degeneracy between metastable ice-rule states that have the same net magnetization but different anomalous Hall effect. The different sizes of the intrinsic anomalous Hall conductivity can be traced to the distortion-induced Berry connection of the Bloch electrons. We expect that similar phenomena should commonly appear in frustrated spin systems with nontrivial structural distortion and finite ordering wave vectors. The appearance of opposite toroidal moments on the two degenerate 1/3 plateau states also points to a mechanism for using the AHE to distinguish toroidal orders. Our study suggests a significant potential for transport measurements in distinguishing hidden symmetries in metallic frustrated spin systems. Page 9 of 44