TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE Disorder- and magnetic field-tuned fermionic superconductor-insulator transition in MoN thin films. Transport and STM studies. M. Kuzmiak,1,2 M. Kopčík,1,2 F. Košuth,1,3 V. Vaňo1,2, J. Haniš1, T. Samuely3, V. Latyshev3, O. Onufriienko1, V. Komanický3, J. Kačmarčík1, M. Žemlička4, M. Gmitra1, P. Szabó1, and P. Samuely1 1Centre of Low Temperature Physics, Institute of Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia 2Department of Physics, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Technical University of Košice, SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia 3Centre of Low Temperature Physics, Faculty of Science, P. J. Šafárik University, SK-04001 Košice, Slovakia 4QphoX B.V., Elektronicaweg 10, 2628XG Delft, Netherlands Abstract Superconductor-insulator transition (SIT) driven by disorder and transverse magnetic field has been investigated in ultrathin MoN films by means of transport measurements and scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy. Upon decreasing thickness, the homogeneously disordered films show increasing sheet resistance Rs, shift of the superconducting transition Tc to lower temperatures with the 3 nm MoN being the last superconducting film and thinner films already insulating. Fermionic scenario of SIT is evidenced by applicability of the Finkel’stein’s model, by the fact that Tc and the superconducting gap  are coupled with a constant ratio, and by the spatial homogeneity of the superconducting and electronic characteristics. The logarithmic anomaly found in the tunneling spectra of the non-superconducting films is further enhanced in increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating state and pointing also to fermionic SIT. Magnetotransport, superconductor-insulator transition, STM, tunneling spectroscopy, strongly disordered ultrathin superconducting MoN films 1 Introduction A quantum phase transition from superconducting to insulating state (SIT) can be induced in quasi two- dimensional systems by disorder or magnetic field. This transition occurs at the critical disorder, where the electron’s mean free path is extremely small and the Ioffe- Regel parameter, the product of the Fermi momentum and the mean free path kFl is close to unity . We distinguish two SIT mechanisms depending on whether the growing disorder affects the amplitude or the phase of the superconducting wave function . At the loss of long- range phase coherence superconducting condensate melts into locally coherent superconducting islands which can survive even in the insulating state . This is termed a bosonic SIT. A fermionic SIT occurs when disorder reduces the electronic screening of the Coulomb interaction and the amplitude of the wave function is suppressed. Then, transition temperature Tc and superconducting order parameter/gap  disappear at once and a bad metallic phase is formed before a transition to the insulating state at even higher disorder . The bosonic SIT has been observed by scanning tunneling spectroscopy in TiN, InOx, NbN and a-MoGe showing emergence of local superconducting puddles with varying superconducting gap present on both superconducting and insulating sides of the transition and a pseudogap above critical temperature Tc or magnetic field Bc2 [5–11]. Loss of phase coherence can also be manifested by variation of the coherence peaks height of the superconducting tunneling spectra among individual puddles . Recent scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) experiments of Dutta et al. performed on ultrathin a-MoGe films near critical disorder show a Bose (bad) metallic state above the critical field still revealing traces of superconducting gap. Then, in both scenarios quantum transition from superconducting to bad metallic state may happen before the insulating state is achieved. At fermionic SIT when increased Coulomb interaction is operative, neither pseudo-gap above Tc or Bc2, nor spatial variation of the superconducting gap appear, i.e. “fermionic” systems are spatially homogeneous at homogeneous disorder. Recently, Carbillet et al. showed that inhomogeneities of the gap on the scale much larger than the superconducting coherence length  can appear in the fermionic SIT as well. This is due to emerging inhomogeneities of the normal state where the strength of the Altshuler-Aronov effect varies. Early tunneling experiments performed on planar tunnel junctions suggested a fermionic mechanism for the SIT in Bi and PbBi/Ge thin films . In our works on disordered ultrathin MoC films we presented a direct TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE evidence that Tc and  are simultaneously suppressed and superconductivity remains spatially homogeneous very close to SIT. When SIT was driven by magnetic field oriented perpendicularly to the heavily disordered but still superconducting MoC film, surprisingly, the Zeeman paramagnetic effects dominated over orbital coupling on both sides of the transition . Here, we present studies on MoN films starting from 30 nm thickness down through the whole SIT where 3 nm MoN is the last superconducting film and thinner films no longer exhibit superconductivity on large scale as evidenced by resistive measurements. Based on our transport and low-temperature STM measurements we show that the SIT in MoN thin films tuned by both disorder and/or magnetic fields is realized by the fermionic pathway. In particular, the spin-dependent AA effect in insulating state points to the dominance of Zeeman effects supporting the fermionic scenario. 2 Experimental Molybdenum forms several nitrides including cubic γ-phase of Mo2N, tetragonal -Mo2N and hexagonal -MoN . The γ-phase has a superconducting transition at about 5 K . Recently, Tsuneoka et al. prepared series of thin γ-phase Mo2N films down to 1.5 nm thickness showing the SIT. Here, we have prepared the high quality Mo2N thin films with t = 30, 10, 5, 3, 2, 1.5 nm thicknesses by reactive magnetron sputtering onto a sapphire substrate from a Mo target in an argon-nitrogen mixture gas atmosphere. The crystal structure of the films was characterized by X-ray diffraction. Our films reveal a face-centered cubic crystalline structure, which is typical for a γ-Mo2N phase . The basic characterization of our samples was done by transport measurements. A more detailed discussion can be found in the Suppl. Mat. , where the determination of the Ioffe-Regel parameter is explained and the analysis of our data in terms of the Finkel’stein’s model is also described. We applied scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) measurements to study the quasiparticle density of states (DOS) of our samples. The experiments were performed in a homemade STM system immersed in a Janis SSV 3He cryostat, which allows measurements down to T = 0.3 K in magnetic fields up to B = 8 T. A gold STM tip was used to measure the ex-situ prepared samples. At each point of the sample surface, first a topography was acquired with the feedback loop on, then the feedback loop was turned off and the tunneling current was recorded while sweeping the bias voltage, all on the grid of 128x128 topography points. The tunneling conductance was calculated by numerical differentiation of the I-V curves. The dI(V)/dV spectra measured through the tunnel junction between a normal metal and a superconductor can be described by the equation dI(V) dV = N ∫ ∞ −∞ NS(E) [− ∂f(E + eV) ∂eV ] dE, (1) where E = eV is the energy and the derivative of the Fermi distribution in the square brackets represents thermal smearing.N is the constant DOS of the metallic tip and NS represents the superconducting DOS, resp. The BCS theory defines NS as NS(E) = Re ( E √E2 − Δ2) , (2) where ∆ is the superconducting energy gap. Tunneling spectra with spectral smearing higher than the thermal broadening can be described by the phenomenological modification of the BCS DOS of Dynes who introduced a complex energy E = E’-iΓ, where Γ is the spectral smearing parameter. The non-zero value of this parameter can be connected with pair-breaking centers at the tunnel junction area . If the superconductor is in the normal state and  = 0, the DOS will be constant in the case of standard metals. However, in the case of highly disordered metals, we must account for corrections related to the enhanced electron-electron interaction. According to the Altshuler-Aronov (AA) theory of 2D systems this is manifested by a logarithmic reduction of the normal state DOS at Fermi energy down to the thermal energy defined by the measuring temperature. The standard AA correction is not a function of the applied magnetic field. However, when the electron spins are taken into account in the particle-hole channel the AA correction to the normalized DOS NN(E) = 1 − δN reveals field dependence, described as δN(E, T, B) ≈ A {f(E, Γ0) + λ1 2λ0 [f(E, Γ0) + 1 2 ∑ f(E + αEZ, Γ0) α=±1 ]} (3) where A includes all constants and parameters of the tunneling barrier, f is the logarithmic function defined in with arguments normalized to the thermal energy and EZ = 2μBB is the Zeeman energy, with μB being the Bohr magneton and B magnetic field. The constants of λ0 and λ1 describe the interaction of an electron and a hole with total spin 0 and 1, respectively and Γ0 is responsible for the broadening of the AA logarithmic singularity . The first and the second terms originate from the interaction of the electron and the hole with a zero projection of the total spin on the direction of the magnetic field, and the third (and fourth) term from interactions with opposite spins. In the case when the ratio λ1 2λ0 ⁄ is from interval 〈−1/3,0〉 at zero magnetic field the logarithmic anomaly of the first term is partly compensated by three equal TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE logarithmic terms with opposite sign. In the presence of applied magnetic field a part of the electronic DOS at the Fermi energy is removed due to spin polarization and two singularities/maxima should appear at E = ±EZ. Then, the logarithmic singularity/minimum at the Fermi level is more pronounced than it was in the zero-field case. 3 Results The temperature dependencies of the sheet resistance Rs(T) obtained on 30, 10, 5, 3, 2 and 1.5 nm thin MoN films at temperatures from 100 K down to 0.3 K are shown in Fig. 1a). The thickest 30 nm sample shows an almost temperature independent sheet resistance down to the superconducting transition at Tc = 5.83 K. With reducing film thickness the normal state sheet resistance Rs increases, the derivative dRs/dT becomes negative and a gradual shift of the superconducting transition typical for homogenously disordered systems is visible down to Tc = 2.8 K in the case of the 3 nm sample. The evolution of this disorder-tuned superconductor-insulator transition can be followed in Fig. 1b), where the critical temperature Tc (blue symbols - left scale) and the Ioffe-Regel parameter kFl (green symbols - right scale) are shown as the function of the film thickness. The inset of Fig. 1b) shows Tc as a function of the sheet resistance Rs by open black symbols. The solid red line is the fit to the Finkel’stein’s formula with the fitting parameters of the critical resistance Rcr = 2.3 kΩ where the superconductivity terminates, the critical temperature of the bulk phase Tc0 = 6.34 K and the elastic scattering time τ = 2.66 × 10-16 s. The rapid decrease of the kFl values with reducing film thickness and the low value of kFl ~ 1.4 determined at the 3 nm sample suggest that this superconducting sample is in the near proximity to critical disorder. From transport measurements in transverse magnetic field the upper critical magnetic field was also determined, see Fig. S1 and S2 in Suppl. Mat. . Low temperature STM measurements were performed to study the surface topography of our thin films. Figure S3 presented in the Suppl. Mat. shows typical topography images of the MoN thin films from both sides of the SIT. The samples had clean surfaces with continuous and compact polycrystalline structure. The images shown in Fig. S3 can be characterized by the average surface corrugations ~ 1.2 nm, 0.5 nm and 0.35 nm for the 30 nm, 3 nm and 2 nm sample, respectively. The sharp, well defined grain boundaries and the low averaged surface corrugations point to high quality of the studied thin films. In Fig. 2, representative temperature dependencies of the STM tunneling spectra measured on 30, 3, and 2 nm samples are shown in panels a), b), and c), respectively. The upper panels show 3D plots of the zero-field temperature dependencies of the dI(V)∕dV spectra. The spectra taken on 30 nm and 3 nm samples reveal standard superconducting features. At increased temperature the superconducting gap structure bordered by symmetrical coherence peaks is suppressed at Tc and at higher temperatures constant normal state tunneling spectra are visible. The value of the superconducting energy gap  and its temperature dependence in both sets of the samples have been determined from fitting to Dynes modification of the BCS DOS. The fitting curves (open symbols) and experimental data (lines) at the indicated temperatures are shown in the corresponding lower panels. We can see clearly that the model describes the experimental data perfectly. The obtained temperature dependencies of the energy gap are shown in Fig. S4 of the Suppl. Mat. . The gap values reveal BCS-like temperature dependencies with Δ(0) = 0.87 meV,  ~ 0.06 meV, Tc = 5.6 K, 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.6 for 30 nm and Δ(0) = 0.44 meV,  ~ 0.4 meV, Tc = 2.9 K, 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.55 for the 3 nm sample. Figure 2c) shows the effect of temperature on the tunneling spectrum measured on the non-superconducting 2 nm film. No coherence peaks indicative of superconductivity are observed at the lowest temperature T = 0.5 K but the spectrum reveals a logarithmic-like reduction towards zero-bias voltage. We fit our experimental data to the thermally smeared AA correction, defined in (3). The curve taken at the lowest temperature is fit by parameters: A = -0.26, λ1 2λ0 ⁄ = -0.12, 0 = 0.15 meV and B = 0 T. In the fits at higher temperatures, only the temperature was changed and the smearing parameter varied slightly in the range of 5 %. The agreement between our data (lines) and the thermally smeared AA correction (symbols) fit indicates, that what we observe is not the temperature dependence of the logarithmic reduction, but only the effect of increased thermal smearing with energy ~ kBT. We also studied the effect of perpendicular magnetic field on the tunneling spectra on samples with thicknesses of 30 nm, 3 nm, 2 nm and 1.5 nm at T = 0.5 K. The magnetic dependence of the dI(V)∕dV spectra measured on the thickest 30 nm superconducting sample shown in Fig. S5 in Suppl. Mat. reveals a classical behavior. In increasing field, the position of gap-like peaks shifts to lower voltage and the gap gradually closes. This process can be better followed in the side view shown in the inset of Fig. S5 and in top view of Fig. S6a) in Suppl. Mat. . The upper critical magnetic field of the 30 nm sample is above the range of our experimental set-up (Fig. S2 in Suppl. Mat. ), so we could not detect a full transition to the normal state. The main panels at the top of Fig. 3 show 3D plots of the effect of perpendicular magnetic field on the tunneling spectra on the 3 nm, 2 nm and 1.5 nm thin films. The insets show side views of the corresponding magnetic dependencies. Fig. 3a) plots the effect of magnetic field on the thinnest (3 nm) superconducting sample that is close to the critical disorder. Again, at increasing field the gap peaks are getting more smeared and the in-gap area is gradually TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE filled but remarkably, the gap-peak position remains unchanged and before the conductance dI(V)∕dV gets completely flat at the upper critical magnetic field Bc2 ~ 5 T, the “gap” structure holds and is even enhanced in further increased field. The both effects are also documented in Fig. S6 b) of Suppl. Mat. ). We have seen similar effects of the magnetic field on ultrathin MoC films in our previous paper , where we studied the magnetic field induced SIT in these samples. The both unusual features were described by the Zeeman effect on the density of states, namely, the constant position of the gap peak as due to spectral broadening of the Zeeman split superconducting gap peaks and enhanced gap in the normal state due to Zeeman effect on spin dependent AA correction to DOS. There, based on the work of , to describe the total DOS we used the product of N(E) = NS D(E)NN(Ω), where NSD is the Dynes modification of the BCS DOS (2) with smearing parameter , NN(Ω) represents spin dependent AA corrections defined in (3), and the energy- dependent parameter Ω(E) = Re [√(E + iΓ)2 − Δ2] ensures the balance of quasiparticles after the transition to the superconducting state. Here, we employ this model to describe the magnetic field dependence of the tunneling spectra measured on our 3 nm thin MoN superconducting sample. We started to fit our spectra in the normal state at B = 8 T without superconducting contribution. We determined the values of the parameters A = -0.3, λ1 2λ0 ⁄ = -0.24, 0 = 0.31 meV which we used to fit the complete magnetic dependence down to B = 0 T. During the fit in the superconducting state at B < Bc2 we used only the value of the energy gap as a fit parameter, which we varied according to formula Δ = Δ(0)√1 − B/Bc2, in agreement with our results on MoC . The bottom panel of Fig. 3a) shows the results of our fit (open symbols) together with selected experimental curves from the upper panel (solid lines). The magnetic field dependence of the AA correction used during the fit is shown in Fig. S7 of the Suppl. Mat. . It can be seen that the small AA correction at B = 0 T with the ZBC value of ~ 0.95 is enhanced by ~ 20 % to the value of ~ 0.75 at B = 8 T. While in the 3 nm MoN film and similarly in MoC films in our previous study superconductivity and AA effect interfere, in the thinner MoN samples one can focus on the AA effects only. As can be seen in Fig. 3b) and c) the AA effect (reduction of the DOS at Fermi energy) gets stronger on the thinner and more disordered 1.5 nm sample compared to 2 nm MoN film. The most importantly, also the amplifying effect of magnetic field on the AA reduction is unambiguously detected, here: the zero-bias conductance drops by roughly ~ 10 % from ~ 0.67 on 2 nm film and ~ 4 % from 0.52 for the 1.5 nm film when the magnetic field is increased from B = 0 to 8 T. To describe these magnetic field dependencies quantitatively, we fit the spectra at selected magnetic fields as shown in the lower panels of Fig. 3b) and c). Since these samples are not superconducting, the superconducting contribution from the total density of states falls out, and we can fit the tunnel spectra to the DOS defined as NN(E) = 1 − δN according to formula (3). We started to fit the spectra again at the highest field B = 8 T, where we obtained the following fitting parameters: A = -0.26, λ1 2λ0 ⁄ = -0.12, 0 = 0.17 meV for the 2 nm sample and A = - 0.23, λ1 2λ0 ⁄ = -0.035, 0 = 0.14 meV for the 1.5 nm sample. At lower magnetic fields only the value of 0 was slightly corrected by less then 3 %. As a result, the spin dependent AA correction to the normal density of states describes well the effect of magnetic field in the both non-superconducting samples, and also in our thinnest 3 nm superconducting sample. In the latter case remarkably, the field dependent AA correction contributes very weakly (< 4 %) to the total DOS in the superconducting state at B < Bc2 (Fig. S7 in Suppl. Mat. ). In Fig. 4, we compare the AA effect in zero magnetic field in 3 nm, 2 nm, and 1.5 nm samples. In the case of 3 nm sample, we plot only the fitting curve of the contribution of the AA effect because in the experiment the total DOS comprises also the superconducting part. One can see a rapid enhancement of the AA correction upon decreasing the thickness/increasing disorder which is even amplified by the fact that spin dependent contributions partly compensating the leading AA term are also diminished with disorder. 4 Discussion In the following we argue that the SIT introduced in our thin MoN films by disorder and magnetic field follows the fermionic scenario. First argument is based on the fact that superconducting transition temperature Tc versus the films sheet resistance Rs in Fig. 1 follows the predictions of the Finkel’stein’s model based on enhanced Coulomb effects leading to suppression of the amplitude of the order parameter and Tc at once . This finding has also been documented in our transport measurements on strongly disordered MoC films and in other materials as for example MoGe films . Tsuneoka et al. who prepared a series of MoN films from 60 nm down to 1.5 nm with Tc decreasing from 6.6 K down to 2.5 K and the SIT transition at about 5 nm thin films also argued that Tc depression obeys the fermionic scenario according to the amplitude fluctuation in the order parameter. They could fit Tc as a function of the sheet resistance to the Finkel’stein’s model with the following parameters: the bulk Tc0 = 6.45 K, the critical resistance Rcr = 2 kΩ and the elastic scattering time τ = 1.6 × 10-16 s values very close to ours. It should be noted that the suppression of Tc with increasing value of Rs has also been observed in systems with an evident bosonic SIT, hence the validity of the Finkelstein model is a TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE necessary but not a sufficient condition of the fermionic model . Second evidence supporting the fermionic SIT is based on the fact that with increasing disorder the superconducting energy gap  and the transition temperature are suppressed simultaneously and the superconducting coupling is constant, not depending on the increasing disorder. In our case it is so and the coupling parameter is 2Δ(0)/kBTc ~ 3.5 - 3.6 for the 30 nm film down to 3 nm MoN (see Fig. S4 in ). This has also been observed in our previous paper in MoC films . Third argument employs the fact that spectral characteristics on increasingly disordered superconductors remains homogeneous, i.e. a long-range coherence holds and no local variations of the superconducting gap emerge. We have studied the superconducting energy gap locally by the STM measurements on all our superconducting samples down to 3 nm thickness close to the critical disorder. The gap maps constructed from these measurements, as well as the zero-bias conductance maps (ZBC) demonstrate the homogeneity of the superconducting state on the flat regions of the investigated surfaces. Homogeneity of tunneling spectra measured on the 3 nm sample along a 40 nm white line from Fig. 5a) is presented in the form of top view on spectra in Fig. 6a). We also studied the coherence-peaks height map on the 3 nm sample, which could reflect the loss of phase coherence, too . Before constructing this map, we normalized all tunneling spectra to the contribution of the AA effect at B = 0 T (black symbols in Fig. 4) determined from fit in Fig. 3. In contrast to experiment on NbN we could not find any distinct variations in the coherence peak heights. On the other hand, we admit that with the high spectral smearing with  ~ 0.4 it would be difficult. In some areas of the 3 nm thin superconducting film, islands a few nanometers wide with slightly different values of the superconducting energy gap than in other locations are observed. However, as already shown in our previous paper such a variation occurs at the places with slightly more pronounced protrusions/thicknesses of the film and a good correlation exists between the topography and the gap maps. The thicker the area the bigger the energy gap  and the smaller the spectral smearing . As we have already shown on MoC disordered films the effect is connected with the pair-breaking fields at the interface between the substrate and the thin film. Obviously, the question may arise how close to SIT the disordered films would have to be for bosonic effects to occur, and whether our 3 nm MoN was that close. For example, in strongly disordered NbN and α-MoGe thin films, samples thicker than 8 nm and 5 nm, resp., exhibit an evident fermionic scenario with a spatially homogeneous BCS-like gap, but on thinner samples with higher disorder, spatial inhomogeneities appear. Therefore, we study here for the first time not only strongly disordered superconducting samples near SIT but also non-superconducting MoN films that are already on the other side of the transition. Remarkably, the spectral maps taken on the 3 nm samples above Bc2 and the spectral maps taken on the non-superconducting 2 nm and 1.5 nm samples measured at any field show no spatial variations regardless of any corrugations. While for the 3 nm MoN film in superconducting state the zero-bias conductance map taken at zero field in Fig 5b) reveals small variations in agreement with the topography in Fig 5a) (see for example the spots in the white ovals, where an increase of about 1 nm in the topography corresponds to a 30 - 50 % lower ZBC due to locally bigger superconducting gap), on the contrary, the ZBC map in c) taken at 7.5 T, i.e. above Bc2, features no areas correlated with topography, only noise with approx. 5 % dispersion. In Fig. 5d), the 2 nm MoN topography shows higher and lower spots, but no spatial changes are observed in the ZBC maps measured at 0 T and 5 T (see e) and f), respectively) except experimental noise. Similar ZBC maps without apparent spatial changes were also observed on the 1.5 nm sample. The 40 nm long linecuts, measured on the surfaces of the superconducting 3 nm thin film in the normal state above Bc2 and non-superconducting 2 nm and 1.5 nm thin films at B = 0 T shown in Fig. 6 b), c), d), respectively, also point to the homogeneity of the measured spectra. Carbillet et al. pointed out that inhomogeneities of the superconducting gap can appear due to local variations of the Altshuler-Aronov effect. They modeled the AA correction as dI/dV ~ V and showed the local variations in the -maps on a rather long scale. We have also analyzed the spectral maps measured on 3 nm (at 7.5 T), 2 nm and 1.5 nm MoN films at different fields on surfaces typically 50 × 50 nm2 in a similar way but our - maps did not show any observable variations. However, we admit that it is not ruling out their existence completely, because of the small size of the studied surfaces and high spectral smearing of the MoN spectra. Fourthly, we show, that the transverse magnetic field applied to the thin films in close proximity to SIT acts through paramagnetic Zeeman spin-splitting effect. In the previous work on 3 nm superconducting MoC film paramagnetic Zeeman effects dominated on both sides of the field-tuned SIT. The critical magnetic field Bc2(T) showed square root temperature dependence typical for paramagnetic pair breaking, the Zeeman effect was found in the superconducting density of states below Bc2, and at higher fields, in the normal state a depleted DOS due to Altshuler-Aronov effect was detected. Also, the logarithmic AA anomaly in DOS present in the STM spectra at Bc2 was enhanced upon increasing magnetic field driving the system deeper into the insulating state. The MoN films close to SIT indicate very similar effects. The spin-dependent and spatially homogeneous AA effect on superconducting 3 nm and thinner non-superconducting samples is identified. Obviously this can be observed only in systems where the magnetic field acts on quasiparticles TITLE GOES HERE: UNOFFICIAL WORD TEMPLATE FOR APS JOURNAL GOES HERE through Zeeman splitting. Therefore, it is very important that the magnetic field dependence of the superconducting energy gap (B) ~ √1 − B/Bc2 typical for the presence of paramagnetic pair breaking of Cooper pairs was necessary in the fits on the 3 nm superconducting sample. The temperature dependence of the critical magnetic field Bc2(T) of our sample shown in Fig. S2 also indicates the dominance of paramagnetic effects. This follows not only from the square-root curvature of Bc2(T) in the vicinity of Tc (red dashed line) but also from the high value of Bc2(0) ~ 4.5 - 5 T close to the Clogston limit (BP[T] ≃ 1.8Tc[K]) , which for the superconductor with Tc = 2.9 K is BP = 5.2 T. The determination of the Bc2 values from our transport measurements is described in detail in the Suppl. Mater. . Thus, in strongly disordered MoN thin films, when a transverse magnetic field is applied, Zeeman spin effects dominate both in the superconducting and the normal states. The dominance of spin splitting effects has also been observed in systems that are close to the metal-insulator transition and exhibit “bad metallic” behavior due to strong electron correlations. Bogdanovich et al. have shown that in boron-doped Si:B samples, the metal-insulator transition is controlled predominantly by electron correlations and orbital effects are unimportant despite strong spin-orbit effects. 5 Conclusions MoN films reveal a transition from superconducting to insulating/bad metallic phase upon decreasing thickness from 30 nm to 1.5 nm. The superconducting transition temperature is gradually shifted from about 6 K to 2.7 K in the case of 3 nm films accompanied by decreasing Ioffe-Regel parameter approaching unity. Films thinner then 3 nm are already non-superconducting. The shift of Tc is also accompanied by the increase of the sheet resistance and can be modelled by the Finkel’stein’s model for the enhanced electron interaction providing the critical sheet resistance Rcr = 2.3 kΩ where the superconductivity terminates. The scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy measurements prove that Tc and the superconducting gap  are coupled with a constant ratio for all films and that the superconducting DOS and the normal- state Altshuler-Aronov DOS corrections are spatially homogeneous and no emergent granularity appears on either sides of SIT. The logarithmic AA DOS correction, is enhanced in increased magnetic field due to the Zeeman spin effects driving the system deeper into the insulating state. All this is pointing to purely fermionic SIT scenario in the system. Acknowledgments We gratefully acknowledge helpful conversations with M. Grajcar and R. Hlubina. Funding Information This work was supported by the projects APVV-20-0425, APVV-20-0324, VEGA 2/0058/20, VEGA 1/0743/19, IMPULZ IM-2021-42, the EU ERDF Grant No. VA SR ITMS2014+ 313011W856, by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under Grant Agreement No. 824109 (European Microkelvin Platform), the COST action CA21144 (SUPERQUMAP) and by U.S. Steel Košice.