Superconductivity in pressurized trilayer La4Ni3O10- single crystals Yinghao Zhu1,2†, Di Peng3†, Enkang Zhang1†, Bingying Pan4†, Xu Chen5†, Lixing Chen1, Huifen Ren5, Feiyang Liu1, Yiqing Hao6, Nana Li7, Zhenfang Xing7, Fujun Lan7, Jiyuan Han1, Junjie Wang5,8, Donghan Jia9, Hongliang Wo1, Yiqing Gu1, Yimeng Gu1, Li Ji10, Wenbin Wang11, Huiyang Gou9, Yao Shen5, Tianping Ying5, Xiaolong Chen5, Wenge Yang7, Huibo Cao6, Changlin Zheng1, Qiaoshi Zeng3,7*, Jian- gang Guo5* & Jun Zhao1,2,11,12* 1State Key Laboratory of Surface Physics and Department of Physics, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 2Shanghai Research Center for Quantum Sciences, Shanghai 201315, China 3Shanghai Key Laboratory of Material Frontiers Research in Extreme Environments (MFree), Institute for Shanghai Advanced Research in Physical Sciences (SHARPS), Shanghai 201203, China 4College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, Shandong 266100, China 5Beijing National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 6Neutron Scattering Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA 7Center for High Pressure Science and Technology Advanced Research, Shanghai 201203, China 8School of Physical Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China 9Center for High Pressure Science and Technology Advanced Research, Beijing 100094, China 10State Key Laboratory of ASIC and System, School of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 11Institute of Nanoelectronics and Quantum Computing, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China 12Shanghai Branch, Hefei National Laboratory, Shanghai 201315, China Abstract The pursuit of discovering new high-temperature superconductors that diverge from the copper-based paradigm1-3 carries profound implications for elucidating mechanisms behind superconductivity and may also enable new applications4-8. Here, our investigation reveals that application of pressure effectively suppresses the spin and charge order in trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals, leading to the emergence of superconductivity with a maximum critical temperature (Tc) of around 30 K at 69.0 GPa. The DC susceptibility measurements confirm a substantial diamagnetic response below Tc, indicating the presence of bulk superconductivity with a volume fraction exceeding 80%. In the normal state, we observe a “strange metal” behavior, characterized by a linear temperature- dependent resistance extending up to 300 K. Furthermore, the layer-dependent superconductivity observed hints at a unique interlayer coupling mechanism specific to nickelates, setting them apart from cuprates in this regard. Our findings provide crucial insights into the fundamental mechanisms underpinning superconductivity, while also introducing a new material platform to explore the intricate interplay between the spin/charge order, flat band structures, interlayer coupling, strange metal behavior and high-temperature superconductivity. Cuprates are the first family of high-temperature (high-Tc) superconducting materials, characterized by layers of CuO2 interleaved with charge reservoir layers1,2. Despite intensive research on various cuprates, the mechanism responsible for high-temperature superconductivity remains elusive2,3. Consequently, the pursuit of high-temperature superconductors that do not rely on copper oxides has become a focal point of intense experimental and theoretical exploration since the discovery of cuprates nearly four decades ago4-8. This is motivated by the belief that such materials may help to elucidate the enigmatic mechanisms governing high-temperature superconductivity while opening doors to new applications. Nickel, situated immediately to the left of copper on the Periodic Table, offers a playground for materials and chemistry designs aimed at replicating high-temperature unconventional superconductivity8-12. However, despite intensive efforts, achieving superconductivity in nickelates has proven to be a formidable challenge. In 2019, an intriguing development occurred when superconductivity was observed in “infinite-layer” nickelate thin films with Tc = 5-20 K13-16. In these materials, Ni1+ (d9) forms square planar NiO2 layers closely resembling Cu2+ (d9) in cuprates13-16. More recently, signatures of superconductivity have also been observed in the Ruddlesden-Popper (RP) bilayer perovskite La3Ni2O7 under high pressure, achieving a Tc of approximately 80 K above 14 GPa (ref. 17). Subsequent studies have observed zero resistance under improved hydrostatic pressure conditions facilitated by a liquid pressure-transmitting medium18-20. However, it has been suggested that the superconductivity in La3Ni2O7 may be filamentary in nature, with a low superconducting volume fraction19,20, underscoring the need for more in-depth research to fully understand the superconducting properties of this class of materials. Unlike “infinite-layer” nickelates and cuprates with a d9 electron configuration, La3Ni2O7 hosts a bilayer NiO2 square structure featuring Ni2.5+ (d7.5) ions17. Furthermore, the p-orbital of apical oxygen, which connects adjacent NiO2 layers, couples the two nearest- neighbor 3 2zd orbitals, suggesting that interlayer coupling may also play a crucial role in La3Ni2O717. However, in contrast to cuprate and iron-based superconductors, where superconductivity typically arises from the suppression of static long-range magnetic order in their parent phases2-4,21, infinite-layer and bilayer La3Ni2O7 nickelates have shown either a lack of magnetic order or hinted at the presence of weak magnetism13,17,22,23. This raises a fundamental question about whether magnetism plays the same crucial role in making nickelates into high-temperature superconductors. Of particular interest, it is well known that the Tc in cuprates depends on the number of CuO2 layers (n) in a non-monotonic way, reaching a maximum for n = 3 in most cases24- 26. As a result, trilayer cuprates have the highest Tc among all cuprates, reaching up to 135 K at ambient pressure and 164 K under high pressure for mercury-based compounds27,28. The mechanism for this layer dependence of superconductivity remains a subject of intense and ongoing debate26-30. This engenders an intriguing question: can trilayer nickelates exhibit superconductivity, and if so, how might it influence Tc. Theoretical considerations have suggested that trilayer La4Ni3O8, with its Ni1.33+ (d8.67) configuration, closely parallels the cuprates with Cu2+/Cu3+ configurations and thus stands as an ideal candidate for a high-Tc superconductor31,32. However, experimental investigations have thus far failed to observe superconductivity in trilayer La4Ni3O8, both under ambient conditions and at high pressure11,33. In contrast to many nickelates that display insulating behavior, including trilayer La4Ni3O8, the trilayer RP compound La4Ni3O10 stands out as a rare oxide compound that maintains its metallic character even at low temperatures under ambient pressure34,35. Trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O10 exhibits a static incommensurate magnetic order accompanied by a charge order36. The nominal valence state of trilayer La4Ni3O10 is Ni2.67+ (d7.33), which is different from the d9 state typically observed in infinite-layer nickelates and cuprates or the d7.5 state found in bilayer La3Ni2O7. Nevertheless, the band structure of La4Ni3O10 unveils intriguing features: the 2 2 x y d − hole band bears a striking resemblance to the behavior observed in hole-doped cuprates, while the 2zd band is rather flat and exhibits a 20 meV density wave-like gap opening associated with the spin order transition35,36, reminiscent of phenomena observed in iron-based superconductors21,37. This distinctive combination of characteristics, coupled with its trilayer structure, positions La4Ni3O10 as an ideal platform for the exploration of the interplay between magnetism, interlayer coupling, and potential superconductivity. However, the investigations of La4Ni3O10 were significantly hampered by the scarcity of high-quality single crystals, which necessitated their growth under a high oxygen pressure atmosphere34. In this paper, we report detailed measurements of La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals under both ambient conditions and high pressures, reaching up to 70 GPa. The high-quality La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals were grown using a high-pressure vertical optical-image floating-zone furnace. Our X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments conducted on powdered La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals at ambient conditions confirm the presence of a pure phase of trilayer La4Ni3O10-δ (Extended Data Fig. 1). Further, we conducted single- crystal neutron-diffraction and single-crystal XRD measurements on La4Ni3O10-δ (Extended Data Fig. 7a, Supplementary Table 1). The combined single-crystal structural refinement analysis using least square fitting by incorporating data from both neutron diffraction and XRD, identified the composition as La4Ni3O9.96(4), pointing to a minor oxygen deficiency. Additionally, the refined crystal structure aligns with the P21/a space group with Z=2 (Fig. 1e), consistent with previous reports34. revealing the detailed positions of atoms within the trilayer structure of La4Ni3O10-δ. We also employed integrated differential phase contrast (iDPC) imaging techniques to accurately visualize the lighter oxygen atoms (Extended Data Fig. 6). The simultaneous acquisition of HAADF and iDPC images, seamlessly aligns with our neutron diffraction and XRD refinements, reinforcing the accuracy of our structural analysis. The HAADF images in large area overviews further confirm the phase purity and exceptional quality of our crystals (Extended Data Fig. 6). To assess the influence of pressure on the crystal structure, we conducted synchrotron- based XRD measurements on powdered La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals (Extended Data Fig. 3). It is shown that the diffraction peaks within the range of 12.5°<2<14° exhibit a noticeable evolution with increasing pressure, indicative of a structural phase transition. The refinement analyses reveal a subtle structural transition associated with the tilting of the NiO6 octahedra, shifting from monoclinic P21/a to tetragonal I4/mmm at pressures exceeding approximately 13-15 GPa (Extended Data Fig. 3). Concurrently, the Ni–O–Ni angle between adjacent NiO2 layers undergoes a change from around 165.6(6)° to 180° during this phase transition (Fig. 1g), potentially enhancing interlayer coupling. The lattice constants and cell volume also exhibited progressive decrease under pressure, with an anomaly observed near the structural phase transition (Fig. 1c, 1d), which is consistent with a recent independent measurement on polycrystalline samples38. To ascertain if such a phase transition also occurs in single crystal samples, single-crystal XRD measurements were conducted, with the structural phase transition being further confirmed by single-crystal refinements (Extended Data Fig. 7b, Supplementary Table 2). To further characterize the material, magnetic susceptibility measurements were conducted, revealing a distinct kink in the data at TN ≈ 136 K (Fig. 2a), suggesting the emergence of the static spin and charge order, as previously revealed through neutron diffraction experiments36. This phase transition was corroborated by heat capacity measurements, which exhibited a pronounced peak at a similar temperature (Fig. 2c). These results are consistent with the material’s monoclinic P21/a structure at ambient pressure34,39. The electrical resistance R(T) of La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals under various pressure conditions is presented in Fig. 2b and Fig. 3a-e. At ambient pressure, La4Ni3O10-δ displays a characteristic metallic behavior, with resistivity exhibiting a decrease as the temperature descends below 300 K. A distinctive, steplike kink in the resistivity curve manifests at the spin/charge ordering temperature TN (Fig. 2b). It's worth emphasizing that the spin/charge order phase transition observed in our measurements displays an exceptional sharpness, which is notable in comparison to previous studies. This indicates the high quality of our La4Ni3O10-δ single crystals, setting the stage for precise investigations into its physical properties under pressure. When external pressure is exerted on the piston-cylinder cell, the characteristic kink related to the spin/charge ordering in the resistivity curve is rapidly suppressed (Fig. 3a), which is consistent with previous measurements on a powder sample below 1.28 GPa40. Resistances above 2.5 GPa were measured in a Be-Cu alloy diamond anvil cell (DAC). To ensure the best hydrostatic condition inside the DAC, we use helium as the pressure- transmitting medium. The resistance initially exhibits weak insulating behavior, accompanied by a peak anomaly associated with the spin order transition at 3.0 GPa (Fig. 3b). As pressure increases, metallic behavior is restored and the peak anomaly is progressively suppressed, and eventually a sharp drop in resistance below a critical temperature Tc of 4.5 K is observed at 15.5 GPa (see Fig. 3b). With further increments in pressure, Tc continues to rise, ultimately reaching a point where zero resistance is observed at pressures exceeding 43.0 GPa (Fig. 3b-d). This compellingly signifies the emergence of superconductivity, with the onset superconducting transition temperature ranging from 4.5 K to around 30 K. We also conducted temperature-dependent resistance measurements in a DAC using KBr as the pressure-transmitting medium. Across the pressure range spanning from 2.2 to 24.6 GPa, a moderate decrease of resistance below a critical temperature of 2-20 K is observed (Fig. 3e). This together with the weak upturn in resistance in the normal state, indicates a limited superconducting volume, likely due to the filamentary nature of the superconductivity within this pressure range. As the pressure is raised further, a significant sharp reduction in resistance becomes evident at approximately 20-30 K, observed at pressures of 38.0 GPa and beyond (Fig. 3e) and the onset Tc reaches 30.1 K at 69.0 GPa (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 5). However, small residue resistance below Tc was observed in this configuration, likely attributed to the less hydrostatic conditions resulting from the pressure-transmitting medium KBr. To provide additional confirmation of the pressure-induced superconductivity, we conducted ultrasensitive DC magnetic susceptibility measurements under high pressures within a custom-built miniature Be-Cu alloy DAC, using nitrogen as the pressure-transmitting medium to provide a hydrostatic pressure environment. A distinctive diamagnetic response at Tc is clearly evident in the zero-field-cooled (ZFC) curve at 40.0 GPa, and as pressure increases, Tc also rises, consistent with the resistance measurements, further confirming the emergence of superconductivity (Fig. 3f-i and Extended Data Fig. 8). We have estimated the maximum superconducting volume fraction to be around 86% across the pressures applied, suggesting the development of bulk superconductivity (Extended Data Fig. 9). Conversely, below 30 GPa, no clear superconducting diamagnetic responses were detected, suggesting that the superconducting volume fraction is relatively limited at low pressures (Extended Data Fig. 10). The difference of susceptibilities between ZFC and field-cooled (FC) curves in the normal states is due to the magnetic background of the pressure cell with residual magnetic impurities (Supplementary Fig. 5). Interestingly, concomitant with the emergence of zero resistance at 43.0 GPa, the normal state resistance follows a linear temperature dependence up to 300 K (Fig. 3b). This behavior is a hallmark of the so-called “strange metal” state, a characteristic phenomenon observed in optimal doped cuprates, certain iron-based materials and nickelate superconductors 2,17,18,41-45, implying the existence of strong correlations and underscores the unconventional nature of superconductivity. Similar strange metal behavior was also confirmed in the measurements conducted within the KBr DAC above 38.0 GPa (Fig. 3e). Figs. 4a-d display the temperature-dependent magnetoresistance measured in magnetic fields perpendicular to the ab plane under various pressures. As the magnetic field is increased, superconductivity is progressively suppressed, providing further confirmation that the transition in resistance is due to the onset of superconductivity. We use the 90% resistance transition to the normal state near Tc and fit it to the yields an estimation of the upper critical field, with values reaching 44 T at 63.0 GPa when utilizing the helium DAC, and 48 T at 69.0 GPa with the KBr DAC (Fig. 4e, Extended Data Fig. 5). These values of upper critical field exceed those observed in infinite-layer nickelates13 but fall below La3Ni2O717. phase diagram in trilayer La4Ni3O10. This phase diagram bears some analogy to those found in cuprate and iron-based superconductors2,21, where high-temperature superconductivity arises upon suppression of a static magnetic order. From the electronic structure perspective, it suggests that the 2zd band could play an important role in shaping the pressure-dependent phase diagram of La4Ni3O10. The 2zd band is notably flat and displays a 20 meV spin density wave-like gap35. This unique electronic structure feature, coupled with its propensity to interact with the p-orbital of apical oxygen, renders the 2zd band highly susceptible to external pressure, with the potential to alter nesting conditions and influence the spin/charge density wave order. Therefore, the concurrent emergence of bulk superconductivity and strange metal behavior could be attributed to the pressure effect that suppresses the density wave gap, brings the flat 2zd band into proximity with the Fermi surface, consequently inducing strong correlations and fostering the emergence of the “strange metal” behavior. Simultaneously, the closing of the density wave gap dampens the static spin-density- wave order and promotes dynamic spin fluctuations, paving the way for superconductivity to emerge, where the hole Fermi surface associated with the 2 2 x y d − orbital may also come into play. If this analysis were extended to the bilayer system, it suggests that the absence of (or weak) static magnetic order in La3Ni2O7 may be attributed to the fact that the 2zd band lies considerably further below the Fermi level compared to La4Ni3O1035,46. However, even the flat bands located away from the Fermi level have the potential to generate high-energy spin fluctuations, which could exert a noteworthy influence on the phase diagram or serve as a mediator of electron pairing47. Further investigations in this direction are warranted to fully elucidate the role of magnetism in nickelate superconductors. Furthermore, it’s important to consider the impact of the interlayer coupling, a factor that could potentially promote superconductivity and has been intensively discussed in multilayer cuprates and bilayer La3Ni2O72,17,29,30,48. The observation of pressure induced superconductivity accompanied by a structural transition from monoclinic to tetragonal phases also suggests a potential significant role of interlayer coupling in trilayer La4Ni3O10-. However, unlike cuprate superconductors where the highest Tc is achieved in trilayer systems, in the case of trilayer La4Ni3O10-, the Tc is lower than that of bilayer La3Ni2O7. This discrepancy suggests the presence of distinct interlayer interaction mechanisms between these two systems. Additional investigations are needed to elucidate these coupling mechanisms, particularly focusing on differences in carrier concentrations and magnetic structures between the inner and outer NiO2 layers, as well as the interlayer coupling between the two outer NiO2 layers. These factors are crucial for understanding the evolution of Tc in multilayer superconductors2,29,30,48. In summary, we present evidences of bulk superconductivity in trilayer nickelate La4Ni3O10- single crystals under pressure. Our experiments also unveil intriguing “strange metal” behavior in the normal state, characterized by linear temperature dependence of resistance up to 300 K, which may be linked to the enhanced spin fluctuations and strong correlations induced by the flat 2zd band positioned near the Fermi level. Furthermore, the layer-dependent Tc in nickelates is distinct from that observed in cuprates, suggesting unique interlayer coupling and charge transfer mechanisms specific to nickelates. Further research is required to fully understand the precise role of interlayer coupling in the pairing, especially considering the differences in carrier concentrations and magnetism between the inner and outer NiO2 layers, as well as the interlayer coupling between the two outer NiO2 layers, which are absent in the bilayer system. Additionally, a comprehensive exploration of the role of the 2 2 x y d − orbital and pairing symmetry is necessary for a complete understanding. In essence, our findings establish a promising new material platform, inviting deeper exploration into the intricate interplay between spin/charge order, flat band structure, interlayer coupling, strange metal behavior and high-temperature superconductivity. This avenue of research holds great potential for uncovering novel phenomena and advancing our understanding of high-temperature superconductors. Methods Growth of La4Ni3O10- single crystals The precursor powder for the La4Ni3O10- compound was prepared using the conventional solid-state reaction method. Chemically stoichiometric raw materials, La2O3 and NiO (Aladdin, 99.99%), were meticulously ground and mixed using a Vibratory Micro Mill (FRITSCH PULVERISETTE 0). An additional 0.5% of NiO was included to compensate for potential NiO volatilization during the crystal growth process. The resulting mixture underwent calcination at 1373 K for 24 hours, with two repeated calcination cycles to ensure complete and homogeneous reactions. Subsequently, the resulting precursor material was pressed into a cylindrical rod, approximately 13 cm in length and 6 mm in diameter, using a hydrostatic pressure of 300 MPa. The shaped rod then underwent once sintering at 1673 K for 12 hours in air. Single crystals were grown using a vertical optical-image floating zone furnace (Model HKZ, SciDre GmbH, Dresden) at Fudan University. During the crystal growth process, we carefully maintained an oxygen pressure within the range of 18-22 bar, and employed a 5 kW Xenon arc lamp as the light source. The rod was rapidly traversed through the growth zone at a speed of 15 mm/h to enhance the density, after which a growth rate of 3 mm/h was maintained. STEM measurements The STEM experiments were performed on a double aberration corrected S/TEM (Themis Z, Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated at 300 kV. For STEM-HAADF imaging, the probe semi-convergent angle is 21.4 mrad, and the HAADF collection angle is from 79 to 200 mrad. The atomic resolution EDX imaging was recorded with a Super-X detector. Measurements under high pressure We conducted electrical resistance measurements on La4Ni3O10- single crystals under pressure in a physical property measurement system (PPMS) by Quantum Design. The temperature range covered was from 1.8 to 300 K, and magnetic fields up to 9 T were applied. The electrical resistivity measurements at low pressures (below 2.5 GPa) were performed in a piston cylinder cell using the standard four-probe method (Fig. 3a). The pressure-transmitting medium employed in this setup was liquid Daphne 7373. The pressure was calibrated from the superconducting transition temperature of Pb. The electrical resistance measurements at high pressures (above 2.2 GPa) were performed in a diamond anvil cell (DAC) with 200-300 μm culets using the standard van der Pauw four-probe method (Fig. 3b-d, Fig. 4, Extended Data Fig. 4). The sample chamber was constructed using a mixture of cubic boron nitride and epoxy, with a diameter ranging from 140 to 280 μm. The single crystal was loaded under helium as the pressure- transmitting medium. Alternately, KBr powders were also used as a different pressure- transmitting medium (Fig. 3e, Extended Data Fig. 5). Pressure calibration was carried out using ruby fluorescence peak shift at room temperature. Ultrasensitive magnetic susceptibility measurements under pressure were conducted using a custom-built beryllium-copper alloy mini-DAC equipped with a rhenium gasket, employing a design similar to refs. 49 and 50. The mini-DAC has dimensions of approximately 8.5 mm in diameter and 30 mm in length. The measurements were performed using a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS3, Quantum Design). The DAC includes a pair of diamond anvils with a diameter of 300 μm and a sample chamber with a diameter of 210 μm. The sample chamber was filled with a single crystal of La4Ni3O10- and liquid nitrogen as the pressure transmitting medium to provide a hydrostatic pressure environment. The samples had a diameter of approximately 150-200 μm and a thickness of roughly 25 μm. The single-crystal neutron-diffraction experiments were performed using the HB-3A four-circle single-crystal neutron diffractometer at the High Flux Isotope Reactor at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. A Si (220) monochromatic neutron beam with a wavelength of 1.533 Å was employed for the measurements. In-situ lab-based high- pressure XRD measurements on powder and single crystals were carried out using a Bruker D8 Venture diffractometer, utilizing Mo Kα radiation (λ = 0.7107 Å) in a diamond anvil cell with 300-μm-diameter culets and stainless steel gaskets (Extended Data Fig. 2, Extended Data Fig. 7, Supplementary Fig. 9, Supplementary Table 1 and 2). A methanol-ethanol-water mixture in the ratio of 16:3:1 was used as the pressure- transmitting medium for these measurements. For the powder measurements, we captured two-dimensional patterns of powder diffraction rings, which were subsequently processed to yield one-dimensional profiles (Extended Data Fig. 2). We included a small ruby ball within the chamber to facilitate pressure calibration by monitoring the ruby’s fluorescence peak shift. In-situ synchrotron-based high-pressure XRD measurements were performed at the beamline 15U1 at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility, China, utilizing an X-ray beam with a wavelength of 0.6199 Å (Extended Data Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 3, Supplementary Table 3). A symmetric DAC with anvil culet sizes of 300 μm, and rhenium gaskets were used. Helium was used as the pressure-transmitting medium to maintain optimal hydrostatic pressure conditions, with pressure calibration again based on the shift in the fluorescence peak of a ruby indicator. Calculation of superconducting volume fraction The susceptibility m of a superconductor can be decomposed into: m = (1-f)p + fd, (1) where f is the superconducting volume fraction, p denotes the paramagnetic susceptibility, and d denotes the diamagnetic susceptibility. In SI units, d = -1, and p → 0, eq. (1) can be then expressed as f = |m|, (2) Upon converting between unit systems, the susceptibility equation becomes: where μ ≈ -1.69×10-6 emu represents the measured magnetic moment at 5 K after subtracting the constant background signal at onset of Tc for sample S6 at 20 Oe and 50 GPa. m ~ 3.16 μg is the sample mass which was calculated based on the refined density ρ = 7.16 g/cm3 and the sample volume at ambient condition. ma is the molar mass, Na is the Avogadro constant, V = 342.837 Å3 is the cell volume for a I4/mmm primitive cell with Z = 2 at 50 GPa (Fig. 1d, Supplementary Table 3). The demagnetizing factor N of a finite cylinder with axial magnetic field can be approximated using51: N-1 ≈ 1 + 1.6 (C/A), (4) where A is the diameter and C is the thickness of the sample. For sample S6, A = 160 μm and C = 22 μm at ambient condition, yielding a demagnetizing factor of N = 0.82. This factor remains largely unchanged under hydrostatic pressure due to the proportional contraction of the lattice dimensions of the crystal structure (Supplementary Table 3). The susceptibility  can be calculated as: N = 1/0 – 1/, (5) where 0 is the measured value and  is the adjusted susceptibility for the sample geometry. Implementing the above procedure,  calculates to approximately -0.86 at 5 K for S6, indicating a superconducting volume fraction of 86% as shown in Extended Data Fig. 9. This substantiates pressure-induced bulk superconductivity in La4Ni3O10- Extended analysis and discussion The upper critical fields of nickelates are comparable with those observed in hole-doped cuprate and iron-pnictide superconductors exhibiting similar Tc values52-54, but surpass those of simple conventional superconductors49,55. Furthermore, our estimation of the in-plane superconducting coherence length of La4Ni3O10- approximates to 26 Å at 69.0 GPa, close to values of 122 iron pnictide and La2-xSrxCuO4 (refs. 52-54). The high upper critical fields and the correspondingly shorter superconducting coherence lengths point to tightly bound Cooper pairs, hinting at an unconventional pairing mechanism possibly driven by spin fluctuations and strong electronic correlations. Indeed, theoretical calculations on both infinite-layered nickelates and bilayer nickelates suggest that electron-phonon coupling alone is insufficient to account for the observed high critical temperatures56,57. We anticipate that the scenario for La4Ni3O10 is similar, although specific calculations for this material have not yet been published in the literature. Recently, a growing number of theoretical preprints on La4Ni3O10 have appeared, examining its intricate electronic structure, the unique layer-dependent magnetism of its trilayer configuration, and its superconductivity. These analyses underscore the critical impact of electronic correlations, spin fluctuations, and interlayer coupling on the material's “strange metal” behavior and its unconventional superconducting pairing mechanism, with an emphasis on the s±-wave pairing symmetry58-64. It has been suggested that the magnetic structures in La4Ni3O10 vary substantially between the inner and outer NiO2 layers, where the inner layer is non-magnetic and the outer layers are antiferromagnetic61-63. There are also likely variations in carrier concentrations and electron correlations across these layers58-64. These distinctions in magnetic structure and electron dynamics potentially introduce unique phenomenon not present in bilayer and infinite-layer nickelates, warranting further exploration. While preparing this manuscript, we became aware of three related preprints that reported resistance measurements on La4Ni3O10 polycrystalline samples65-67.