Single-Chip Silicon Photonic Processor for Analog Optical and Microwave Signals Hong Deng1,2*, Jing Zhang1,2, Emadreza Soltanian1,2, Xiangfeng Chen1,2, Chao Pang1,2, Nicolas Vaissiere3, Delphine Neel3, Joan Ramirez3, Jean Decobert3, Nishant Singh4, Guy Torfs4, Gunther Roelkens1,2, Wim Bogaerts1,2* 1*Photonics Research Group, Department of Information Technology, ,Ghent University - imec, Ghent, Belgium. 2Center for Nano- and Biophotonics (NB Photonics), Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 3III-V Lab, Palaiseau, France. 4IDLab, Department of Information Technology, Ghent University - imec, Ghent, Belgium. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): hong.deng@ugent.be; wim.bogaerts@ugent.be; Contributing authors: jingzhan.Zhang@ugent.be; emadreza.soltanian@ugent.be; xiangfeng.chen@ugent.be; chao.pang@ugent.be; nicolas.vaissiere@3-5lab.fr; delphine.neel@3-5lab.fr; joan.ramirez@3-5lab.fr; jean.decobert@3-5lab.fr; nishant.singh@UGent.be; guy.torfs@ugent.be; gunther.roelkens@ugent.be; Abstract The explosion of data volume in communications, AI training, and cloud comput- ing requires efficient data handling, which is typically stored as digital electrical information and transmitted as wireless radio frequency (RF) signals or light waves in optical fibres. Today’s communications systems mostly treat the RF and optical signals separately, which results in unnecessary conversion losses and increased cost. In this work, we report the first fully on-chip signal processor for high-speed RF and optical signals based on a silicon photonic circuit. Our chip is capable of both generation and detection of analog electrical and opti- cal signals, and can program a user-defined filter response in both domains. The 1 arXiv:2311.09258v1 [physics.optics] 15 Nov 2023 single silicon photonic chip integrates all essential components like modulators, optical filters, and photodetectors, as well as tunable lasers enabled by transfer- printed Indium Phosphide (InP) optical amplifiers. The system’s configuration is locally programmed through thermo-optic phase shifters and monitored by pho- todetectors. We demonstrate our chip’s capabilities with different combinations of RF and optical signal processing functions, including optical and RF signal generation and filtering. This represents a key step towards compact microwave photonic systems for future wireless communication and sensing applications. Keywords: Silicon photonics, Heterogeneous integrated circuits, Microwave photonics, Signal processing 1 Introduction Today’s increasingly interconnected and data-driven society relies on always-accessible high-speed data connections. Communication networks are evolving towards an increasingly granular infrastructure, powered by fixed-line optical fibers and high- bandwidth wireless access networks. To distribute the digital data, systems use separate devices to generate and process optical signals and wireless radio frequency (RF) signals, which results in unnecessary conversion and propagation losses, as well as increased cost. We need a more versatile approach to effectively handle the signals in both the RF and the optical domain. Silicon photonic circuits have emerged as a widely deployed solution for optical signal transmission , manipulating light on the surface of a chip using optical waveguides to transport signals, high-speed modulators to encode information on a lightwave, and germanium photodetectors(PDs) to convert these signals back to the electrical domain. The signals can be filtered with waveguide-based interferometers and coupled off-chip to optical fibres. Supported by the high-precision manufacturing infrastructure of electronics, there is a clear trend towards increasing circuit complex- ity and programmability . Through the integration of phase tuners, the paths of light can be electronically configured to implement wavelength/frequency filters with tun- able pass bands, arbitrary linear transformers, and convolution calculators , which prove to be invaluable for quantum information processing, deep learning, and LiDAR systems[1, 22–24]. Because optical signals can span a massive bandwidth, photonics is used to gener- ate, manipulate, transport, and measure high-speed RF signals. This field is commonly known as Microwave Photonics (MWP) . Enabled by fast electro-optic modula- tors, tunable optical filters and low-noise PDs, photonic circuits can perform diverse complex RF signal processing functions . Current demonstrations are based on InP platforms , silicon photonic platforms and SiN platforms . On-chip lasers and optical amplifiers can only be natively supported on InP platforms. No demonstration with a natively integrated laser source has been presented on other platforms. 2 Fig. 1 (a) Schematic block diagram of the silicon photonic signal processor. (b) Microscope image of the fabricated chip; (c) A packaged demonstrator with wirebonded controls and microwave connectors (before fibre attachment). Silicon has an indirect bandgap, and therefore the integration of III-V materi- als, such as GaAs and InP, has been extensively explored . Transfer printing has emerged as a promising method that optimizes the utilization of costly III-V epitaxial substrates without modifications to the fabrication process of silicon photonics. In this work, we report the first single-chip signal processor built in silicon photon- ics technology, capable of implementing programmable operations on both optical and RF signals, and converting between the two domains. The chip contains two widely tunable lasers, a reconfigurable modulator, optical switches, a fully tunable Mach- Zehnder interferometer (MZI) loaded with 4 independent ring resonators, and two high speed PDs. The silicon photonic chip is fabricated in imec’s iSiPP50G process, sup- plemented with micro-transfer-printed optical amplifiers. The system’s configuration is locally programmed through thermo-optic phase shifters and monitored by on-chip tap PDs. 2 Results Our signal processor consists of four main subcircuit blocks, which are the tunable laser (with 2 lasers), the reconfigurable modulator, the reconfigurable optical filter 3 Fig. 2 (a) The signal processor configuration for optical filtering. (b) Single bandpass filtering con- figuration and response; (c) Double bandpass filtering configuration and response; (d) Second-order Chebyshev Type II bandpass filtering configuration and response; (e) Forth-order Chebyshev Type II bandpass filtering configuration and response. and the high-speed PD block, shown in Fig. 1a. Light generated by the laser source(s) is guided into the modulator circuit, which can be configured for either phase mod- ulation or intensity modulation (details in supplementary information S2.3). The light, now carrying an RF payload signal, feeds into the optical filter consisting of a fully tunable four-ring-loaded MZI with tap monitors. The filtered light signal is then converted back into the RF domain by the high-speed PD. The four functional blocks are connected by optical switches, making it possible to inject or extract light at each joint, allowing processor configurations for both optical and RF signal processing, or cascading of processors through fiber links. The optical switches are implemented as single-stage or double-stage MZIs (details in supplementary information S2.2) . A fabricated chip is shown in Fig. 1b, and a packaged device (before fiber attachment) is shown in Fig. 1c. The entire photonic circuit has 15 optical fibre ports, 1 RF input and 2 RF outputs, 52 heater-based optical phase shifters, and 8 tap monitors, and it has the capability of fully reconfiguring the optical and electrical response and the conversions between the domains, and it can also function as a tunable laser source or a tunable RF source. Optical-to-optical (O/O) response. Figure 2 pictures the signal processor config- ured as an optical linear filter: the light signal is guided through the MZI loaded with four independently tunable ring resonators (two in each arm). Such ring-loaded MZIs have can act as an auto-regression/moving average (ARMA) filter . We implemented all couplers in the filter as tunable MZIs, as shown in Fig 2b-e. With the built-in tap monitors, the coupling status of each ring can be calibrated locally. 4 The tuning procedures are explained in the supplementary information S2.4. The optical responses shown in Fig. 2b-e are measured with an optical vector analyzer (LUNA OVA5000), and normalized to grating coupler transmission envelope. If the phase difference in the MZI is zero, the rings will introduce sharp pass bands as shown in Fig. 2b-c. The fabricated rings show a 3 dB bandwidth of 35 pm when crit- ically coupled. If the MZI phase difference is set to π, an overcoupled ring pair can form typical Chebyshev Type II filters with a flat passband. The measurements show passbands with ∼0.5 dB ripple in passbands and 30 dB stopband rejection (Fig. 2d). By then tuning the second ring pair to the roll-off points, a higher-order Chebyshev Type II filter response is obtained, improving the roll-off bandwidth from 226 pm to 101 pm (Fig. 2e). More details and examples of optical filtering are described in the supplementary information S2.4. Electrical-to-optical (E/O) response. Combining the laser(s) and the modula- tor, we can imprint RF signals onto the optical carrier(s), corresponding to a pure electrical-to-optical response. The on-chip tunable lasers consist of a Fabry–P ́erot (FP) laser and a ring laser with intra-cavity wavelength filters. The measurements show −3 dBm optical power coupled to fiber with a tuning range of 60 nm. Depend- ing on the design of the transfer-printed SOA, the lasing range can be adjusted (details in supplementary information S2.1). The reconfigurable modulator block consists of a Mach-Zehnder modulator with tunable couplers and a PN junction carrier depletion modulator in one arm, and a slow thermal phase shifter in the other arm. With the tunable couplers and phase shifter we can configure the modulator to provide either intensity modulation or pure phase modulation, which is measured with more than 20 dB extinction with the same optical powers in an off-chip PD (details in supplementary information S2.3). Optical-to-Electrical (O/E) response. The O/E conversion is implemented by two on-chip PDs. Because the packaged connectors ofthe packaged chip still introduce excessive RF crosstalk, we introduce an extra erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) in the signal path (going off-chip through the grating couplers). This boosts the modulated light signal, in turn enhancing the electrical signal. The O/E response of the on-chip PDs shows a 3 dB bandwidth of 25 GHz. More details are shown in the supplementary information S2.5. Electrical-to-electrical (E/E) response. The packaged chip can act as an analog microwave processor and implement sophisticated linear filtering of RF signals, as shown in Fig. 3. The response is measured with an off-chip PD to avoid the RF crosstalk altogether. Unlike previously demonstrated integrated microwave photonic filters using single-sideband modulation (SSB), our signal processor can use both modulated sidebands, which simplifies the optical filter design. The reconfigurable modulator can generate sidebands with tunable phase relations (details in supplemen- tary information S2.3), and with the reconfigurable optical filters, the RF response coming from the PDs can be fully controlled. Furthermore, to construct a generalized bandpass or bandstop filter in the RF domain requires only cascaded ring filters. More details explaining the unique benefits of this double-sideband approach can be found in supplementary information S3.1. Figure 3b-g shows various types of RF 5 Fig. 3 (a) The signal processor configuration for E/E conversion. (b) Microwave filter: single tunable bandpass filter. (c) Microwave filter: double tunable bandpass filter; (d) Microwave filter: tunable one- pass one-stop band filter; (e) Microwave filter: tunable low pass filter; (f) Microwave filter: tunable high pass filter; (g) Microwave filter: four tunable bandpass filters. filter responses, realized by tuning both the modulator block and the rings. Limited by the Q factors of the rings, the narrowest 3 dB RF filter bandwidth is ∼3 GHz. 6 Fig. 4 (a) The signal processor configured as an opto-electronic oscillator. (b) Measurement setup for the OEO. (c) RF signal generation with 500 m fiber and off-chip PD; (d) RF signal generation with 20 m fiber and on-chip PD; ESA: Electrical Spectrum Analyzer. EA: Electronic Amplifier. EDFA: Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier. RF frequency multiplier. The signal processor reported can implement RF fre- quency doubling using the laser, the modulator and the detector. By biasing the Mach-Zehnder modulator at its null point, the ratio of the second-harmonic sig- nal (2f) to the linear response (1f) can be adjusted by tuning the couplers in the modulator block such that the losses in both arms are fully balanced (this is a 70:30 balance as the PN modulator has a higher loss). This results in a 2f/1f signal ratio that is as high as 40 dB with an off-chip PD. For an on-chip PD, the RF crosstalk degrades the 1f extinction (details in supplementary information S3.2). Opto-electronic oscillator (OEO). With additional electronic amplifiers compen- sating the loss of the RF bandpass filters shown above, our signal processor can form an OEO with a tunable central frequency, as shown in Fig. 4. An extra length of fiber is added in the light path to form a longer oscillation cavity, which is indicated in Fig. 4. With an off-chip PD, RF signals can be generated with afrequency tunable from 4 GHz to 24 GHz, and −116 dBc/Hz phase noise at 100 kHz offset frequency, shown in Fig. 4c. And with the on-chip PD, the generated signal can be tuned from 3.3 GHz to 11.6 GHz with −84 dBc/Hz phase noise at 100 kHz offset frequency, shown 7 in Fig. 4d. More details are shown in supplementary information S3.3. Except for the functionalities shown above, our signal processor can also work as an optical wavelength meter or RF frequency meter using the tap monitors in the filter block, where the resolution is limited by the Q factor of the loaded ring (Supplementary information S3.4). 3 Discussion The single-chip signal processor provides a fully programmable filtering response for optical and RF signals, as well as generation and detection of electrical and optical signals. As a demonstrator, the performance of this processor is limited by its system scale, and the packaging and crosstalk management leave room for improvement. Microwave photonic filtering based on double-sideband modulation. The E/E response of the reported signal processor is based on double sideband modu- lation. Compared to SSB modulation schemes, our algorithm allow a simpler filter design and a lower intrinsic RF loss. The scheme relies on the reconfigurable mod- ulator, which can generate RF sidebands with a tunable phase difference, while the tunable couplers ensure the minimum optical loss in all scenarios. In this case, the optical filters used to filter the modulation introduced sidebands can just be as simple as cascaded tunable ring resonators. Filtering performance and scale-up analysis. The optical and electrical filters are both based on the same optical filter block in our signal processor. As a tunable filter, the minimum 3 dB bandwidth depends on the quality (Q) factor of the rings, which were ∼ 50000 at critical coupling. The monitor PDs inside the ring introduce extra loss (limiting the Q), but they monitor the ring status for configuration. Better calibration schemes or a tunable power tap could allow us to reduce the impact of these monitor PDs. The filtering performance is also limited by the filter order, which corresponds to the number of ring filters in the block. For a higher-order RF filter, we only need to cascade additional ring filters, which is very scalable in terms of optical losses and tuning scheme. For optical filtering, increasing the order requires extra ring pairs over both arms of the MZI. Equalized E/O conversion with widely tunable optical carriers. The two on- chip laser sources both show 50 nm tuning ranges in a different wavelength region, and a total 90 nm tuning range (from 1508 nm to 1598 nm). With the on-chip modulators, an E/O conversion with widely tunable optical carriers can be reached. The programmable filter can also be used as an RF equalizer. In the supplementary information S3.2 we show how we compensate the uneven RF loss of the PCB and bonding wires, boosting the 3 dB bandwidth from 4.5 GHz to 26 GHz. In addition, the on-chip laser together with two PDs can also be configured as a coherent receiver with tunable local oscillator (LO). But due to the high RF crosstalk 8 (discussed in the crosstalk section), we did not further evaluated this. RF signal generation. We reported two demonstrations for RF signal genera- tion. We showed frequency doubling with 40 dB 2f/1f extinction ratio using the configurable modulator, and a tunable OE oscillator with an external fibre and RF amplifier. The OEO’s RF generation covers the 4-24 GHz span with almost constant phase noise of −114 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz using an off-chip PD. This is superior to com- mercial products (R&S SMR, −105 dBc/Hz at 100 kHz offset frequency for 10 GHz central frequency). The frequency generation of the OEO system is not limited to 24 GHz with our signal processor, but its phase noise measurement is limited by the used spectrum analyzer (26 GHz). Thermal crosstalk. For configurability, the system contains 52 thermal tuners, making it quite sensitive to external and internal temperature fluctuations. In addi- tion, the power dissipation of the transfer-printed laser (300 mW) and the modulator termination (80 mW at −2 V) make the thermal control even more challenging. Even though the sample is mounted on a temperature controller, it still drifts with ambient temperature. Apart from this, the system shows a high stability and repeatability, which means that the different crosstalk contributions can be compensated with the tuners. Optical crosstalk. The chip has an integrated laser, but no optical isolator. This makes the laser cavities vulnerable to all reflections along the optical path. As these are not fully avoidable, all phase tuners will also affect the reflected light, introducing small perturbations to the laser cavity. However, the tunability of the system allows us to compensate for most of these. RF crosstalk. A key limitation to our demonstration reported here is the RF crosstalk. This can be mostly attributed to the packaging: the high-speed PCB couples the RF signal directly from the input connectors to the output connectors, bypassing the chip. Because we did not boost the PD output with transimpedance amplifiers (TIAs), their relatively weak signal is swamped by the direct RF crosstalk and can- not be retrieved. For the reported experiments we always used an off-chip EDFA to boost the modulated optical signal and then fed it back into the chip. With a proper TIA and better RF isolation, the extra EDFA would not be necessary. Details of this characterization are shown in the supplementary information S2.5. 4 Conclusion In this work, we reported the first single-chip microwave photonic signal processor based on silicon photonics. It can be programmed as a reconfigurable filter for opti- cal signals and RF signals, and provide E/O and O/E conversions. The laser sources based on transfer printing make it work without an external light source. Using multi- ple monitor detectors, the system can be configured locally. In addition, the processor shows its capabilities for RF signal generation and RF frequency doubling. In general, 9 this demonstration suggests a promising and comprehensive approach for the gener- ation, distribution, and processing of optical and RF signals and its potential use in data centers, wireless and satellite communication, and other optical and microwave applications. Supplementary information. See the attachment file. Acknowledgments. Acknowledgments are not compulsory. Where included they should be brief. Grant or contribution numbers may be acknowledged. The research presented here was supported by the European Research Council through the Consolidator Grant PhotonicSWARM (grant 725555), and the European Horizon2020 program through the projects MORPHIC (grant 780283), CALADAN (grant 825453) and MedPhab (grant 871345). Author Contributions. H.D. and W.B. conceived the idea of the project. H.D. and J.Z. simulated and designed the whole system and laid out the mask. H.D. performed the experimental characterizations and analysis. E.S. helped with the transfer printing process. X.C. helped with the mask layout. C.P. helped with the chip post processing. N.V., D.N., J.R, and J.D provided the SOA coupon fabrication. N.S. and G.T. helped with the OEO characterization. H.D., E.S. and W.B. wrote the paper. G.R and W.B. supervised the project. All authors commented on the manuscript. Declarations The authors declare no conflicts of interest