Relativistic materials from an alternative viewpoint Ann E. MattssonÔłŚ and Daniel A. RehnÔÇá Computational Physics Division, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545 (Dated: December 8, 2023) Electrons in materials containing heavy elements are fundamentally relativistic and should in principle be described using the Dirac equation. However, the current standard for treatment of electrons in such materials involves density functional theory methods originally formulated from the Schr ╠łodinger equation. While some extensions of the Schr ╠łodinger-based formulation have been explored, such as the scalar relativistic approximation with or without spin-orbit coupling, these solutions do not provide a way to fully account for all relativistic effects of electrons, and the language used to describe such solutions are still based in the language of the Schr ╠łodinger equation. In this article, we provide a different method for translating between the Dirac and Schr ╠łodinger viewpoints in the context of a Coulomb potential. By retaining the Dirac four-vector notation and terminology in taking the non-relativistic limit, we see a much deeper connection between the Dirac and Schr ╠łodinger equation solutions that allow us to more directly compare the effects of relativity in the angular and radial functions. Through this viewpoint, we introduce the concepts of densitals and Dirac spherical harmonics that allow us to translate more easily between the Dirac and Schr ╠łodinger solutions. These concepts allow us to establish a useful language for discussing relativistic effects in materials containing elements throughout the full periodic table and thereby enable a more fundamental understanding of the effects of relativity on electronic structure. I. INTRODUCTION Solid state materials containing heavy elements are currently studied using computational methods based on the Schr ╠łodinger equation (SE). Among the most popu- lar approaches is density functional theory (DFT), which was originally developed as a reformulation of the Schr ╠łodinger equation. For heavy elements, however, rel- ativistic effects are known to play an essential role in de- termining materials properties. While some extensions of SE-based DFT such as the scalar relativstic (SR) and SR with spin-orbit coupling (SR+SO) are frequently used, these methods do not include all relativistic ef- fects and introduce approximations that so far have not been adequately assessed. On the other hand, the rela- tivistic formulation of DFT based on the Dirac equation was developed nearly 40 years ago in the work of Ra- jagopal and Galloway , and also by MacDonald and Vosko. This relativistic formulation, which we refer to as RDFT, has not been used or implemented exten- sively in the context of solid state materials, though some codes have done so using various methodologies. [7ÔÇô15] On the other hand, the quantum chemistry community frequently uses methods based on the Dirac equation for the study of heavy elements. [16ÔÇô24] In order to advance our predictive capabilities for ma- terials containing heavy elements and assess the SR and SR+SO approximations in the context of solids, we need to move towards the RDFT formulation and solve the corresponding Dirac-Kohn-Sham equations in order to establish a baseline from which to assess the approxi- mations made with existing methods. However, to do ÔłŚ aematts@lanl.gov ÔÇá rehnd@lanl.gov this, we must also address the fact that a significant lan- guage barrier exists in moving between the Dirac and Schr ╠łodinger solutions. This language barrier originates from the way we refer to states in the Dirac and SE so- lutions to the hydrogen-like atom, i.e., an isolated ion (nucleus) with nuclear charge Z and one electron. The SE solutions give us a quantum number n describing the energy, and quantum numbers l and m giving the orbital angular momentum, as well as a spin index s =ÔćĹ, Ôćô. On the other hand, the Dirac equation applied to the same problem gives us a different set of quantum numbers, N, ╬║, j, and j3, defined below. While l also appears in the Dirac equation, it depends on the value of ╬║ or j and is not a good quantum number. In addition, the spin in- dex in the Dirac solutions arises naturally in the Dirac four-vector notation, along with the two positron spin solutions. These fundamental differences in quantum numbers make it important to develop a language and methodology for translating between the SE and Dirac pictures. The primary focus of this article is to establish a new language for translating between the Dirac and SE solu- tions. We do this by focusing on the hydrogen-like atom, deriving analytic solutions to the problem with the Dirac equation, and then taking the non-relativistic limit in a particular way that allows the SE solutions to be un- derstood in the context of the four-vector solutions to the Dirac equation. In doing so, we define two concepts that establish a language for translating: densitals and Dirac spherical harmonics. We then use these concepts to analyze states in the SE and Dirac solutions. These concepts also allow us to translate from the traditional SE terminology (e.g., s, p, d, f states) to the more gen- eral Dirac terminology we define below. The benefit of this approach is that it enables a much more direct and informative comparison of the effects of relativity on any arXiv:2312.04448v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 7 Dec 2023 2 orbital we wish to consider. Furthermore, it allows us to visualize the effect of relativity on contraction of or- bitals or radial functions in a direct way, and also sheds light on why, in some cases, DFT+U methods may not be adequate to account for all types of orbital contrac- tion, which is known to be important in the study of lanthanides and actinides. A further benefit of developing this language and methodology is that it will enable us to discuss mag- netic properties of systems in a more natural way. The RDFT formulation tells us that the ground state energy of a system should depend not only on the static electron density n through the effective scalar potential veff, but also the current density JJJ, through the effective vector potential Aeff. This lends itself to a more general way to discuss magnetism in the context of solids than when using the SR and SR+SO methodologies, in which the spin and orbital contributions to the total current are decoupled and the orbital contribution is usually only included when adding the so-called orbital polarization (OP) term. [25ÔÇô28] These corrections introduce approxi- mations that are difficult to assess without a full solution to the Dirac-Kohn-Sham equations. We point out that most of the material presented in this article has been published and discussed before, in fact, much of it is textbook material. The key to this work is to put the pieces together in a way that can enhance our understanding and facilitate discussions. We do not pretend that our way is the only clarifying way the pieces can be put together, but it is a way that has worked well for us. We also expect the language to evolve as others adopt it. Fundamentally, the purpose of the present work is to provide a framework for discussing relativistic states in materials, one that at the same time provides a way to translate from the commonly-used SE concepts to the more general Dirac concepts. To do this, we proceed as follows: in Sec. II we define the Dirac equation in full four-vector notation. In Sec. III we solve the Dirac equation for the hydrogen-like atom and take the non- relativistic limit in a manner that is different from most textbook treatments. In Sec. IV we introduce the con- cept of densitals and show comparisons of SE and Dirac solutions using this concept. We follow with a discus- sion of how this compares to the SR approximation in Sec. V and conclude with ideas for future work that use this framework VI. II. THE DIRAC EQUATION The Dirac equation in 4 ├Ś 4 matrix form is ´┐Ż c╬▒╬▒╬▒ ┬Ě p + 1V (r) + ╬▓mc2´┐Ż ¤łi(r) = ╬Ái¤łi(r) , (1) where the canonical momentum is p = Ôłĺi─žÔłç, the wave function is a 4Ôłĺcomponent spinor ¤łi = ´úź ´úČ ´úş ¤ł1,i ¤ł2,i ¤ł3,i ¤ł4,i ´úÂ ´úĚ ´úŞ = ´┐Ż ¤łA,i ¤łB,i ´┐Ż , (2) where ¤łA,i (¤łB,i) are the two upper (lower) components, and the matrices are ╬▒k = ´┐Ż 0 ¤âk ¤âk 0 ´┐Ż , ╬▓ = ´┐Ż I 0 0 ÔłĺI ´┐Ż , I = ´┐Ż 1 0 0 1 ´┐Ż , 1 = ´┐Ż I 0 0 I ´┐Ż , (3) where ¤âk are the Pauli matrices. III. THE HYDROGEN-LIKE ATOM: DIRAC SOLUTION The electrons in a hydrogen-like atom with nuclear charge Z move in a Coulomb potential defined by V (r) = V (r) = ÔłĺZe2 c 4¤Çr , (4) where ec is the electron charge. The solution to the Dirac equation in the presence of a Coulomb potential is described in the text book Advanced Quantum Mechanics by Sakurai , and we follow most of the notation given therein. Following this, we define the electron charge, ec, as a negative quantity, ec = Ôłĺ|ec|. The key concept we use from Ref. is that we trans- form the radial differential equations to ordinary equa- tions using an ansatz containing a few parameters and expansion coefficients in the radial coordinate that are subsequently determined so that the differential equa- tion is fulfilled. A major difference, however, is that we do the derivation from the second order radial differential equation for only the upper components and derive the lower components from those solutions. This is because we wish to obtain a direct comparison with the second order radial Schr ╠łodinger equation. The energy eigenvalues for the Dirac equation with the potential as in Eqn. 4 are eN╬║ = ╬ÁN╬║ mc2 = ´┐Ż (N + ´┐Ż ╬║2 Ôłĺ ╬│2)2 (N + ´┐Ż ╬║2 Ôłĺ ╬│2)2 + ╬│2 , (5) where N Ôëą 0 is an integer, ╬║ ╠Ş= 0 is an integer, and ╬│ = Ze2 c 4¤Ç─žc = Z╬▒ (6) with ╬▒ Ôëł 1/137 the fine-structure constant. The corre- sponding eigenfunctions are ¤ł╬║<0 Njj3 = ´úź ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úş gN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 + j3 j ) Y j3Ôłĺ 1 2 jÔłĺ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) gN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 Ôłĺ j3 j ) Y j3+ 1 2 jÔłĺ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ÔłĺifN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 Ôłĺ j3 j+1) Y j3Ôłĺ 1 2 j+ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ifN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 + j3 j+1) Y j3+ 1 2 j+ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ´úÂ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úŞ , (7) 3 when ╬║ < 0 and j = Ôłĺ╬║ Ôłĺ 1 2, and ¤ł╬║>0 Njj3 = ´úź ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úş ÔłĺgN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 Ôłĺ j3 j+1) Y j3Ôłĺ 1 2 j+ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) gN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 + j3 j+1) Y j3+ 1 2 j+ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ifN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 + j3 j ) Y j3Ôłĺ 1 2 jÔłĺ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ifN╬║(r) ´┐Ż 1 2(1 Ôłĺ j3 j ) Y j3+ 1 2 jÔłĺ 1 2 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ´úÂ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úŞ , (8) when ╬║ > 0 and j = ╬║ Ôłĺ 1 2. Here j3 is the projection of j so that Ôłĺj ÔëĄ j3 ÔëĄ j in integer steps, and Y m l (╬Ş, ¤ć) are (complex) Laplace spher- ical harmonics. The upper and lower radial functions are gN╬║(r) = ´┐Ż´┐Ż 1 Ôłĺ e2 N╬║ ╬│ Z abohr ´┐Ż3/2 N0 eÔłĺ¤üD¤ü pÔłĺ1 D ├Ś ├Ś N ´┐Ż m=0 bm¤üm D , (9) fN╬║(r) = ´┐Ż´┐Ż 1 Ôłĺ e2 N╬║ ╬│ Z abohr ´┐Ż3/2 N0 eÔłĺ¤üD¤ü pÔłĺ1 D ├Ś ├Ś N ´┐Ż m=0 am¤üm D , (10) where ¤üD is dimensionless, ¤üD = ´┐Ż 1 Ôłĺ e2 N╬║ ╬│ Z abohr r , (11) as is p2 = ╬║2 Ôłĺ ╬│2. The coefficients in the sums are obtained by the recursion relations b1 = ´┐Ż´┐Ż 1+eN╬║ 1ÔłĺeN╬║ 1 ╬│ (p + ╬║) Ôłĺ (2N Ôłĺ 1) ´┐Ż b0 (2p + 1) , (12) bq+2 = ´┐Ż´┐Ż 1+eN╬║ 1ÔłĺeN╬║ 1 ´┐Ż bq+1 Ôłĺ ´┐Ż 1+eN╬║ 1ÔłĺeN╬║ 1 ╬│ 2(N Ôłĺ q)bq (q + 2)(q + 2 + 2p) , (13) and ╬│a0 = (p + ╬║)b0 , (14) ´┐Ż 1 + eN╬║ 1 Ôłĺ eN╬║ (15) The normalization constant is given by N0 = 1 ´┐Ż´┐Ż2N t=0 ct ╬ô(1+2p+t) 21+2p+t (16) where ╬ô is the gamma function and ct = ´ú▒ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú▓ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú┤ ´ú│ t´┐Ż i=0 (atÔłĺiai + btÔłĺibi) 0 ÔëĄ t ÔëĄ N N ´┐Ż i=tÔłĺN (atÔłĺiai + btÔłĺibi) N ÔëĄ t ÔëĄ 2N . (17) A. The non-relativistic limit The Schr ╠łodinger equation is the non-relativistic limit of the Dirac equation, meaning |V | Ôë¬ mc2. For the potential in Eqn. 4 this limit becomes ´┐Ż 1 Ôłĺ e2 N╬║╬│ ¤üD Ôë¬ 1 , (18) taking into account Eqn. 11. In the Dirac equation the eigenenergies of a system includes the rest mass (mc2) but for a non-relativistic system the energy is instead relative to the dominant energy contribution of the rest mass. This means that eNR = eN╬║ Ôłĺ 1 and that 0 < ÔłĺeNR Ôë¬ 1. Note that this is consistent with the non-relativistic limit in Eqn. 18. Expanding the energy in Eqn. 5 in terms of ╬│ we arrive at eNR = Ôłĺ1 2 ╬│2 (N + |╬║|)2 Ôëí Ôłĺ1 2 (Z╬▒)2 n2 (19) and we can identify N +|╬║| with the non-relativistic prin- cipal quantum number n, n = 1, 2, 3, . . .. We will soon 4 also connect the other two Dirac quantum numbers j (or equivalently ╬║) and j3 to the non-relativistic quantum numbers l and m. It is straightforward to derive that ´┐Ż 1 Ôłĺ e2 N╬║ ╬│Ôćĺ0 ÔłĺÔćĺ ╬│ n . (20) This gives that the non-relativistic criteria in Eqn. 18 becomes ╬│2 n ¤ü Ôë¬ 1 , (21) with the dimensionless radial coordinate in Eqn. 11 be- coming ¤ü = Z n abohr r . (22) The recursion relations for the coefficients bNR m and aNR m , and the value of pNR are determined from carefully elim- inating terms that are ╬│2/¤ü smaller than other terms in the same equations that the corresponding Dirac quan- tities are determined from. The resulting equations are indeed the same equations we would get if we put the ansatz directly into the Schr ╠łodinger equation. The re- sults are pNR(pNR Ôłĺ 1) = ╬║(╬║ + 1) , (23) and bNR q+1 = Ôłĺ2(n Ôłĺ pNR Ôłĺ q) (q + 1)(2pNR + q)bNR q , (24) aNR q = 0 , (25) where we have used that N + pNR = n, determined from identification with the non-relativistic energy as above. Equation 23 gives two solutions pNR = ´ú▒ ´ú▓ ´ú│ Ôłĺ╬║ = j Ôłĺ 1 2 + 1 ╬║ < 0 ╬║ + 1 = j + 1 2 + 1 ╬║ > 0 (26) Identifying pNR Ôłĺ 1 = l, with l the non-relativistic angu- lar momentum quantum number, we arrive at gnl(r) = ´┐Ż Z n abohr ´┐Ż3/2 N0 eÔłĺ¤ü¤ü l nÔłĺlÔłĺ1 ´┐Ż m=0 bm¤üm , (27) which, with some good bookkeeping, can be reduced to the more recognizable form gnl(r) = ´┐Ż 2Z n abohr ´┐Ż3/2 ´┐Ż (n Ôłĺ l Ôłĺ 1)! 2n(n + l)! eÔłĺ¤ü(2¤ü) lL(2l+1) nÔłĺlÔłĺ1(2¤ü) , (28) where L(b) a is the generalized Laguerre polynomial. To connect the Dirac solutions even more to the non- relativistic limit, we replace m = j3 Ôłĺ 1/2 in both the negative and positive ╬║ wave functions and arrive at ¤ł╬║<0 nlm = ´úź ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úş gnl(r) ´┐Ż 2l+1 Y m l (╬Ş, ¤ć) gnl(r) ´┐Ż 2l+1 Y m+1 l (╬Ş, ¤ć) Ôłĺifnl(r) ´┐Ż (l+1)Ôłĺm Y m l+1(╬Ş, ¤ć) ifnl(r) ´┐Ż Y m+1 l+1 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ´úÂ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úŞ , (29) using that l = j Ôłĺ 1 2; Ôłĺ╬║ = l + 1; m = j3 Ôłĺ 1 2 for ╬║ < 0, and ¤ł╬║>0 nlm = ´úź ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úČ ´úş Ôłĺgnl(r) ´┐Ż lÔłĺm 2l+1 Y m l (╬Ş, ¤ć) gnl(r) ´┐Ż 2l+1 Y m+1 l (╬Ş, ¤ć) ifnl(r) ´┐Ż l+m 2(lÔłĺ1)+1 Y m lÔłĺ1(╬Ş, ¤ć) ifnl(r) ´┐Ż lÔłĺ(m+1) 2(lÔłĺ1)+1 Y m+1 lÔłĺ1 (╬Ş, ¤ć) ´úÂ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úĚ ´úŞ , (30) using that l = j + 1 2; ╬║ = l; m = j3 Ôłĺ 1 2 for ╬║ > 0. If we now set fnl(r) = 0, as we derived above for the SE, we can add and subtract the two wave functions with suitable coefficients to arrive at the fact that both the upper spin up, ¤ł1,i, and spin down, ¤ł2,i, components can be described by ¤łnlm = gnl(r)Y m l (╬Ş, ¤ć) . (31) The spin and angular momentum are indeed decoupled in the non-relativistic limit, and both spin and angular momentum are now good quantum numbers. IV. DENSITALS SE solutions are often plotted using only the angular part of the wavefunctions, not the radial part. Most of- ten this is done using the real, as opposed to complex (or Laplace), spherical harmonics, and these are typi- cally referred to as orbitals. However, the Dirac solution in Eqns. 7 and 8 cannot be illustrated in this manner due to the fact that we have a mixture of different an- gular momenta functions in each component, as well as different radial functions in the upper and lower compo- nents. Because of this, we will introduce the the concept of densitals for illustrating our solutions. While the wavefunctions or orbitals of a system are not observables, the electron density formed by these orbitals ¤üe = ´┐Ż i fi|¤łi|2 (32) with fi an occupancy factor. The density is also the pri- mary quantity in the different computational methods based on density functional theory , that are preva- lent in materials physics and many other fields. Densitals 5 are illustrative objects based on the partial change den- sities via plotting of the volume where their probability density is larger than a cutoff value, |¤łi|2 > ¤ücutoff . (33) In Fig. 1 we show the densitals for the 3 different SE p-states (n = 3, l = 1, m = Ôłĺ1, 0, 1) using the usual real spherical harmonics and the radial function in Eqn. 28. However, as mentioned above we cannot use the real spherical harmonics for the Dirac solution in Eqns. 7 and 8. We therefore define Dirac spherical harmonics as Yj3 j,high = ´┐Ż (l + 1) + m 2l + 1 Y m l ´┐Ż 1 0 ´┐Ż + ´┐Ż (l + 1) Ôłĺ (m + 1) 2l + 1 Y m+1 l ´┐Ż 0 1 ´┐Ż (34) Yj3 j,low = Ôłĺ ´┐Ż l Ôłĺ m 2l + 1Y m l ´┐Ż 1 0 ´┐Ż + ´┐Ż l + (m + 1) 2l + 1 Y m+1 l ´┐Ż 0 1 ´┐Ż (35) where j = l + 1 2 for high and j = l Ôłĺ 1 2 for low and j3 = m ┬▒ 1 2 so that Ôłĺj, Ôłĺj + 1, . . . ÔëĄ j3 ÔëĄ . . . , j Ôłĺ 1, j. From Eqns. 29 and 30 we have that the upper compo- nents are described by these Dirac spherical harmonics. The lower components come from the same formulas but the ╬║ < 0 solution uses the low formula with l replaced by l+1 and the ╬║ > 0 solution uses the high formula with l replaced by l Ôłĺ 1. This shift in l values for the lower components means that the upper and lower components will have the same values for j and j3. We see that the upper and lower components separately use a linear com- bination of Y m l with l fixed and different m. We also note that we already in the separate upper and lower compo- nents are mixing spin and the projection of the angular momentum. The angular momentum itself gets mixed when upper and lower components are taken into account together, as when forming the density or densitals. We should note that the Dirac spherical harmonics are eigen- functions of the spin-orbit coupling operator. In Fig. 2 we show the densitals for the 3 distinct Dirac solutions for n = 3, l = 1, that is, two Dirac high states, 3Dhp┬▒1/2 and 3Dhp┬▒3/2, with j = 3/2 and the single Dirac low state, 3Dlp┬▒1/2, with j = 1/2. The notation used here is n Dh(igh),l(ow)lj3, with n the non-relativistic principal quantum number, l the non-relativistic angular momen- tum, j3, which is often omitted, the projection of the relativistic total angular momentum j, with j = l + 1/2 for Dh and j = l Ôłĺ 1/2 for Dl. A comparison of Figs. 1 and 2 does not allow for an easy interpretation or translation between the Dirac and SE solutions. However, if we plot the densitals for the SE solution using the Dirac spherical harmonics, as in Eqns. 29 and 30 (with fnl(r) = 0) as in Fig. 3, we see a clear correspondence between the Dirac and the SE so- lutions. The correspondence between the SE and Dirac solutions when seen from the viewpoint of Dirac spherical harmonics is the main message of this work. We should be able to better understand lanthanide and actinide ma- terials from SE calculations using this alternative view- point. V. DISCUSSION A. The two Dirac solutions The two solutions can be written as a single solution if we allow the use of spherical harmonics Y m╬║ ╬║ with neg- ative ╬║. We have, however, chosen to use the definition Y m╬║ ╬║ = Y m╬║ Ôłĺ╬║Ôłĺ1 for negative ╬║, to more easily relate to standard SE language with l being a positive integer. We thus have two types of Dirac solutions, high and low or ╬║ < 0 and ╬║ > 0. We have chosen the names high and low for several reasons. We will discuss this when consid- ering the translations from l to ╬║, j. Since l and ╬║ have different relations in the high and low solutions, Dirac solutions with the same l can have different energies be- cause of the different values of ╬║2, see Eqn. 5, and they will have different radial functions, see Eqn. 13. In fact, low solution |╬║| = (j + 1/2) = l, and the high solution will have a higher energy than the low solution. Of course this is the spin-orbit splitting. The high solution will also have a higher value of j = l + 1/2 than the low solution, j = l Ôłĺ 1/2, for a fixed l. Note that in our notation the value of j is indicated by the labels high and low while an index is giving the value of j3. We find this notation eas- ier to use in discussions than the standard notation since it is more easily related to energy and how spin and an- gular momentum are related. In the non-relativistic limit the Dirac solution in Eqns. 29 and 30 (with fnl(r) = 0), corresponds to spin-up and spin-down solutions along the angular momentum z-axis, or as it is commonly phrased, angular momentum and spin are parallel or anti-parallel. When the spin and angular momentum couples, the total angular momentum j will be high (j = l + 1/2) for the parallel solution and low (j = lÔłĺ1/2) for the anti-parallel solution. The main confusion that can still arise is when com- paring states where l is not the same. Of course, this is because the fact that we are not used to translating between the relativistic ╬║, j and the non-relativistic l. For example, nDlp and nDhs will be degenerate in en- 6 one spin-down electron. We have 6 p-states. sponding to the 3p-densitals in Fig. 1. Dirac high densitals are in purple and the Dirac low densital is in yellow. represents the same solution as the 3p-densitals in Fig. 1. Dirac high densitals are in blue and the Dirac low densital is in orange. ergy in the Dirac solution since they have the same |╬║|. Indeed, evaluating |Yj3 l+1/2,low|2 and |Yj3 l+1/2,high|2 shows that they are the same function, as they should since 7 they have the same j and j3 values, and the densitals only differ by their different radial functions which are dependent also on the sign of ╬║. B. Main effect of relativity There are many more or less fundamental ways of un- derstanding that the main effect of relativity is to con- tract the electron density closer to the nuclei. In the planetary view of electrons and nuclei, we know that a planet that moves faster around its sun also needs to con- tract its orbit since the area swept per unit time needs to be constant. In the positron/electron picture we un- derstand that the mingling of positrons and electrons in the deeper parts of the potential close to the nucleus can allow for more electrons to occupy low energy states in this region. We will here show two more indications to support this fact. In Fig. 4 we compare pz and dz2 squared orbitals for the real spherical harmonics with the correspond- ing Dhp┬▒1/2/Dld┬▒1/2 and Dhd┬▒1/2/Dlf┬▒1/2 squared or- bitals for the Dirac spherical harmonics. We note that the Dirac orbitals are contracted towards the center while still having more probability density at the center. The Dirac orbitals are formed from superpositions of real orbitals so as to be better suited to accommodate a larger density around the nucleus. The orbitals for the Dhs┬▒1/2/Dlp┬▒1/2 are spheres and only the radial func- tions can contract these densitals. In Fig. 5 we compare the Dirac radial functions (for Z = 94) with the non-relativistic ones. As we have noted before, while the squared orbitals for Dh(l Ôłĺ 1)j3 and Dl(l)j3 are the same, their radial functions are not. We clearly see that the Dirac radial functions are shifted to- wards the origin compared to the non-relativistic ones. In addition we note that the lower-components Dirac ra- dial function, fN╬║, have larger weight when the upper component Dirac radial function differ the most from its non-relativistic counterpart. The large difference be- tween the 3p radial function and the 3Dlp radial function is particularly revealing. Finally we should note that the relativistic effects on the radial function is smaller for larger l. For larger l the relativistic effects are almost exclusively in the orbital part of the solution. In sum- mary, the contraction of the lower l densitals are due to the radial function while the contraction of higher l den- sitals are due to the orbitals. This means that if we use Dirac spherical harmonics also when evaluating the SE solutions, any relativistic effect should be included in the larger l states. The observations made in this section could explain the fact that the PBE functional in DFT often gives relatively accurate structural predictions, i.e., atom po- sitions and lattice constants, for actinide materials when studied using SE-based DFT despite these studiesÔÇÖ non- relativistic nature. If the true electron density in a relativistic material is more concentrated around the The real spherical harmonics (green) |Y10|2 (left) and |Y20|2 (right) compared to the |Y┬▒1/2 3/2,high|2/|Y┬▒1/2 3/2,low|2 (left) and |Y┬▒1/2 5/2,high|2/|Y┬▒1/2 5/2,low|2 (right) Dirac spherical harmon- ics (purple). Note that while the Dirac spherical harmonics squared with the same j and j3 are the same, their radial functions are dependent on high (l = j Ôłĺ 1/2 = Ôłĺ╬║ Ôłĺ 1) and low (l = j + 1/2 = ╬║), so their Dirac densitals will not be the same. nuclei compared to the density in a non-relativistic cal- culation for that material, it means that the true inter- stitial density in a relativistic material is lower compared to the interstitial density in the non-relativistic calcu- lation for that material since the total number of elec- trons must remain the same. The density overlap be- tween atoms is thus smaller in the relativistic material compared to the non-relativistic calculation of that ma- terial. This means that bonds are weaker in a relativistic material than what a non-relativistic calculation (with a good functional) would give. Note that in the limit of no interstitial density we would have no bonds or only very weak van der WaalsÔÇÖ bonds. It follows that the lattice constant can be expected to be larger in the relativistic material than what a non-relativistic calculation (with a good functional) would give. For non-relativistic ma- terials, well treated by the SE, PBE has a tendency to underbind and give too large unit cell volumes. As de- scribed above, this is exactly the same tendency as the lower density in the interstitial region of a relativistic ma- terial would have. However, this means that, even though PBE in the SE treatment predicts accurate atomic posi- tions and lattice constants, the density in the interstitial region is too high. This is commonly described as a func- tional deficiency and not an effect of neglected relativistic effects. The common view is that the density becomes too delocalized because we have based the functionals on the fully delocalized uniform electron gas. The remedy 8 (g3Dh s)2 (f3Dh s)2 g30 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 ╬║=-1, j=1/2 (g3Dl p)2 (f3Dl p)2 g31 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 ╬║=1, j=1/2 (g3Dh p)2 (f3Dh p)2 g31 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 ╬║=-2, j=3/2 (g3Dl d)2 (f3Dl d)2 g32 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 ╬║=2, j=3/2 (g3Dh d)2 (f3Dh d)2 g32 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 ╬║=-3, j=5/2 The five Dirac radial functions in shell 3 compared to the three SE radial functions. Note that the angular part is determined by the value of j, so even if we use the SE radial functions instead of the Dirac radial functions, we will have 5 different groups of densitals in the third shell. Note also that the energy degeneracy for the Dirac solution only depends on the absolute value of ╬║, |╬║|. While all third shell states are degenerate for the SE solution, each l state will be split into a high and low energy state in the Dirac solution. This is the spin-orbit splitting. is often to introduce some localizing effect, such as a +U treatment on the f- or d-orbitals. In view of the insights here, it might be that we should instead contract the s and p orbitals, which are the most contracted ones in the Dirac equation compared to the SE, and use a functional with correct binding properties on this contracted den- sity. The key insight from this scenario would be that the regions in space that are accounting for binding even in relativistic materials have non-relativistic character, and all effects are secondary and due to the contraction of the density towards the nuclei. As is usually the case, the truth is probably that we both have to create new functionals able to describe both localized and delocal- ized electrons on the same footing, and use the full Dirac equation in order to obtain accurate and indisputable re- sults for relativistic materials. C. Scalar relativistic method The scalar relativistic method by Koelling and Har- mon is widely used and often is successfully extended to include spin-orbit coupling by a variational proce- dure on top of a scalar relativistic basis. The method is based on neglecting part of the angular momentum eigen- value in the radial equations in order to obtain a radial equation only dependent on the non-relativistic quantum numbers n and l. This radial equation, however, cannot be put in the same form as we have used for the Dirac and the SE above. In fact, even though the SR solutions might form a basis, this basis has the wrong boundary conditions compared to the Dirac equation and thus even a variational approach for including the omitted SO term will not give the full Dirac solution. This is a well known 9 gN╬║ 2 Z=94 fN╬║ 2 Z=94 gN╬║ 2 Z=90 fN╬║ 2 Z=90 gN╬║ 2 Z=79 fN╬║ 2 Z=79 gN╬║ 2 Z=57 fN╬║ 2 Z=57 gN╬║ 2 Z=47 fN╬║ 2 Z=47 gN╬║ 2 Z=29 fN╬║ 2 Z=29 gN╬║ 2 Z=13 fN╬║ 2 Z=13 g31 2 1 2 3 4 5 r (n abohr Z ) 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 g (r)2 f (r)2 ( Z n abohr )3 3Dlp Illustration of how the Dirac radial function ap- proaches the non-relativistic radial function as the value of Z is lowered. Z = 94 corresponds to plutonium, Z = 90 to thorium, Z = 79 to gold, Z = 57 to lanthanum, Z = 47 to silver, Z = 29 to copper, and Z = 13 to aluminum. fact that effects the Dl p state the most. In Fig. 6 we show this radial function for a number of different Z values and how it successively deviates from the non-relativistic 3p radial function with growing Z. The behavior of the ra- dial function near the nucleus is determined by the lowest power, p Ôłĺ 1, of ¤ü in the radial solutions above. For the Dirac solution p Ôłĺ 1 = ´┐Ż ╬║2 Ôłĺ ╬│2 Ôłĺ 1 and we see that both ╬║ = ┬▒1 gives an almost zero value. However, for the non-relativistic solution we have pNR Ôłĺ1 = l which is zero only for s states. For the scalar relativistic solution the lowest power is ´┐Ż l(l + 1) + 1 Ôłĺ ╬│2 Ôłĺ 1 which, again, is zero only for s states. We should note that the Dirac spherical harmonics are eigenfunctions of the spin-orbit coupling operator. This means that the spin-orbit coupling itself is included in any solution written in terms of Dirac spherical harmon- ics. In the non-relativistic limit, the coupling vanishes be- cause the lower-component radial function becomes very small and we can rotate to a frame where spin and an- gular momentum are decoupled and each good quantum numbers. In the scalar relativistic method, however, part of the spin-orbit coupling effect on the radial function is explicitly omitted with catastrophic consequences for the Dlp state. VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK Just as the SE solution to the hydrogen-like atom is the basis for the s-, p-, d-, and f-electron language of non-relativistic electronic structure, we expect the Dirac solution of the same system presented here to form the basis for the language of relativistic electronic struc- ture. We have provided a simple system for translat- ing from the l, m, and s non-relativistic quantum num- bers to the j, j3, and ╬║ relativistic quantum numbers via the n D(irac)h(igh),l(ow)lj3 notation, with n the non- relativistic principal quantum number and with j = We have introduced Dirac spherical harmonics and den- sitals, which can be used for visualizing SE and Dirac solutions on the same footing. We have noted that the main effect of relativity in the case of a hydrogen-like atom is a contraction of the electron density towards the core and that this radial contraction is larger for lower angular momentum l, such as s and p states, while the larger angular momenta d and f orbitals is closer to the non-relativistic limit. We intend to investigate the power of the here- presented alternative viewpoint in several lines of work. For one, it is often elucidating to examine the density of states (DOS) of a system. The integrated DOS is closely related to the partial charges in Eqn. 32 that we based our definition of densitals on. To gain even more detailed information, an lm-decomposed DOS is often studied, in particular for actinide materials. Commonly the lm- decomposition is made by projecting on real spherical harmonics, but we want to explore what more informa- tion we can gain by instead projecting on Dirac spher- ical harmonics. Another line of work is to reexamine the scalar relativistic method from this alternative view point and see if we can modify it to resolve some of the most severe deficiencies. Basing all-electron methods and pseudo-potentials on the Dirac spherical harmonics is an- other obvious task. We expect this alternative viewpoint to help in developing existing and new computational methods to give better results for actinide materials. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported in part by Advanced Sim- ulation and Computing, Physics and Engineering Mod- els, at Los Alamos National Laboratory. Research pre- sented in this article was also supported by the Labo- ratory Directed Research and Development program of Los Alamos National Laboratory under project numbers 20230518ECR and 20210001DR. This work was also per- formed, in part, at the Center for Integrated Nanotech- nologies, an Office of Science User Facility operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science. Los Alamos National Laboratory, an affirmative action equal opportunity employer, is managed by Triad Na- tional Security, LLC for the U.S. Department of EnergyÔÇÖs NNSA, under contract 89233218CNA000001. P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Physical review 136, B864 (1964). W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Self-consistent equations in- 10 cluding exchange and correlation effects, Physical Review D. Koelling and B. Harmon, A technique for relativistic spin-polarised calculations, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 10, 3107 (1977). A. Rajagopal and J. Callaway, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Physical Review B 7, 1912 (1973). A. Rajagopal, Inhomogeneous relativistic electron gas, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 11, L943 A. H. MacDonald and S. Vosko, A relativistic density functional formalism, Journal of Physics C: Solid State Physics 12, 2977 (1979). D. A. Rehn, J. M. Wills, T. E. Battelle, and A. E. Matts- son, DiracÔÇÖs equation and its implications for density functional theory based calculations of materials contain- ing heavy elements, Phys. Rev. B 101, 085114 (2020). D. A. Rehn, T. Bj ╠łorkman, A. E. Mattsson, and J. M. Wills, Relativistic density functional theory in the full po- tential linear muffin tin orbital method 10.2172/1595363 D. Pashov, S. Acharya, W. R. Lambrecht, J. Jackson, K. D. Belashchenko, A. Chantis, F. Jamet, and M. van Schilfgaarde, Questaal: A package of electronic structure methods based on the linear muffin-tin orbital technique, Computer Physics Communications 249, 107065 (2020). The Munich SPR-KKR package, version 8.6, H. Ebert et al, https://www.ebert.cup.uni-muenchen.de/sprkkr. H. Ebert, D. Koedderitzsch, and J. Minar, Calculat- ing condensed matter properties using the KKR-GreenÔÇÖs function methodÔÇörecent developments and applications, Reports on Progress in Physics 74, 096501 (2011). H. Eschrig, M. Richter, and I. Opahle, Relativistic solid state calculations, in Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Vol. 14 (Elsevier, 2004) pp. 723ÔÇô776. M. Kadek, M. Repisky, and K. Ruud, All-electron fully relativistic Kohn-Sham theory for solids based on the Dirac-Coulomb Hamiltonian and Gaussian-type functions, Physical Review B 99, 205103 (2019). W. Liu, F. Wang, and L. Li, The Beijing density func- tional (BDF) program package: Methodologies and ap- plications, Journal of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry 2, 257 (2003). R. Zhao, V. W.-z. Yu, K. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhang, and V. Blum, Quasi-four-component method with numeric atom-centered orbitals for relativistic density functional simulations of molecules and solids, Phys. Rev. B 103, DIRAC, a relativistic ab initio electronic structure pro- gram, Release DIRAC18 (2018), written by T. Saue, L. Visscher, H. J. Aa. Jensen, and R. Bast, with con- tributions from V. Bakken, K. G. Dyall, S. Dubillard, U. Ekstr ╠łom, E. Eliav, T. Enevoldsen, E. Fa├čhauer, T. Fleig, O. Fossgaard, A. S. P. Gomes, E. D. Hedeg ╠Őard, T. Helgaker, J. Henriksson, M. Ilia╦çs, Ch. R. Jacob, S. Knecht, S. Komorovsk ╠üy, O. Kullie, J. K. L├Žr- dahl, C. V. Larsen, Y. S. Lee, H. S. Nataraj, M. K. Nayak, P. Norman, G. Olejniczak, J. Olsen, J. M. H. Olsen, Y. C. Park, J. K. Pedersen, M. Pernpoint- ner, R. di Remigio, K. Ruud, P. Sa´┐Żlek, B. Schimmelpfen- nig, A. Shee, J. Sikkema, A. J. Thorvaldsen, J. Thyssen, J. van Stralen, S. Villaume, O. Visser, T. Winther, and S. Yamamoto (available at https://doi.org/10.5281/ zenodo.2253986, see also http://www.diracprogram. org). S. Fritzsche, C. F. Fischer, and G. Gaigalas, RELCI: A program for relativistic configuration interaction cal- culations, Computer physics communications 148, 103 C. F. Fischer, G. Tachiev, G. Gaigalas, and M. R. Gode- froid, An MCHF atomic-structure package for large-scale calculations, Computer physics communications 176, 559 L. Visscher, O. Visser, P. J. Aerts, H. Merenga, and W. Nieuwpoort, Relativistic quantum chemistry: the MOLFDIR program package, Computer physics commu- nications 81, 120 (1994). L. Belpassi, F. Tarantelli, A. Sgamellotti, and H. M. Quiney, All-electron four-component Dirac-Kohn-Sham procedure for large molecules and clusters containing heavy elements, Physical Review B 77, 233403 (2008). L. Belpassi, L. Storchi, H. M. Quiney, and F. Tarantelli, Recent advances and perspectives in four-component Dirac-Kohn-Sham calculations, Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 13, 12368 (2011). T. Shiozaki, BAGEL: Brilliantly advanced general electronic-structure library, Wiley Interdisciplinary Re- views: Computational Molecular Science 8, e1331 (2018). H. Quiney and P. Belanzoni, Relativistic density func- tional theory using Gaussian basis sets, The Journal of Chemical Physics 117, 5550 (2002). A. Willetts, L. Gagliardi, A. G. Ioannou, C.-K. Skylaris, S. Spencer, N. C. Handy, and A. M. Simper, MAGIC: an integrated computational environment for the mod- elling of heavy-atom chemistry, International Reviews in Physical Chemistry 19, 327 (2000). O. Eriksson, B. Johansson, R. C. Albers, A. M. Boring, and M. S. S. Brooks, Orbital magnetism in Fe, Co, and Ni, Phys. Rev. B 42, 2707 (1990). O. Eriksson, M. S. S. Brooks, and B. Johansson, Orbital polarization in narrow-band systems: Application to vol- ume collapses in light lanthanides, Phys. Rev. B 41, 7311 P. S ╠łoderlind, Cancellation of spin and orbital magnetic moments in ╬┤-Pu: Theory, Journal of Alloys and Com- pounds 444-445, 93 (2007), proceedings of the Pluto- nium Futures - The Science 2006 Conference. P. S ╠łoderlind, Quantifying the importance of orbital over spin correlations in ╬┤ÔłĺPu within density-functional the- ory, Phys. Rev. B 77, 085101 (2008). J. J. Sakurai, Advanced quantum mechanics (Pearson Ed- ucation India, 1967). Name suggested by Vassiliki-Alexandra (Vanda) Gleza- kou at the Second International Workshop on Theory Frontiers in Actinide Science: Chemistry and Materials, February 26 - March 1, 2023, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA. Other names we have seen for Dirac spherical harmonics are ÔÇŁSpinor spherical harmonicsÔÇŁ and ÔÇŁPauli central field spinorsÔÇŁ. J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Physical Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996). P. S ╠łoderlind and A. Gonis, Assessing a solids-biased density-gradient functional for actinide metals, Phys. Rev. B 82, 033102 (2010). V. Kocevski, D. A. Rehn, M. W. Cooper, and D. A. An- dersson, First-principles investigation of uranium monon- 11 itride (UN): Effect of magnetic ordering, spin-orbit in- teractions and exchange correlation functional, Journal of Nuclear Materials 559, 153401 (2022).