Exposing the odd-parity superconductivity in CeRh2As2 with hydrostatic pressure K. Semeniuk,1, ∗ M. Pfeiffer,2, 1, ∗ J. F. Landaeta,2, 1 M. Nicklas,1 C. Geibel,1 M. Brando,1 S. Khim,1 and E. Hassinger2, 1, † 1Max Planck Institute for Chemical Physics of Solids, 01187 Dresden, Germany 2Institute for Solid State and Materials Physics, TU Dresden University of Technology, 01062 Dresden, Germany (Dated: September 25, 2024) Odd-parity superconductivity is a fundamentally interesting but rare state of matter with a potential for ap- plications in topological quantum computing. Crystals with staggered locally noncentrosymmetric structures have been proposed as platforms where a magnetic field can induce a transition between even- and odd-parity superconducting (SC) states. The strongly correlated superconductor CeRh2As2, with the critical temperature Tc ≈ 0.4 K, is likely the first example material showing such a phase transition, which occurs at the magnetic field μ0H∗ = 4 T applied along the crystallographic c axis. CeRh2As2 also undergoes a phase transition of an unknown origin at T0 = 0.5 K. By subjecting CeRh2As2 to hydrostatic pressure and mapping the resultant changes to the SC phase diagrams we investigated how the lattice compression and changes to the electronic correlations affect the stability and relative balance of the two SC states. The abnormally high in-plane upper critical field becomes even higher close to a quantum critical point of the T0 order. Remarkably, the SC phase- switching field H∗ is drastically reduced under pressure, dropping to 0.3 T at 2.7 GPa. This result signals an apparent strengthening of the local noncentrosymmetricity and forecasts a possible stabilization of the putative odd-parity state down to zero field, hitherto not considered by theoretical models. Introduction.—Broken inversion symmetry in crystals causes momentum-dependent spin polarization, as exempli- fied by the Rashba effect . In noncentrosymmetric super- conductors, coupling of the momentum and spin degrees of freedom prohibits labeling the Cooper-pair wave function as a purely spin-singlet or spin-triplet one — the state is a mix of both . However, two noncentrosymmetric lattices can be combined into a globally centrosymmetric superstructure, with the constituents related via the inversion symmetry. The superconducting (SC) state must then have a definite parity and a magnetic-field-induced switching from an even parity state to an odd-parity state is expected when the polarization of the spins due to the sizable spin-orbit coupling remains pre- served locally and stabilizes the odd-parity state . The two-phase superconductivity in CeRh2As2 may be the only known practical realization of this phenomenon . The material crystallizes in a non-symmorphic CaBe2Ge2-type structure (space group 129, P4/nmm) , and in accordance with the above-mentioned principle, its unit cell has two non- centrosymmetric Ce sites of opposite polarity, related to each other via inversion symmetry. CeRh2As2 is an unconventional superconductor with the critical temperature Tc ≈ 0.3–0.4 K, varying with sample qual- ity . Applying a magnetic field H|| parallel to the crystallographic c axis reveals two peculiar aspects: 1) At μ0H∗ = 4 T, a transition from a low-field SC state (SC1) to a high-field state (SC2) takes place; 2) The upper critical field H|| c2 reaches 15 T , which is unusually high for the given Tc. The SC2 state rapidly vanishes as the field is rotated, and for a field H⊥ perpendicular to the c axis, only the SC1 phase exists with the upper critical field H⊥ c2 of 2 T . Based on a reasonable agreement of these observations with the earlier ∗ These authors contributed equally. † correspondence should be addressed to konstantin.semeniuk@cpfs.mpg.de and elena.hassinger@tu-dresden.de predictions , SC1 and SC2 have been interpreted, respec- tively, as the states of the even and odd parity of the order parameter . The conjecture is further supported by recent theoretical works [8–10]. At a temperature T0 ≈ 0.5 K, CeRh2As2 enters a state "Phase I" of currently unknown microscopic origin . At a pressure P0 ≈ 0.5 GPa, Phase I vanishes in a quantum critical point (QCP), which gives rise to the quantum criti- cal fluctuations that apparently drive the SC pairing and lead to the extreme quasiparticle masses and non-Fermi-liquid be- havior in the system . Additionally, recent nuclear mag- netic and quadrupolar resonance studies detected local mag- netic fields below 0.25 K and proposed an antiferromagnetic (AFM) order [14–16], but it is currently unclear whether it is concomitant with T0 or Tc transitions, or exists independently from the other states . The alternating Rashba-type spin-orbit coupling due to the local inversion symmetry breaking and strong electronic cor- relations of a heavy-fermion system are thought to be the key ingredients for realizing the parity transition. The former fa- vors comparable magnitudes of the SC pairing potentials of the two phases. The latter allows the purely orbitally-limited SC2 state to survive at higher fields than the paramagnetically- limited SC1 state. The low orbital limiting field of isostruc- tural weakly-correlated LaRh2As2 can then explain why this compound hosts only one SC phase . We used hydrostatic pressure to investigate how tun- ing both the strength of correlations and the local non- centrosymmetricity affects the unusual superconductivity in CeRh2As2. While an independent study reported a dis- continuity in Tc(P) at 2.5 GPa, hinting at a pressure-induced transition to a different SC state, this result was not repro- duced in our previous work , and there are strong indica- tions that the anomaly was caused by a sudden loss of pressure hydrostaticity, rendering the results for P ≥ 2.5 GPa question- able. The study also suffered from a sizable uncertainty in critical temperatures and fields at high pressures, making it impossible to draw solid conclusions regarding the effect of arXiv:2312.09729v4 [cond-mat.supr-con] 24 Sep 2024 2 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 T (K) 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 P = 0 0.30 0.55 0.73 0.92 1.53 2.05 2.67 P (GPa) 0 1 2 3 P (GPa) 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Tc (K) Sample 1 Sample 2 Sample 3 Sample 4 Ref. CeRh2As2 H = 0 (a) (b) CeRh2As2. (a) Resistivity (ρ) of CeRh2As2 (Sample 2) against tem- perature (T) at different pressures. (b) Pressure (P) dependence of the transition temperature Tc for different samples, including data from an independent study . Tc is defined as the temperature at which dρ/dT peaks. Differences between the samples are explained in Supplemental Material. pressure on the relative balance between SC1 and SC2 (we analyze the results of Ref. in more detail in Supplemen- tal Material [SM]). In this letter, we demonstrate that the in-plane upper crit- ical field is enhanced and the shape of the H⊥ c2(T) curve be- comes anomalous close to P0, in agreement with the presence of the QCP . More importantly, our study reveals a pro- nounced and interesting effect of pressure on the multi-phase superconductivity: while both SC1 and SC2 occupy a smaller area in the H∥ −T space at high pressures, SC2 becomes more favored with respect to SC1 (contrary to Ref. ). This is accompanied by a dramatic reduction of the phase-switching field H∗, signifying a major enhancement of the staggered Rashba interaction. Results.—In Fig. 1(a) we show how pressure affects the SC transition seen in ρ(T) at zero magnetic field, and in Fig. 1(b) we plot resistive Tc(P) for multiple samples studied. Besides a ∼ 30 mK spread of Tc, all of the measured samples show con- sistent pressure dependence, which agrees with the one found in our previous study . At ambient pressure, the system is close to the peak of the SC dome in the T–P space, and Tc effectively stays at ∼ 0.4 K up to about 0.7 GPa. Subse- quently, Tc steadily decreases down to ∼ 0.2 K at 2.67 GPa, the highest achieved pressure. Compared, to the independent high-pressure study of CeRh2As2 , the overall rate of sup- pression of Tc is similar, yet the sharp dip near 2.5 GPa is def- initely absent for all our samples, indicating that the dip was almost certainly caused by the loss of hydrostaticity . The in-plane upper critical field curves, H⊥ c2(T), are shown in Fig. 2 for different pressures. A selection of ρ(T) and ρ(H) data behind the displayed phase diagrams is given in SM. For T ≪ Tc, H⊥ c2 initially increases with pressure and peaks between 0.55 and 0.73 GPa. At these pressures, in-plane magnetic field H ⊥ c. (a) Field-temperature (μ0H–T) phase diagrams (Sample 3). The solid lines are guides for the eye. The grey arrow indicates the change for increasing pressure. Inset: the zero-temperature upper critical field against pressure. the H⊥ c2(T) curve follows a rather atypical linear increase in the low-temperature region without signs of saturation down to 30 mK. At higher pressures, H⊥ c2 decreases in the entire temperature range, and the saturating form expected from a strongly Pauli-limited superconductor is recovered by 1.5 GPa. The upper critical field curves for the out-of-plane magnetic field, H|| c2(T), are depicted in Fig. 3(a). The superconductivity is monotonically suppressed by pressure at all temperatures. In the zero-temperature limit, H|| c2 is reduced from 18 T to 4 T across the full pressure range [Fig. 3(b)]. The reduction of low-temperature H|| c2 in the SC2 state mimics the decrease of the orbital limiting field H|| orb, estimated from the slope of the critical field curve near Tc, in the SC1 state, but there exists a ∼ 4 T offset between the two quantities. The SC1-SC2 transi- tion appears as a pronounced kink in H|| c2(T). The kink shifts down in both field and temperature with pressure, and can be tracked all the way to 2.67 GPa, where μ0H∗ = 0.3 T, indicat- ing that the two SC phases are still present [inset of Fig. 3(a)]. Discussion.—Whereas the anomalously high Pauli limit in CeRh2As2 has been mainly attributed to the enhancement caused by the Rashba interaction , electronic correlations may also play a crucial role . In particular, strong fluctua- tions in the vicinity of the Phase I QCP could explain the non- trivial pressure dependence of the SC1 upper critical field for H ⊥ c and the large Pauli limit. The Chandrasekhar-Clogston limit is violated in a number of other strongly-correlated su- perconductors, which do not exhibit a pronounced inversion symmetry breaking at the relevant sites [21–24]. In these cases, the large Pauli limit has been attributed to a strong coupling of electrons to the pairing-mediating fluctuations, in analogy to strongly-coupled phonon-mediated superconduc- 3 .19 out-of-plane magnetic field H ∥ c. (a) Field-temperature (μ0H–T) phase diagrams (Samples 1 and 2). The solid lines are guides for the eye. The transition between the two superconducting phases SC1 and SC2 occurs at a magnetic field H∗ and is seen as a kink in the critical field curve (marked for P = 0). Inset: the SC1-SC2 transition at 2.67 GPa. The straight trend lines emphasize the slope change. The dashed line marks a hypothetical SC1-SC2 phase boundary. (b) Pressure dependence of the orbital-limiting upper critical field (H∥ orb), estimated from the slopes of H∥ c2(T) curves at Tc as well as the zero- temperature limit of the upper critical field H|| c2. Data from an inde- pendent study are included for comparison. (c) Pressure depen- dence of H∗. tors, where an enhancement of the Pauli limit was found to reflect the renormalization of the density of states at the Fermi level . The maximum of H⊥ c2 near P0 in CeRh2As2 re- sembles the case of other Ce-based heavy-fermion supercon- ductors, such as CeIrSi3 and CeCu2Si2 , where Hc2 peaks close to the critical pressure of the magnetic order. The atypical shape of H⊥ c2(T) can then be explained by a sizable increase of the coupling strength upon approaching the QCP with decreasing temperature. By multiplicatively scaling the H⊥ c2(T) data in Fig. 2 along the temperature and field axes, the critical field curves at dif- ferent pressures can be shown to follow the same form down to at least T/Tc ≈ 0.5. This also applies to the ambient- pressure critical field data from the previous heat capacity and magnetic AC susceptibility measurements . Note, that in the case of heat capacity and susceptibility, the field has to be scaled by a factor of 2, as opposed to 2.5 for the ambient-pressure resistivity, which reflects the difference in in CeRh2As2. (a) Scaled in-plane critical field curves (Tc– zero-field critical temperature; H⊥ c2,e – effective Pauli-limiting field, based on a theoretical even-parity curve , shown as the dashed line). Scaled critical field data from the earlier heat capacity (CP) and AC magnetic susceptibility (χAC) measurements are included. (b) Scaled out- of-plane critical field curves (T SC2 c – extrapolated zero-field critical temperature of the high-field SC2 phase; H|| c2,o – critical field at T = 0 according to a fit to the odd-parity model , shown as the solid line). (c) Pressure dependence of the relevant properties, normalized to their zero-pressure values, including the critical temperature T0 of Phase I at 4 T (H⊥ c2 – the actual in-plane upper critical field extrapolated to T = 0). (d) Pressure dependence of the ratio of the SC2 and SC1 critical temperatures at H = 0. Tc (addressed in SM). This universal behavior can be de- cently approximated by the theoretical even-parity curve from an earlier study [the dashed curve in Fig. 4(a)], with the 4 agreement even extending to the lowest achieved temperatures at 2.50 and 2.67 GPa. Using the T/Tc > 0.5 portion of the H⊥ c2(T) data to constrain the theoretical even-parity curve, we define the effective zero-temperature Pauli limit H⊥ c2,e, which serves as the scaling factor in Fig. 4(a) and does not account for the low-temperature deviation below 2 GPa. The decrease of this Pauli limiting field with pressure can mostly be corre- lated with the reduction of Tc [Fig. 4(c)]. Close to Tc, the theoretical curve visibly deviates from the data, implying that the initial slope of H⊥ c2(T) and hence the in-plane orbital limiting field estimated from it are signifi- cantly steeper than found in the earlier experiments , where the slope was possibly underestimated due to a low density of points. Based on the current data, we place the lower limit of |(dH⊥ c2/dT)Tc| at 113 T/K at P = 0. A steep initial slope is indeed expected for superconductivity arising from electronic states with extreme effective mass anisotropy or belonging to quasi-two-dimensional elements of the Fermi surface . The quasi-two-dimensional Fermi sheets could also explain why the model based on loosely coupled superconducting layers may work for bulk CeRh2As2. Aside from the influence of the quantum critical fluctu- ations, the atypical shape of H⊥ c2 at low temperature could also be caused by a presence of a finite-momentum pair- ing state . A particular variant of it, called a com- plex stripe phase, has been predicted for systems with lo- cally broken inversion symmetry . The superconductiv- ity in CeRh2As2 is strongly Pauli limited for H ⊥ c and the band structure is likely anisotropic — these features are necessary for enabling a finite-momentum pair- ing . However, such states are easily destroyed by impu- rities . We estimate comparable mean free paths l and co- herence lengths ξ for the probed batch of CeRh2As2 samples (see SM). For the in-plane values we find lab ≈ 2ξab, meaning that the clean limit is possibly applicable for H ∥ c. Further studies using bulk probes and newer generations of crystals are needed for investigating the anomalous shape of H⊥ c2 and the possible existence of the complex stripe phase. As for the effect of pressure on the multi-phase supercon- ductivity, both SC1 and SC2 persist well beyond the Phase I critical pressure of P0 ∼ 0.5 GPa . Besides reinforcing the fact that the SC1-SC2 line is not a transition between a mixed SC+I and a pure SC state , this finding also bears conse- quences for the spin-flop interpretation of the H∗ signature, suggested in previous works . Namely, if the SC1- SC2 transition involves magnetic ordering, then the latter is entirely separate from Phase I, and is at least as robust under pressure as H∗. Hence, while the T0 quantum critical transi- tion is a likely source of pairing-mediating interactions, the phenomenology of the SC1-SC2 transition can be regarded independently of Phase I. The H|| c2(T) curve of the SC2 state retains the orbitally lim- ited character at all pressures. As shown in Fig. 4(b), by mul- tiplicatively scaling the data for different pressures along the temperature and field axes, the phase boundaries between the SC2 and normal states can be superimposed onto a single the- oretical curve for an odd-parity state . Such a universality indicates that changes to the effective quasiparticle mass and Tc are sufficient for explaining the pressure dependence of the SC2 critical field curve. Pressure dependence of the c-axis or- bital limiting field indicates that the Fermi velocity increases above 1.5 GPa (see SM), which possibly reflects the weaken- ing of correlations at high pressure observed in the normal- state resistivity . By extrapolating the SC2 critical field curve to H = 0, we define a fictive critical temperature T SC2 c and denote the usual Tc as T SC1 c . The ratio T SC2 c /T SC1 c increases with pressure and steeply approaches unity for P > 2 GPa [Fig. 4(d)], in agree- ment with H∗ decreasing towards zero [Fig. 3(c)]. Theories describing locally non-centrosymmetric super- conductors quantify the extent of local inversion asymmetry with a parameter α/tc, where α is the strength of Rashba interaction and tc is the interlayer hopping parameter. Ac- cording to the parity-switching picture, the observed enhance- ment of T SC2 c relative to T SC1 c implies an increase of α/tc un- der pressure, whereas one would naively expect tc to become larger as the c-axis lattice parameter shrinks, and thus α/tc to decrease with pressure. The increase of α/tc could be linked to the prediction of the Fermi sheets relevant for the super- conductivity being centered at the edges of the Brillouin zone (BZ), where the non-symmorphic symmetry of the lattice en- forces tc = 0 . If these Fermi sheets shift closer to the BZ boundaries under pressure, the mean value of tc can in- deed decrease. Note that the increase of α/tc should lead to a further enhancement of the Pauli limiting field of SC1. For H ∥ c, the effect should be particularly strong, but the SC1 section of the phase diagram becomes too small to investigate that. For H ⊥ c, however, the Pauli limiting field is expected to increase only by a minor amount (discussed in SM) in line with our results. What is more striking, is the unexpectedly steep increase of T SC2 c /T SC1 c above 2 GPa. The trend predicts that above 3 GPa the SC2 phase will become the only stable SC phase, in agree- ment with the pressure dependence of H∗. According to the model, when the staggered Rashba interaction is present, the ratio of the magnitudes of the odd- and even-parity state or- der parameters is given by (α/tc)/ � (α/tc)2 +1, implying that T SC2 c is always smaller than T SC1 c . This inference, however, assumes the equal bare pairing potentials of the two states (be- fore the Rashba interaction is considered) . The strong changes of T SC2 c /T SC1 c (and H∗) at high pressure challenge this assumption and provide a new input for extended theo- ries. Conclusions.—Our study of the superconductivity in CeRh2As2 under pressure demonstrates a strong overall sen- sitivity of SC properties to the proximity to the quantum crit- ical point. However, the pronounced stabilization of the SC2 state over SC1 under pressure indicates that a different tun- ing parameter drives the balance between the two SC phases. The proposed relevance of the staggered Rashba interaction fits this picture and implies a major increase of the local non- centrosymmetry with pressure. These results demonstrate a good tunability of the system and motivate further experimen- tal and theoretical investigations into the microscopic pro- cesses involved in the superconductivity and other ordered states of CeRh2As2. 5