Optical Transmission Enhancement of Ionic Crystals via Superionic Fluoride Transfer: Growing VUV-Transparent Radioactive Crystals Kjeld Beeks,1 Tomas Sikorsky,1 Fabian Schaden,1 Martin Pressler,1 Felix Schneider,1 Bj ̈orn N. Koch,2 Thomas Pronebner,1 David Werban,1 Niyusha Hosseini,1 Georgy Kazakov,1 Jan Welch,3 Johannes H. Sterba,3 Florian Kraus,2 and Thorsten Schumm1 1Institute for Atomic and Subatomic Physics, TU Wien, Stadionallee 2, 1020, Vienna, Austria 2Anorganische Chemie, Fluorchemie, Fachbereich Chemie, Phillips-Universit ̈at Marburg, Hans-Meerwein-Str. 4, 35032 Marburg 3CLIP, TRIGA Center Atominstitut, TU Wien, Stadionallee 2, 1020, Vienna, Austria (Dated: March 4, 2024) The 8 eV first nuclear excited state in 229Th is a candidate for implementing a nuclear clock. Doping 229Th into ionic crystals such as CaF2 is expected to suppress non-radiative decay, enabling nuclear spectroscopy and the realization of a solid-state optical clock. Yet, the inherent radioactivity of 229Th prohibits the growth of high-quality single crystals with high 229Th concentration; radiolysis causes fluoride loss, increasing absorption at 8 eV. These radioactively doped crystals are thus a unique material for which a deeper analysis of the physical effects of radioactivity on growth, crystal structure and electronic properties is presented. Following the analysis, we overcome the increase in absorption at 8 eV by annealing 229Th doped CaF2 at 1250 ◦C in CF4. This technique allows to adjust the fluoride content without crystal melting, preserving its single-crystal structure. Superionic state annealing ensures rapid fluoride distribution, creating fully transparent and radiation-hard crystals. This approach enables control over the charge state of dopants which can be used in deep UV optics, laser crystals, scintillators, and nuclear clocks. Thorium-229 (229Th), possessing an 8 eV and approx- imately 600-second lifetime first nuclear excited state (isomer state), enables high-precision vacuum ultravio- let (VUV) laser spectroscopy [1–3]. The anomalously low energy of this excited state offers the potential for the construction of an optical clock based on a nuclear transition . The structure of the nuclear levels is governed by both Coulomb and nuclear forces . This allows probing of these forces via nuclear spectroscopy, paving the way for new fundamental research: For ex- ample the search for dark matter, or potential drifts in the fine-structure constant . 229Th is required to be in a 3+ or higher charge state to suppress the non-radiative decay . The possibility of trapping charged 229Th in a solid-state matrix offers an alternative to ion traps. In the solid, the nucleus is isolated due to the small interaction with its chemical environment . Ionic crystals such as CaF2 are an ex- cellent choice as host material for the 229Th based nuclear clock . The ionic character of these crystals naturally forces the 229Th into a 4+ charged state, substituting the calcium (Ca2+) cation , and their large band gaps make them transparent to wavelengths around 150 nm or 8 eV . Ionic crystals such as oxides and fluorides dis- play good scintillator properties and are resistant to VUV radiation, making them suitable to host the radioactive 229Th and observe its radiative decay . In this ex- periment, calcium fluoride (CaF2) was chosen as the host material due to its excellent scintillator properties , simple cubic structure , large 12 eV electronic and 10 eV optical bandgap , and an unchanged 10 eV op- tical bandgap after thorium doping. Both 232Th and 229Th were used to grow single crystalline Th:CaF2 using the vertical gradient freeze method . The process of growing CaF2 in a vacuum environment leads to a fluoride ion (F–) deficit due to thermal dissoci- ation of CaF2 and its reaction with the residual water in the system . This sequence leads to the formation of a non-stoichiometric or fluoride-deficient crystal. To counterbalance the loss in fluoride ions, the crystal tends to generate metallic Ca nanoparticles , which possess the capacity to absorb and scatter light , especially within the VUV and optical range. Non-stoichiometry in all ionic crystals leads to changes in the configura- tion: either change of charge state of cations or formation of metal colloids . Although this variation in con- figuration has been thoroughly examined in oxides like CeO2 , it has not been extensively studied for flu- orides and there is a lack of common terminology, under- standing and means of controlling the compositions [28– 32]. Due to the presence of a radioactive element dur- ing growth, radiolysis causes enhanced dissociation of CaF2 . The strong dissociation creates a very non- stoichiometric composition. The change in composition leads to a change of dopant configuration and absorption profile, as was first observed in the work of Cirillo et al. (1987) . Here, adding F2 to Eu2+:CaF2 changed the charge state of Eu and thus the absorption profile of the crystal. A lack of fluoride in the crystal is compensated for by reducing the calcium to neutral, and the dopant to a lower charge state. By adding fluoride the charge state of the dopant can be increased and the calcium oxidized. Radioactivity not only affects growth: (doped) CaF2 arXiv:2312.13713v2 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 29 Feb 2024 2 Superionic Th:CaF2 ° Fluoride deficient Th:CaF2 Stoichiometric Th:CaF2 Ca2+ Ca Th4+ Th? F- +F2 Anneal Cool deficient, imperfect crystal shows Ca metallic nanoparticles (orange region, right), Th doping with unknown surrounding and charge state (green region, bottom left), and Th stoichiometrically surrounded by fluoride ions (blue region, top left) . The associated absorption peaks are identified in the text and measured in Figure 3. Adding F atoms at superionic temperatures distributes the anions quickly through the crystal due to the increased mobility . After slowly cooling down, the crystal reaches a stoichiometric composition with the dopant in the ideal surrounding. The increase in blue absorption and decrease in all others is shown in Figure 4. subjected to radiation from radioactive decay after growth shows complex behavior centered around fluoride motion in the lattice . The 229Th:CaF2 crystals there- fore are a unique and complex system for which we give a concise description, following the literature [18, 24, 35– 37]. The presence of a radioactive element in the CaF2 ma- trix is a source of excitation of the lattice, which pro- duces defects and aggregates which lie at the core of un- derstanding the dynamic processes. Mainly the motion of fluorine determines the produced defects and their re- spective absorption and emission bands: fluoride moves through the crystal expending much less energy (0.6- 1.5 eV) than the calcium ions and the formation energy of an anion Frenkel pair (F– interstitial and vacancy) is 2.7 eV as compared to 6 eV to form a cation Frenkel pair. Therefore the main defects in CaF2 are related to fluo- ride: F, H and Vk centers. The F center is an electron trapped at the location of a fluoride vacancy, which is similar to an electron in a box. Therefore the F center has rich optical absorption and emission bands. Th H center is a fluoride interstitial, which shares a trapped hole with a lattice fluoride thereby creating an F– 2 dimer with high mobility. The Vk center is a trapped hole shared between two lattice fluorides, thereby also creating an F– 2 dimer. The energy deposited by 229Th and its daughters through α and β decay is in the range of 100 keV to 8.5 MeV per decay. Such a high energy excitation will produce core shell holes and highly excited electrons. These will decay through various mechanisms such as Auger electrons, x-ray emission and plasmons to electron hole pairs (12.2 eV formation energy), and self-trapped- excitons (STE, formation energy 11.18 eV, absorption bands at 282 and 482 nm, emission bands from 200 to 500 nm). The electron hole pair can annihilate under photon emission, non-radiatively create a separate F and H center in the lattice (imperfect damaged crystal) or decay to a STE. The STE initially constitutes of a self- trapped-hole (Vk center) and a captured electron, but quickly decays to an F and H pair. The F-H pair again either annihilates and emits a photon, or decays non- radiatively and leaves a separate F and H center in the crystal. The F center (absorption at 378 nm, emission at 585 nm) agglomerates into higher order M (2 F), R (3 F) and N (4 F) centers and continues to form Ca metal- lic colloids (fluoride vacancy agglomeration in CaF2 is metallic Ca) as it is energetically favorable. The agglom- eration shifts absorption and emission bands to lower en- ergies. Most importantly the Ca colloids absorb in two bands, from 550 to 960 nm and 160 to 200 nm depend- ing on their size . In thorium doped crystals these colloids absorb around 150 nm due to the change in refractive index. The H center (absorption at 310 nm) can further col- lapse either to an impurity trapped hole (identified at 295 nm for Th) or two H centers form an interstitial dimer (two interstitial F– that share a hole,F– 2). The dimer for- mation can also aggregate to form dislocation loops (as observed). Through hopping, the single (or higher order) F and H centers can again find one another and annihi- late (evaporate) under photon emission, thereby again producing a perfect crystal. If a stoichiometric amount of Ca and F2 is present, this can be done through an- nealing at 600 ◦C. If not, fluoride annealing needs to be applied. 3 Due to the constant internal irradiation of this crystal, the above processes are dynamic and the fluorides are in motion. Defects will accumulate until a steady state of growth and evaporation of Ca colloids and H center dimers is reached. The constant irradiation also provides a constant stream of Cherenkov photons (200 to 122 nm). Irradiated non-stoichiometric CaF2 damages faster, as a larger amount of F and H centers is already present to compensate for non-stoichiometry, which can quickly ag- gregate upon irradiation to larger more absorbing de- fects. The damage steady state is reached quicker and annealing does not completely repair radiation damage. To create more transparent and radiation resistant CaF2, fluorine needs to be added for a stoichiometric crystal. Therefore we study the impact of the Th:CaF2 crystal composition on its VUV transmission and the electronic structure of the dopant sites. Due to the 229Th radioac- tivity, radiolysis becomes the major cause of the fluorine (F2) loss during the growth phase. This substantial F2 loss modifies the electronic structure of the CaF2 crys- tal, resulting in a consequential change in its absorption profile . The large resulting VUV absorption would make such a 229Th:CaF2 unsuitable for a nuclear optical clock. We follow and developed a novel and safer exper- imental method that does not require toxic F2 gas to add fluoride ions to already grown, single-crystalline, Th doped CaF2 and still dramatically improve the transmis- sion profile. We use an induction heated carbon crucible to anneal Th:CaF2 at above its superionic temperature, but below its melting temperature, in a carbon tetrafluoride (CF4) atmosphere. The crystal is placed in the center of an induction coil in a carbon crucible, after which the sys- tem is evacuated to approximately 1 × 10−6 mbar. The chamber is then filled with 1.1 bar CF4. In the heating step, the carbon crucible is heated using the induction coil (1300 ◦C, heating rate 20 K/min) while the walls of the vacuum system are water-cooled, creating a steep temperature gradient. The temperature gradient causes the CF4 gas to be reactive only at the crystal surface and inert at the vacuum system walls, which significantly reduces safety concerns while ensuring the efficiency of the process. After annealing for 1 hour while holding the temperature, the system is cooled down (cooling rate 1 K/min) and at room temperature the CF4 is replaced by N2. A schematic representation of the process is shown in Figure 1. Above the superionic transition temperature of CaF2 (1250 ◦C ), but below the melting temperature, flu- oride anions exhibit high mobility while calcium cations remain immobile. The mobility of fluoride ions ensures their uniform distribution throughout the bulk crystal. To produce a heavily fluoride deficient crystal, we first performed superionic annealing in vacuum instead of a CF4 atmosphere on a 232Th:CaF2 crystal. Excessive flu- orine loss from the crystal during vacuum superionic an- nealing for 24 hours has turned an initially transparent crystal into a cloudy and opaque one (see Figure 2, left). Annealing in an argon atmosphere was also performed, producing a similar but less deficient crystal. The for- mation of calcium metal colloids can explain the opacity . In the following phase, which consists of CF4 an- nealing in two cycles of one hour each, the crystal regains its visible transparency (see Figure 2, middle and right). in two steps, each step lasting one hour. Ca colloids absorb and scatter heavily in the visible region . It is clearly seen that after the first cycle the opaqueness recedes to the center, while after the second fluorination step the crystal has fully regained optical transmission. Following the fluorination treatment, we observed a significant improvement in the VUV transparency of the 229Th:CaF2 crystals, as shown in Figure 3. Note that this crystal was fully opaque around 8 eV (150 nm) and hence unusable for nuclear laser spectroscopy directly af- ter growth. After several cycles, the absorption was lower as compared to the non-radioactive 232Th doped crystal, indicating CF4 could improve its absorption profile as well (as was done in ). When comparing this ab- sorption spectrum to pure CaF2, three absorption cen- ters can be seen to appear and disappear. The absorp- tion spectrum was recorded using a McPherson 204/302 VUV spectrometer, as described in the work of Beeks et al. . As verified by gamma spectroscopy, the anneal- ing process did not cause any quantifiable loss of radioac- tivity, indicating no noticeable reduction of the 229Th concentration. To quantitatively describe the VUV absorption profile over the time of fluorination, we identify three absorp- tion lines (assuming gaussian profile) in Figure 3. We at- tribute the 122 nm absorption to the Th4+ charge trans- fer state , the 130 nm absorption to Th ions in a different surrounding, and the broad 150 nm absorption to Ca metallic colloids . The 130 nm absorption is likely caused by a change in the surrounding of the Th ion: either the change of charge state of the Th atom to neutral/1+/2+/3+ due to the fluoride deficiency, reac- tion of the non-stoichiometric CaF2 with oxygen in the air thereby replacing the F atoms surrounding Th by O atoms or a change in charge compensation mechanism to for example a Ca vacancy . Investigations of the 130 nm absorption line are ongoing. In Figure 4 it can be seen that in low and high-doped crystals the 122 nm 4 120 130 140 150 160 170 Wavelength [nm] 1 2 3 4 5 Absorption [mm 1] (1) (3) (5) Th4+ Th? Ca0 1 hr CF4 3 hr CF4 5 hr CF4 VUV CaF2 232Th:CaF2 229Th:CaF2 crystal for different superionic fluoride annealing durations (numbers indicate annealing time). To compare, absorption of a 232Th:CaF2 crystal with similar doping con- centration without fluoride annealing is plotted and that of a VUV grade pure CaF2 sample. The three absorption line centers shown in Figure 1 are fitted with gaussian functions, while compensating for the undoped CaF2 absorption back- ground and drawn in the figure with the same colors and indicated defect. absorption increases with cycle number, indicating an in- crease in Th4+ with fully charge-compensated surround- ing. The other two absorption lines assigned to Ca col- loids and Th in a different surrounding both diminish. Effectively the electronic structure of the Th dopants is manipulated by adding fluoride ions to the deficient crys- tal. 0 1 2 3 4 5 CF4 annealing time [hrs] 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 Relative Absorption [mm 1] 10 eV low doped 9.5 eV low doped 8.5 eV low doped 10 eV high doped 9.5 eV high doped 8.5 eV high doped undoped CaF2 identified in Figure 1 and Figure 3 at 121.9 nm, 130.5 nm and 148.2 nm or approximately 10 eV, 9.5 eV and 8.5 eV is plotted as a function of superionic fluoride transfer time for two 229Th:CaF2 crystals (1×1018 and 6×1018 cm−3). Data points are connected with splines to lead the eye. After fluorination of the 229Th:CaF2, no change in color is observed in the crystal over the course of a year as opposed to the original fluoride deficient crystals . The VUV transmission decreased from 50% to 35% over the course of 1 year, as opposed to complete VUV opac- ity in 3 days for non-fluorinated crystals. The original transmission could be completely regained through su- perionic fluoride transfer. After a year, no other changes in the radioactive crystals are observed such as cracking, thus it is concluded the radiation hardness significantly increased after fluorination as predicted. Alternative methods of fluorination of low-doped 229Th:CaF2 crystals were also tested. Highly fluoride de- ficient crystals (opaque) were treated using 3 different methods. The first method was annealing in an F2 atmosphere. A Mg sample holder was passivated for two days at 600 ◦C (heating rate: 4 K h−1, cooling rate: 1 K min−1) in an F2 flow (20 % F2 in N2 atmosphere, 5 cm3 min−1). The 229Th:CaF2 crystal was placed in the sample holder and was fluorinated for five days at 600 ◦C (heating rate: 4 K h−1, cooling rate: 1 K min−1) in an F2 flow (20 % F2 in N2 atmosphere, 5 cm3 min−1). The second method was treatment using an NF3 plasma. In this method a Ni sample holder was passi- vated in a fluorine plasma at room temperature for one hour. The 229Th:CaF2 crystal was placed in the sample holder and was fluorinated in a fluorine plasma at room temperature for three hours. NF3 was used as feeding gas with a flow rate of 30 cm3 min−1. The third method was treatment in a F2 filled auto- clave. In this method a Ni sample holder was passivated for one day at 400 ◦C and approximately 400 bar (heat- ing rate: 100 K h−1, cooling rate: 4 K min−1, 20% F2 in Ar atmosphere). The 229Th:CaF2 crystal was placed in the Ni sample holder and was high-pressure fluorinated at 400 ◦C and approximately 400 bar for five days (heat- ing rate: 100 K h−1, cooling rate: 4 K min−1, 50% F2 in Ar atmosphere). The resulting crystals still displayed high absorption as can be seen in Figure 5. The 5 days of F2 anneal- ing at 600 ◦C displayed results similar to 1 hour of CF4 annealing at 1250 ◦C. Compared to alternative treatments, only superionic annealing under CF4 atmosphere demonstrated a signif- icant improvement in the VUV transmission (compare cluded that the superionic state of CaF2 allows for effi- cient and rapid homogeneous distribution of the acquired fluoride ions. This contrasts with other methods where the solid phase of the crystal prevents fluoride ion diffu- sion through the crystal. Many facts have been gathered on 229Th:CaF2: The observed absorption centers at 122, 130 and 150 nm, their change with fluoride content and the known fluorescence of 229Th:CaF2 at 184 nm (and at 168, 230, 238, 250 and 295 nm ). Aside from the 150 nm absorption which has been identified as Ca nanoparticles , we can speculate on the origin of the other absorption and 5 130 140 150 160 170 Wavelength [nm] 2 4 6 8 10 Absorption [mm 1] 600 °C F2 NF3 plasma F2 autoclave no treatment Absorption spectra of different segments of a 1 × 10−17 cm−3 doped 229Th:CaF2 crystal that was grown using 1 MBq of activity for different fluoride treatments. No reli- able data could be obtained below 130 nm due to the high absorption. fluorescence bands. We will compare thorium with chem- ical analogues such as cerium and hafnium. The cerium analogue we will use to compare spectro- scopic data in CaF2, as its 4+ and more common 3+ states have similar electronic configuration. Due to rela- tivistic effects, the differences between Ce and Th might be large. The hafnium analogue we will use for the charge state thorium assumes, as neutral hafnium has a similar valence electron configuration (5d26s2 vs. 6d27s2) and chemically behaves similar to thorium. Just as thorium, hafnium almost exclusively takes a 4+ charge state, as opposed to cerium. It is known that the rare earths in CaF2 reduce upon X- ray irradiation .Hf4+ doped in YPO4 can be reduced to Hf3+ by X-ray irradiation and it is known that the actinides reduce through self-irradiation in CaF2 . We thus speculate that thorium undergoes the same pro- cess from 4+ to 3+. As F centers and electrons in the conduction band are constantly produced, the Th4+ cations will attract them through the coulomb force more strongly compared to Ca2+ cations. Through the change of absorption intensities with fluoride annealing we as- sert that the change in charge state is not only through irradiation but also stoichiometry. It can be argued that these are the same processes: Locally, the creation of F centers through irradiation creates non-stoichiometry thereby changing the charge state of the dopant. Comparing Th3+ to Ce3+ doped in CaF2, we can find that Ce3+ has several 4f n to 4f n−15d excitations around 180 nm . The bare Th3+ ion has a strong 6d to 7p line at 170 nm . Fluorescence lines in the VUV are known to exist for 3+ heavy rare earth ions in CaF2 . We speculate that the fluoride deficient CaF2 contains some Th3+, that is optically active through absorption at 130 nm and emission at 168 and 180 nm. Through addition of fluoride these disappear and only the Th4+ absorption at 120 nm remains. This charge transfer state was predicted and would constitute creating an electron hole pair on the thorium dopant and a neigh- boring fluoride. We speculate that this pair decays to a defect stabilized Vk plus electron center , which emits at 295 nm . This report demonstrates the enhancement of optical transmission in ionic crystals through superionic fluoride transfer. This superionic state substantially decreases the treatment duration. Furthermore, our findings sug- gest the possibility of controlling the dopant surround- ing in CaF2 by the addition or removal of F–, although the removal process carries a potential risk of creating Ca metallic nanoparticles. We have developed a sim- ple and safe method of fluorine manipulation in fluoride ionic crystals. Utilizing this method, we are able to fabri- cate highly transparent, heavily doped 229Th:CaF2 crys- tals for a solid-state nuclear clock. The manipulation of the electronic structure brings the potential for ad- vancements in optics, scintillator and laser crystal de- velopment by optimizing light absorption and emission through dopant and cation surrounding control (e.g., Eu:CaF2).