Toolbox for nonreciprocal dispersive models in circuit QED Lautaro Labarca,1, вҲ— Othmane Benhayoune-Khadraoui,1, вҲ— Alexandre Blais,1, 2 and Adrian Parra-Rodriguez1, 3, вҖ  1Institut Quantique and D МҒepartement de Physique, Universit МҒe de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Qu МҒebec J1K 2R1, Canada 2Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, ON M5G 1M1, Canada 3Instituto de F МҒДұsica Fundamental IFF-CSIC, Calle Serrano 113b, 28006 Madrid, Spain We provide a systematic method for constructing effective dispersive Lindblad master equations to describe weakly anharmonic superconducting circuits coupled by a generic dissipationless nonreciprocal linear system, with effective coupling parameters and decay rates written in terms of the immittance parameters characteriz- ing the coupler. This article extends the foundational work of Solgun et al. for linear reciprocal couplers described by an impedance response. Notably, we expand the existing toolbox to incorporate nonreciprocal elements, account for direct stray coupling between immittance ports, circumvent potential singularities, and include collective dissipative effects that arise from interactions with external common environments. We il- lustrate the use of our results with a circuit of weakly anharmonic Josephson junctions coupled to a multiport nonreciprocal environment and a dissipative port. The results obtained here can be used for the design of com- plex superconducting quantum processors with nontrivial routing of quantum information, as well as analog quantum simulators of condensed matter systems. I. INTRODUCTION Superconducting circuits have become one of the most prolific platforms for the design and operation of small- scale quantum processors and quantum simulators, with ba- sic quantum algorithms and error-correction protocols al- ready being implemented [3вҖ“8]. Based on Josephson junc- tions (JJs) , nonlinear elements with negligible dissipa- tion at cryogenic temperatures, superconducting circuits show macroscopic quantum coherence and are useful platforms for the engineering of light-matter interaction giving rise to the field of circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) . In typical cQED setups, transmons are used as qubits due their simplicity and reduced sensitivity to charge noise, a fea- ture that is linked to their low anharmonicity . These qubits are integrated in circuits with lumped or distributed ele- ment couplers, readout resonators and control lines . With these various components operated in the dispersive regime, it is possible to obtain effective models where the qubits are dressed by their electromagnetic environment . To ad- dress the growing complexity of quantum processors, sys- tematic approaches have been developed to characterize the effective low-energy quantum Hamiltonian of the qubits, ac- counting for the multimode nature of the distributed circuit elements, while remaining agnostic on the specific circuit de- sign [1, 14вҖ“17]. These methods rely on the classical proper- ties of the linearized microwave structure in which the qubits are embedded. This includes knowledge of the immittance response of the microwave circuit, encompassing both admit- tance and impedance responses, or the com- putation of eigenmodes and their corresponding fields through three-dimensional electromagnetic simulations . The non- linearity arising from the qubits is subsequently introduced, with its effects being systematically computed at any desired level of precision, provided it remains weak. вҲ— These authors contributed equally. вҖ  adrian.parra.rodriguez@gmail.com Although general, these methods are not tailored to de- scribing nonreciprocal elements that are characterized by non- symmetric immittance response , and the need for in situ physical or synthetic magnetic fields to break time-reversal symmetry. Nonreciprocal components, such as circulators and isolators, are essential for routing signals in and out of quantum processors. They also find application in the simula- tion of photonic lattices with broken time-reversal symmetry , enabling the exploration of topological phases with superconducting circuits . In this article, we provide a systematic tool to engi- neer nonreciprocal Lindbladian in cQED platforms based on Schrieffer-Wolff (SW) transformations, i.e., in the dispersive regime, of general nondissipative linear couplers described by an immittance matrix. This work thus constitutes a gen- eralization of the analysis conducted by Solgun et al. to nonreciprocal circuit elements. Here, the qubitвҖҷs electromag- netic environment is described not only by their impedance response, but, when applicable, by an admittance response, re- moving singularities appearing in the characterization of some linear systems. Moreover, due to the mixed couplings between phase-space variables (i.e., flux-charge coupling), appearing in the description of nonreciprocal elements, a generalized symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation is used. In addi- tion to this transformation, another perturbation theory is em- ployed to eliminate the dissipative ports (i.e., the input-output lines used to address and measure the qubits) within the Born- Markov and partial secular approximations. This allows us to deduce not only the local decay rates, commonly known as Purcell rates, as discussed in Ref. , but also the correlated decay rates resulting from the interaction of the qubit modes with a common bath. The general method we use, which is based on the exact fraction expansion of immittance responses (a.k.a. black-box modeling [14вҖ“16, 18, 22]), is applicable to electromagnetic environments containing an infinite number of modes and does not suffer from divergence issues [23вҖ“26]. This article is structured as follows. In Sec. II, we present our main results, which includes an overview of the derivation of the qubitsвҖҷs Hamiltonian and decay rates, while deferring the technical details to the Appendices. This allows us to for- arXiv:2312.08354v4 [quant-ph] 19 Sep 2024 2 mulate the master equation for the qubits in its Lindblad form in terms of the circuitвҖҷs immittance parameters. It is worth em- phasizing that our results subsume and extend those derived in Ref. , and are capable of describing a broader range of circuits, including nonreciprocal elements, direct stray cou- plings both capacitive and inductive, and correlated decay. In Sec. III, we consider a simple case involving a nonrecipro- cal three-port scattering device, showing how our results can be used to achieve unidirectional signal transmission. Finally, in Sec. IV we give insight into potential applications that can benefit from our work, and we discuss possible directions for future works. II. EFFECTIVE LINDBLAD MASTER EQUATION In this section we present our main results and provide sketches for their derivations, with full details found in the appendices. Fig. 1 (a) schematically illustrates our concep- tual framework: qubits (green and blue) are interacting via an arbitrary linear and lossless electromagnetic environment that can contain nonreciprocal elements, and coupled to drive and dissipative ports (orange and brown). The electromag- netic environment is described by its multiports impedance Z(Пү) or admittance Y(Пү). Moreover, following Solgun et al. , вҖҳqubit portsвҖҷ are defined between the terminals of nonlin- ear dipole elements described by their flux degree of freedom (such as Josephson junctions), which we decompose into a linear part (represented schematically by the bare inductance МғLJi) and a purely nonlinear contribution Unl(ПҶi) (represented by the spider symbol). The вҖҳdrive portsвҖҷ are defined as the terminals at the ends of transmission lines carrying the sig- nals to the chip. We note that, with the port definitions we use here, the response matrices Z(Пү) and Y(Пү) do not include the linear part of the dipole potential, inline with the method of Refs. . This approach contrasts to that used in, e.g., Refs. . In general, any lossless causal immittance has a canonical lumped representation known as its Cauer circuit that synthe- sizes its response ; see Appendix A. Thus, in the circuit of Fig. 1 we substitute Z (or Y) by its Cauer circuit composed of capacitors, inductors, and gyrators coupled to the external ports by ideal transformers (see Fig. 5 in Appendix A). As shown in Appendix C, using the methods of canonical circuit quantization of Refs. , we construct the exact classical Lagrangian of the circuit. From this Lagrangian, we obtain the full classical system-bath Hamiltonian that we decompose in the standard way as H = HS + HI + HB + HD(t). (1) In this expression, HS is the Hamiltonian of the junctions and inner modes of the circuit (i.e. resonators and gyrators cou- pled to the qubit modes), HI is the interaction Hamiltonian of the coupling between qubit and inner modes with the dis- sipative ports, and HB is the bath Hamiltonian corresponding to the dissipative ports. Finally, HD(t) accounts for classical external voltage sources at the drive ports. elements divided into linear and nonlinear parts, and transmission lines modeled as classical voltage drive ports coupled by a general (nonreciprocal) linear system described by an immittance frequency- dependent matrix, i.e., Z(Пү) or Y(Пү). After dispersive elimination of the black-box inner modes an effective Lindblad master equation including effective couplings Jij = |Jij|eiОёijwith nontrivial phases Оёij, correlated decay rates Оіij, and drive amplitudes Оөid is obtained for the qubit modes. (b) Schematic illustration of the qubit modes (green) and electromagnetic environment modes (black). Having obtained a general classical representation of the circuit, we now assume the circuitвҖҷs inner modes to be disper- sively coupled to the qubit modes; see Fig. 1 (b). As usual, we first approximately diagonalize the linear sector of the cir- cuit, and then add the qubit nonlinearity. The presence of gy- rators, which are the minimal lumped element circuits needed to synthesize a nonreciprocal response, introduces nondynam- ical modes in the circuit description . Following Ref. , we eliminate these nondynamical modes with a symplectic transformation mixing the flux-charge variables of the inner modes, see Appendix C for details. Following this elimina- tion, we move to the dispersive frame by applying a second symplectic perturbation theory akin to the Schrieffer-Wolff transformation in quantum mechanics, see Appendix B for de- tails and a worked example. This transformation dresses the qubit and inner modes while preserving the symplectic struc- ture of the Hamiltonian. In contrast to the standard SW trans- formation approach used in, e.g., Ref. , the transformation used here preserves the symplectic structure of the Hamilto- nian even with flux-charge couplings present in the descrip- tion of gyrators. The next step is to add back the qubitвҖҷs nonlinearity. 3 This approach can be applied to different types of low- anharmonicity qubits operating within a single deep poten- tial well. For such qubits, the charge dispersion is further suppressed when coupled to a linear (non)reciprocal electro- magnetic environment . Here, we focus on the transmon by keeping the first nonlinear term of the Joseph- son junctionвҖҷs cosine potential. After quantizing the modes and applying a rotating-wave approximation, we obtain in this way an effective master equation for the qubit modes and their dispersive couplings to inner circuit modes taking the familiar Lindblad form МҮЛҶПҒ = вҲ’i[ ЛҶHq + ЛҶHПҮ + ЛҶHv(t), ЛҶПҒ] + LОі ЛҶПҒ. (2) In this expression, ЛҶHq is the qubit Hamiltonian ЛҶHq = пҝҪ i ПүiЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi + Оҙi 2 ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi(ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi вҲ’ 1) + пҝҪ iМё=j JijЛҶbiЛҶbвҖ  j, (3) where ЛҶbi is the annihilation operator for the dressed qubit mode i. The first two terms of ЛҶHq correspond to the free dressed qubit Hamiltonian, and the last term to qubit-qubit coupling mediated by the circuit. As in Solgun et al. , the parameters entering Eq. (3) can be expressed in terms of the impedance of the full circuit. Generalizing those results, here expressions for these parameters are also obtained in terms of the circuit admittance. Crucially, this allows us to avoid singularities appearing in the characterization of some linear circuits (see Appendix A for details). Moreover, our descrip- tion can account for the presence of nonreciprocal elements. To simplify the presentation, the expressions for the parame- ters entering ЛҶHq are provided below for the special case where there is no direct coupling (capacitive, inductive or nonrecip- rocal) between the qubit ports (see Appendix C for details of the derivation, including the case with direct coupling). First, to second-order in perturbation theory, the qubit fre- quencies in Eq. (3) are Пүi = Пүi вҲ’ Im{Yac ii(Пүi)} 2CJi , (4) Пүi = Пүi вҲ’ Im{Zac ii(Пүi)} 2LJi , (5) where the last term accounts for the Lamb shift introduced by the inner modes, with LJi = 1/CJiПү2 i the dressed junction inductance. For I = Y, Z the ac part of the response is defined as Iac = I вҲ’ Idc, while the dc part Idc is the sum of poles at zero and infinity, i.e., Ydc = iПүCY + LвҲ’1 Y /iПү + EвҲһ, where CY (LY ) is the capacitive (inductive) matrix extracted from the admittance, and EвҲһ = [Ydc вҲ’ (Ydc)T ]/2 = Ydc,NR is the nonreciprocal part of Ydc corresponding to direct nonrecip- rocal coupling between the ports. We emphasize that the dc part of the impedance contains only the capacitive response, Zdc = CвҲ’1 Z /iПү, as we consider ports shunted by capacitors, see Appendix A for details. In the expression for Пүi, the fre- quencies Пүi take the form Пүi = пҝҪПүJi пҝҪ 1 + О¶i пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ ECi/пҝҪПүJi (1 + О¶i)3/2 вҲ’ ECi/пҝҪПүJi пҝҪ , (6) where пҝҪПүJi = 1/(пҝҪLJiCJi)1/2 is the plasma frequency of junc- tion i, with пҝҪLJi = ПҶ2 0/EJi the bare junction inductance, and CJi its total shunt capacitance. The frequency Пүi has two types of correction over the bare qubit frequency. First, the presence of the charging energy (bare anharmonicity) ECi = e2/2CJi. Second, and in contrast with the simi- lar expression from Ref. , the presence of О¶i = пҝҪLJi/Lsi which accounts for a possible effective shunting inductance Lsi = [limsвҶ’0 sYii(s)]вҲ’1 . Importantly, a correction of this form can only be systematically obtained from the ad- mittance response. When working with the impedance repre- sentation, such an inductive correction could in principle be obtained from limsвҶ’вҲһ[Z(s)/s]. Nonetheless, as we show in Appendix A, for realistic circuits in which the ports are shunted by capacitances (e.g. transmons), limsвҶ’вҲһ Z(s) = 0 and the correction vanishes. In short, an inductive energy cor- rection cannot be systematically obtained from the impedance representation. However, in order to use the impedance repre- sentation with a shunting inductance, the latter must be taken out of the response and be directly added to the bare junction inductance as part of the dipole self-inductance. Moving on to the second term of Eq. (3), the qubit anhar- monicity takes the form Оҙi = вҲ’ECi(ПүJi/Пүi)2 . To second- order in perturbation theory, the qubit-qubit coupling Jij in the last term of Eq. (3) is Jij = i 4 пҝҪ ПүiПүj CJiCJj пҝҪYij(Пүi) Пүi + Yij(Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ , (7) Jij = i 4 пҝҪ ПүiПүj LJiLJj пҝҪZij(Пүi) Пүi + Zij(Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ , (8) In these expressions, the admittance and impedance account for both the reciprocal (symmetric) and nonreciprocal (anti- symmetric) response, Y = YR + YNR and Z = ZR + ZNR. Crucially, the Jij coupling has a nontrivial phase result- ing from the interplay of the reciprocal and nonreciprocal re- sponses. Indeed, writing Jij = |Jij|eiОёij, the phase is deter- mined by the expression tan Оёij = вҲ’ ПүjYNR ij (Пүi) + ПүiYNR ij (Пүj) Im пҝҪ ПүjYR ij(Пүi) + ПүjYR ij(Пүi) пҝҪ, (9) with an identical expression for the impedance response ob- tained by substituting Y(Пү) вҶ’ Z(Пү). In general, effective quantum models breaking time-reversal symmetry require a nontrivial phase in the hopping between sites . Here, we find that this nontrivial phase can be manipulated by adjusting the ratio between reciprocal and nonreciprocal microwave re- sponses between qubit ports at the qubit frequencies. We note that Eqs. (7) to (9) can lead to different interaction amplitudes |Jij| and hopping phases Оёij when obtained from the admit- tance or the impedance responses. This difference between the two approaches arises from our perturbative derivation, which leads to different final effective frames. Crucially, in the dispersive regime, where these expressions remain valid, any discrepancies between them are negligible. The second term of the Hamiltonian appearing in Eq. (2) describes the cross-kerr interactions between the qubit modes 4 and the inner circuit modes ЛҶHПҮ = пҝҪ i,Ој ПҮiОјЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbiЛҶaвҖ  ОјЛҶaОј, (10) where ЛҶaОј is the annihilation operator for the dressed inner circuit mode Ој. To second-order in perturbation theory and sixth-order in the nonlinear terms of the junctions potential, the cross-Kerr coefficients are (see Appendix E) ПҮiОј = 2Оҙi пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 2E(i) C Пүi пҝҪ пҝҪ ПүОј Пү2Ој вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 ((gqQ iОј )2 + (gqО  iОј )2), (11) ПҮiОј = 2Оҙi пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ 2E(i) C Пүi пҝҪ пҝҪ ПүОј Пү2Ој вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 ((gПҶО  iОј )2 + (gПҶQ iОј )2), (12) for the admittance and the impedance, respectively. In these equations, ПүОј is the frequency of mode Ој obtained from the ac poles of the response. The coefficients gqQ iОј (gПҶО  iОј ) and gqО  iОј (gПҶQ iОј ) are the bare charge-charge (flux-flux) and charge- flux (flux-charge) couplings between qubit mode i and cir- cuit mode Ој and are proportional to the residue of the admit- tance (impedance) at frequency ПүОј. Detailed expressions for these couplings can be found in Eqs. (E28) and (E29) of Ap- pendix E. Notably, the presence of nonreciprocity in the cir- cuit, captured by these charge-flux interactions, modifies the dispersive shifts. Hamiltonian ЛҶHv(t) describes coupling of the qubits to ex- ternal drive ports and it is given by ЛҶHv(t) = n пҝҪ i=1 nD пҝҪ d=1 Оөid(t)ЛҶbi + ОөвӢҶ id(t)ЛҶbвҖ  i, (13) where n and nD are respectively the number of qubit and drive ports. Focusing on the situation where there is no direct cou- pling between drive ports and assuming a single tone voltage drive Vd(t) = vd sin(Пүdt) at each drive port d, the drive am- plitudes take the form Оөid(t) = vd пҝҪпҝҪYdrive dd (Пүd) пҝҪпҝҪвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2ПүiCJiZ0 пҝҪпҝҪ Yac id(Пүi) + Ydc,NR id (Пүd) пҝҪ Г— sin(Пүdt вҲ’ ПҶ) вҲ’iYdc,R id (Пүd) cos(Пүdt вҲ’ ПҶ) пҝҪ , (14) when expressed using the admittance case, and Оөid(t) = вҲ’ vdi пҝҪпҝҪZdrive dd (Пүd) пҝҪпҝҪвҲ’1 пҝҪ 2ПүiLJi cos(Пүdt вҲ’ ПҶвҖІ) Г— пҝҪ Zac id(Пүi) + Пүd Пүi Zdc id(Пүd) пҝҪ . (15) expressed using the impedance. In these expressions, ПҶ = arctan[Z0 Im Ydc dd(Пүd)] and ПҶвҖІ = вҲ’ arctan[Z0/ Im Zdc dd(Пүd)] are the phase shift introduced by the external transmission line Z0 at drive port d. Moreover, the reciprocal and non- reciprocal components of the dc response take into account possible direct couplings between qubit and drive ports. Ad- ditionally, Ydrive and Zdrive denote, respectively, the external admittance and impedance filtered by the capacitances and inductances at drive ports. They are obtained by adding the lower nD Г—nD block of the dc immittance response Ydc D (Zdc D) to the characteristic value of the admittance (impedance) of the external transmission lines located at each drive ports, Ydrive(Пү) = ZвҲ’1 0 + Ydc D(Пү) and Zdrive(Пү) = Z0 + Zdc D(Пү). For the sake of simplicity and without loss of generality, we will consider all the external transmission lines to have the same characteristic impedance Z0, that is Z0 = Z01nD. More gen- eral expressions accounting for arbitrary voltage pulse shapes as well as direct capacitive and inductive couplings between drive ports can be found in Appendix C. The external ports also open decay channels for the qubit, something which we model as baths of harmonic oscilla- tors following the Caldeira-Leggett approach . Go- ing to the dispersive frame as above, we obtain an effec- tive qubits-baths interaction, which in addition to the usual flux-flux and charge-charge couplings include a nonreciprocal flux-charge interaction responsible for breaking time-reversal symmetry. Using the Born-Markov and partial secular ap- proximations, which allows us to account for possible qubits quasi-degeneracies (see Appendix F), we then trace out the baths to obtain the correlated decay rates of the qubits. As above, these rates are expressed in terms of the admittance and impedance responses yielding the expressions Оіij = 1 пҝҪCJiCJj nD пҝҪ d,dвҖІ=1 Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 ddвҖІ (Пүij) пҝҪ Yid(Пүi)YвӢҶ jdвҖІ(Пүj), (16) and Оіij = 1 пҝҪ LJiLJj nD пҝҪ d,dвҖІ=1 Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1 ddвҖІ (Пүij) пҝҪ Zid(Пүi)ZвӢҶ jdвҖІ(Пүj), (17) where Пүij = (Пүi + Пүj)/2 is the average frequency. Notably, the Purcell decay rates of qubit i due to its coupling to the drive ports can be determined from the diagonal elements of the matrix Оіij. In the absence of direct stray coupling between drive ports, these rates are given by ОіiОә = 1 CJi nD пҝҪ d=1 Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 dd (Пүi) пҝҪ |Yid(Пүi)|2, (18) ОіiОә = 1 LJi nD пҝҪ d=1 Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1 dd (Пүi) пҝҪ |Zid(Пүi)|2, (19) where |Iid(Пүi)|2 = пҝҪпҝҪIR id(Пүi) пҝҪпҝҪ2 + пҝҪпҝҪINR id (Пүi) пҝҪпҝҪ2 with I = Z, Y. Here, we have omitted the coherent contribution from the baths which in the dispersive and weak direct coupling regime only leads to a small renormalization of the qubitsвҖҷ Hamilto- nian ЛҶHq. Notably, as shown in Ref. , this coherent contri- bution is exactly cancelled in our regime of interest by second- order terms in the system-bath couplings that enters in the Caldeira-Leggett Hamiltonian (see Appendix F). 5 (a) 3-port nonreciprocal linear coupler connecting (i) 3 Josephson junctions, or (ii) 2 Josephson junctions and an ohmic dis- sipative element (a resistor). (b) A ПҖ-capacitive filter. (c) One-pole represention of a transmission line filter. Combining these expressions, we finally have the last term of LОі ЛҶПҒ of the master equation of Eq. (2) which takes the form LОі ЛҶПҒ = пҝҪ ij ОіijD(ЛҶbi,ЛҶbj)ЛҶПҒ. (20) In this expression, D(ЛҶbi,ЛҶbj)ЛҶПҒ = ЛҶbj ЛҶПҒЛҶbвҖ  i вҲ’ 1 2{ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbj, ЛҶПҒ} and the sum is on qubits i and j such that |Пүi вҲ’ Пүj| вүІ min(ОіiОә, ОіjОә). In summary, we have shown how the master equation of a nonreciprocal circuit in the dispersive regime is determined by the total linear response exhibited by the microwave struc- ture connecting the qubits and the drive ports. That is МҮЛҶПҒ = LЛҶПҒ where the Lindblad superoperator is a function of the circuitвҖҷs admittance or impedance. For completeness, the cases with direct capacitive, inductive, and nonreciprocal coupling be- tween the qubit ports can be found in Appendix C for both admittance and impedance responses. III. EXAMPLE OF APPLICATION We now illustrate how the results of the previous section can be used with a simple circuit example that consists on three Josephson junctions coupled via filters to a nonrecipro- cal scattering element, see Fig. 2(a). We take the scattering matrix of the nonreciprocal circuit element to be S(ПҶ) = 1 3 пЈ« пЈӯ r(ПҶ) r(ПҶ) t(ПҶ) вҲ’ c(ПҶ) r(ПҶ) пЈ¶ пЈё, (21) вҲҡ 3 sin(ПҶ). Geometrically, this scattering matrix is a rotation 0 1 2 1 Pj = | пҝҪ 0|ЛҶbj|ПҲ(t) пҝҪ |2 P1 P2 P3 (a) 0 1 3 2 3 1 t/T 0 1 2 1 Pj = | пҝҪ 0|ЛҶbj|ПҲ(t) пҝҪ |2 P1 P2 P3 (b) filter of Fig. 2 (b), and (b) with the resonator filter in Fig. 2 (c). The inner circulator phase is set to ПҶ = ПҖ/3. Solid (dashed) lines were obtained from the exact (effective) Hamiltonian of the circuits. The approximate period is T = 2ПҖ/ вҲҡ 3J(ПҶ). The circuit parameters for (a) are CJ = 100 nF, Cc = 0.1CJ, Cg = 1.5CJ, R = 50 О©, EJ/h = 11.37 GHz, which leads to EJ/EC вүғ 64, Оҙi вүғ вҲ’0.05Пү and Пүy(ПҖ/3) вүғ 2ПҖ Г— 11.5 GHz. On the other hand, the parameters for (b) are CJ = 100 nF, Cjr = 0.1CJ, Cg = 0.1CJ, Crs = CJ, 1/вҲҡLrCr = 2ПҖГ—7.0 GHz, пҝҪ Lr/Cr = 50 О©, R = 50 О©, EJ/h = 14.51 GHz, which leads to EJ/EC вүғ 82, Оҙi вүғ вҲ’0.04Пү. around the symmetric axis n = (1, 1, 1)T / вҲҡ 3 and, for ПҶ = 2ПҖ/3, it corresponds to an ideal circulator. Focusing first on the case where the filter is a simple ПҖ- capacitive filter, see Fig. 2 (b), we obtain the admittance and impedance response of the circuit in Appendix G 4. Equipped with these responses, we use Eq. (9) to directly obtain the hop- ping phase Оёij between qubit modes in the circuitвҖҷs effective quantum Hamiltonian. We find tan Оёij(ПҶ) = вҲ’ вҲҡ 3Пү/Пүy(ПҶ), (22) where Пү = МғПүJ + Оҙ (see Eq. (6)), with МғПүJ = 1/ пҝҪ LJ пҝҪCJ the junctionвҖҷs plasma frequency, Оҙ = вҲ’EC/(1 вҲ’ EC/ МғПүJ) the anharmonicity and EC the charging energy which we take to be equal for all three junctions. Moreover, Пүy(ПҶ) = sponse, with R the characteristic impedance of the nonre- ciprocal scattering element. As noted in Ref. , chiral dynamics with complete population transfer is obtained for Оёij(ПҶ) = ПҖ/6, which leads to the condition Пү = Пүy(ПҶ)/3, (23) valid for all values of ПҶ Мё= 0, ПҖ. Therefore, we conclude that for the circuit of Fig. 2 (a) with the filter of Fig. 2 (b), chiral dynamics can in principle be obtained with any value of ПҶ Мё= {0, ПҖ} , something which only requires a suitable adjustment of the qubits frequencies. 6 As an illustration of this chiral dynamics, starting with one excitation in the first qubit and all other modes in the vacuum, we plot in Fig. 3 (c) the evolution of the qubit population compare the evolution obtained from the exact Hamiltonian of the circuit obtained after the elimination of the nondynamical modes (full lines, see Appendix D), with the expectation val- ues obtained using the effective Hamiltonian of the qubit sec- tor constructed using the formulas from the preceding section (dashed lines). The agreement between the two approaches is excellent and shows the expected circulation dynamics. Other filters can be used instead of the capacitive filter of Fig. 2 (b). For example, consider the LC-resonator filter de- picted in Fig. 2 (c), which is equivalent to the one studied in Sec. II of Ref. . In this case, the interaction between the qubit modes is mediated by four bosonic modes instead of one. However, under dispersive coupling this additional cir- cuit complexity does not substantially increase the difficulty of the application of our formulas. As before, we fix the qubit frequencies such that Оёij = ПҖ/6, and plot in Fig. 3 (b) the re- sulting dynamics starting with one excitation in the first qubit and all others in the vacuum state of both exact and effective Hamiltonians. Once again, we find excellent agreement be- tween both approaches. Notably, and in contrast with the anal- ysis in Ref. , the inner modes do not need to be weakly coupled to achieve the desired chirality. Moreover, as in the previous example, we find that for any value of ПҶ Мё= 0, ПҖ, the effective phase between qubit modes can be adjusted to any desired value. Details of the simulation are provided in Ap- pendix G 5. As an additional example of application, we now consider the circuit of Fig. 2 where we replace the Josephson junction of port 3 by a resistor of impedance Z0, see panel (a, ii). Fol- lowing the above approach, the circuit parameters can be op- timized to obtain partial excitation transfer between the ports. Indeed, in the absence of a drive, ЛҶHv = 0, the master equa- tion Eq. (2) leads to the following equations of motion for the qubit operators ЛҶbi dЛҶb1 dt = вҲ’i пҝҪ Пү + ОҙЛҶbвҖ  1ЛҶb1 вҲ’ iОі11 2 пҝҪ ЛҶb1 вҲ’ пҝҪ iJ21 + Оі12 2 пҝҪ ЛҶb2, dЛҶb2 dt = вҲ’i пҝҪ Пү + ОҙЛҶbвҖ  2ЛҶb2 вҲ’ iОі22 2 пҝҪ ЛҶb2 вҲ’ пҝҪ iJ12 + Оі21 2 пҝҪ ЛҶb1. (24) By imposing iJ21 + Оі12/2 = 0, the qubit at port 1 can be isolated from qubit at port 2 . Using Eqs. (16) and (17), we have that this condition is equivalent to Y21(Пү) = Z0 1 + Пү2C 2 DZ2 0 Y13(Пү)YвӢҶ 23(Пү), (25) when expressed in terms of the admittance response, with an analogous expression for the impedance response. Isolation is possible only if 0 вүӨ Y21(Пү)/Y13(Пү)YвӢҶ 23(Пү) вүӨ 1/ПүCD, where CD = CD + CcCg/(Cc + Cg) and CD corresponds to the shunting capacitance of the dissipative port. For the circuit parameters. (a) One excitation in mode ЛҶb1 and mode ЛҶb2 in vacuum at t = 0. The population is transferred to mode ЛҶb2, and then lost to the resistive port. (b) Reversed situation with qubit 2 hav- ing the excitation at t = 0. Because of chirality, qubit 1 remains underpopulated (less than 1%) while qubit 2 decays. The dashed lines are obtained from the master equation Eq. (24) (dashed lines). Those results are compared to the exact dynamics obtained from classical Kirchhoff equations (solid lines). The circuit parameters are Cc = 0.01CJ, CD = Cg = 0.01Cc, ПҶ = ПҖ/3, Z0 = 3R, Пү = 10Пүy(ПҖ/3), Оҙ = вҲ’0.05Пү, TD = 20RCJ. ПҖ-capacitive filter, this leads to the following constraints Пү вү« Пүy(ПҶ) = tan ПҶ 2 R(Cc + Cg), вҲҡ 3 Пүy(ПҶ)Cc = Z0 1 + Пү2C 2 DZ2 0 . (26) The first condition results from the filterвҖҷs high-pass behav- ior, while the second represents an impedance matching con- dition for the dissipative port of impedance Z0, and admits a solution only when Cc/CD вүҘ 2 вҲҡ 3Пү/Пүy(ПҶ). This inequality is satisfied when Cc вү« CD, Cg. In that case, the matched load should be chosen such that Z0 вүғ вҲҡ 3R/ tan ПҶ/2. For ПҶ = 2ПҖ/3, we recover the usual impedance matching condi- tion Z0 = R of an ideal circulator. Importantly, isolation can also be obtained for ПҶ Мё= 2ПҖ/3 provided a suitable adjustment of the impedance matching condition is made. Fig. 4 shows the evolution of the initial 1-excitation state in (a) qubit 1 or (b) qubit 2 for ПҶ = ПҖ/3. Panel (a) shows the expected pop- ulation transfer from qubit 1 to qubit 2, while panel (b) illus- trates the chirality of the evolution with the excitation in qubit 2 not reaching qubit 1 but instead being lost to the environ- ment. These results are obtained from integration of the mas- ter equation Eq. (24) using expressions Eqs. (7) and (16) for Jij and Оіij, respectively (dashed lines). On the same figure, the full lines are obtained by solving numerically the corre- sponding classical Kirchhoff equations, yielding an excellent agreement. The three-port network that we have considered here repre- sents a small nontrivial example of the general results of the previous section. Naturally, extending the application of the above results to an N-port network is straightforward. The 7 underlying principles remain unchanged , facilitating the use of our formulas to more complex and larger multi-port systems. Our results explicitly show that a linear element with an arbitrary level of nonreciprocity, e.g., the scattering matrix of Eq. (21), is sufficient to reproduce all dynamics achievable with an ideal circulator, provided a suitable adjustments of the circuit parameters is made. In other words, the design of on- chip circulators could in principle be relaxed to engineer the studied class of nonreciprocal synthetic models. We provide further examples with simple circuits in Appendix G. IV. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK We have shown that knowledge of the classical immittance response together with qubit design parameters (e.g., Joseph- sonвҖҷs energies) is sufficient to fully characterize the disper- sive master equation for transmon qubits even in the pres- ence of nonreciprocal elements. While we have focused on transmon qubits, our results can be readily extended to any weakly anharmonic qubit operating in a single well poten- tial, e.g., building upon the results of Ref. . Naturally, it can also account for the presence of higher harmonics of the Josephson potential . Moreover, having obtained ex- pressions for both impedance and admittance responses offers two significant advantages. First, it enables the description of a wide range of circuits, effectively eliminating some sin- gularities that may arise during the characterization of linear systems (examples are provided in Appendix A). Second, this dual approach allows us to use our results for qubits that are dual to the transmons, i.e., for which the charge degree of free- dom is a good quantum number. Prominent examples of such qubits include phase-slip junctions [38вҖ“40]. Expanding beyond weakly anharmonic qubits, the formal- ism presented here could potentially be adapted to induc- tively shunted qubits, such as the fluxonium qubit, follow- ing Ref. . In that case, the normal modes of the electro- magnetic environment can be extracted from the poles of the impedance response, while the Josephson junction is treated separately outside the response, as we have done in this work. However, becCianiause a truncated Taylor expansion of the Josephson energy is no longer a good approximation to the potential, one should then consider the full cosine operator, whose matrix elements in the normal mode basis can be ob- tained from the zero-point fluctuations of the junction phase . Crucially, these zero-point fluctuations can be directly computed from the immittance response, akin to the approach detailed in Ref. . More generally, we expect that our work will facilitate the exploration of nonreciprocal models in circuit and cavity QED platforms [20, 21, 42вҖ“44]. It can, for example, be used to systematically explore novel designs for on-chip nonrecip- rocal elements, building upon the principles established in Refs. . Moreover, apart from the dispersive shifts, the parameters of the master equation are determined by the im- mittance response assessed at the frequencies of the qubits. Hence, only finite-element simulations around this range of frequencies are needed making this approach efficient with respect to energy-participation ratio-based methods . More broadly, our work bridges the gap between electrical engineering via immittance design and quantum simulation of nonreciprocal and topological models. This connection re- lies on the mapping between the phase of the tunneling rate and immittance parameters provided by Eq. (9), highlight- ing that different nonreciprocal immittance designs yield dis- tinct topological models . Finally, further work includes extending the treatment of nonlinearities to higher-order cor- rections, incorporating weakly nonlinear elements within the nonreciprocal response, and investigating tunable couplers in the spirit of Ref. . Furthermore, there will be a need for additional work to extend the systematic construction of ef- fective models using the immittance-based paradigm to be ap- plicable to the waveguide QED context, where the black-box structure would encompass a continuous spectrum. All the codes to reproduce the main results are available online . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank I. L. Egusquiza for early-stage helpful dis- cussions on the symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation. This work was undertaken thanks to funding from NSERC, FRQNT, Canada First Research Excellence Fund and the Min- ist`ere de lвҖҷ МҒEconomie et de lвҖҷInnovation du Qu МҒebec. This mate- rial is partially based upon work supported by the U.S. Depart- ment of Energy, Office of Science, National Quantum Infor- mation Science Research Centers, Quantum Systems Accel- erator (QSA). A. P.-R. is funded by the Juan de la Cierva fel- lowship FJC2021-047227-I. O.B.K is supported by the UM6P International PhD Program. Appendix A: Immittance response formulas, electromagnetic duality and singular cases In this appendix, we first provide a review of canonical immittance matrix decompositions for lossless circuits. We then discuss the electromagnetic duality between impedance and admittance responses, and analyze singular cases in both approaches. For more details on linear response synthesis, the reader is referred to Ref. . Linear systems can be generically characterized by a scattering matrix in Laplace space S(s) and, in most cases, by an impedance Z = R(1 вҲ’ S)вҲ’1 matrix, or both provided that the involved matrix in- verses exist. Here, R is a characteristic parameter in resis- tance units. These immittance responses can be decomposed into their multipole expansions Z(s) =A0 s + AвҲһs + BвҲһ + пҝҪ ОІ AОІs + BОІ Пү2 ОІ + s2 , Y(s) =D0 s + DвҲһs + EвҲһ + пҝҪ ОІ DОІs + EОІ Пү2 ОІ + s2 . (A1) 8 correspond respectively to the multiport Belevitch transformer that connects the capacitive, inductive, reciprocal, and nonreciprocal stages to the rest of the circuit . Additionally, EвҲһ represents the dc nonreciprocal response. The presence of a non-singular capacitive stage in the admittance picture, reflecting the shunting capacitances of the ports, implies that there is neither an inductive stage V nor dc nonreciprocal response in the impedance decomposition. (b): Electromagnetic duality between the impedance and admittance pictures, which is broken in the presence of Josephson junctions in the port terminals. However, full duality is recovered when connecting admittance вҖҳqubitвҖҷ ports to a phase-slip flux qubit described by its loop charge degree of freedom [38вҖ“40] in series with a linear inductor, which is the dual circuit of a capacitive shunted JJ, as well as a current source-admittance representation of the drive ports. 9 where AОұ and DОұ with Оұ вҲҲ {0, вҲһ, ОІ} are N Г— N real sym- metric matrices with N the number of ports. Similarly, BО¶ and EО¶ with О¶ вҲҲ {вҲһ, ОІ} are N Г— N real antisymmetric matrices. These matrices are defined from the residues of the impedance (admittance). Explicitly, we have A0 = Res[Z(0)], AОІ = 2 Re{Res[Z(ПүОІ)]}, BОІ = вҲ’2ПүОІ Im{Res[Z(ПүОІ)]}, AвҲһ = lim ПүвҶ’вҲһ вҲӮZ(Пү)/вҲӮПү = lim ПүвҶ’вҲһ Z(Пү) iПү , BвҲһ = lim ПүвҶ’вҲһ[Z(Пү) вҲ’ iПүAвҲһ], (A2) where the residue is given by Res[Z(Пү0)] = limsвҶ’iПү0(s вҲ’ iПү0)Z(s), and Z(Пү) вүЎ limsвҶ’iПү Z(s). The same expressions hold for DОұ and EО¶ exchanging Z with Y. The synthesis of these responses can be done using their canonical Cauer cir- cuit, see Fig. 5 (a). We now turn to important facts on how this synthesis is done. First, we note that the expansions in Eq. (A1) are in gen- eral valid for any lossless causal linear response . How- ever, we consider all of the ports to be capacitively shunted, a physically realistic assumption also taken in Ref. . Hence, from the definition of the impedance matrix Zij(s) = vi(s)/ij(s)|ik=0 = vc port i, ij(s) the current at port j, and vc i = ic i/sCi the volt- age of the capacitor shunting port i, it follows directly that limsвҶ’вҲһ Zij(s) = 0. As such, the impedance responses we will be considering have no poles at infinity and AвҲһ = BвҲһ = 0. Moreover, we define the reciprocal (nonreciprocal) poles with frequencies ПүrОі (ПүgОј) where 1 вүӨ Оі вүӨ m (1 вүӨ Ој вүӨ l), as those with zero (nonzero) imaginary part in their residue, see Eq. (A2). Doing so, the expansions of Z and Y read Z(s) = A0 s + m пҝҪ Оі=1 AОіs Пү2rОі + s2 + l пҝҪ Ој=1 AОјs + BОј Пү2gОј + s2 , Y(s) = D0 s + DвҲһs + EвҲһ + m пҝҪ Оі=1 DОіs Пү2rОі + s2 + l пҝҪ Ој=1 DОјs + EОј Пү2gОј + s2 . (A3) The Cauer decomposition of these responses rests on two key facts. First, with an appropriate choice of reactive elements, the circuit poles will be at the same frequencies as the re- sponse poles. Importantly, the minimal number of reactive elements necessary is directly given by the rank of the re- sponse residues. Second, the residue matrices AОұ and BО¶ (DОұ and EО¶) encode the topology of the circuit. This topology is realized in the circuit with the use of ideal transformer ma- trices (U, V, R, N in Fig. 5 (a)) and gyrators . An ideal transformer matrix TbГ—a is a constraint between its a primary and b secondary ports voltages (va, vb) and currents (ia, ib), such that va = TT vb and ib = вҲ’Tia. An ideal gyrator is a two-port nonreciprocal constraint relating its left and right port voltages (vl, vr) and currents (il, ir), such that пҝҪ vl vr пҝҪ = R пҝҪ 0 вҲ’1 1 0 пҝҪпҝҪ il ir пҝҪ , (A4) where R is the gyration resistance of the gyrator. In the non- degenerate case, the rank of each residue at frequencies ПүrОі and ПүgОј is one. We elucidate the process of obtaining explicit expressions for the transformer matrices, gyration ratios, and reactive element parameters in the subsequent paragraphs. We focus first on the impedance response synthesis, see Fig. 5 (a). The transformer matrix U is obtained from the or- thogonal decomposition of A0 = UT C вҲ’1U. The capacitances of the purely capacitive stage are given by the inverse of the eigenvalues of A0 (the entries of the diagonal matrix C). The transformer matrix R is given by RT = пҝҪr1, . . . , rm пҝҪ , where the transformer ratios rОі are (N Г—1) column vectors coupling the external ports with the inner mode resonators of frequency ПүrОі = 1/пҝҪCrОіLrОі. Such ratios are the electrical engineerвҖҷs equivalent to the energy-participation ratios and signs used in Ref. . These transformer ratios are obtained from the residue matrices AОі = rОіrT Оі /CrОі. As there is a degree of freedom in the choice of CrОі, following the standard conven- tion we set CrОі = 1 and LrОі = 1/Пү2 rОі. Therefore, the trans- former ratios are directly given by the normalized eigenvector with nonzero eigenvalue ( О»Оі, О»Оі) of AОі as rОі = пҝҪ О»ОіО»Оі, and hence have units of [C]вҲ’1/2. The transformer matrix N is given by NT = пҝҪ nL 1 , nR 1 , . . . , nL l , nR l пҝҪ , where the trans- former ratios nL,R Ој are (N Г— 1) column vectors coupling the external ports with the left and right branches of the gyrators, with gyration ratio RОј capacitively shunted at each branch with CgОј, synthetizing the nonreciprocal resonators of fre- quency ПүgОј = 1/RОјCgОј. These transformer ratios are ob- tained from both AОј = (nL Ој(nL Ој)T + nT Ој(nR Ој )T )/CgОј and BОј = RОјПү2 gОј(nR Ој (nL Ој)T вҲ’ nT Ој(nR Ој )T ). As before, following standard convention we set CgОј = 1 and RОј = 1/ПүgОј. One can show that in the nondegenerate case, the transformer ra- tios can be given by nL,R Ој = пҝҪ О»L,R Ој О»L,R Ој , where О»L,R Ој and О»L,R Ој are the normalized eigenvectors with nonzero eigenvalue of AОј. In summary, we have A0 = UT C вҲ’1U, AОі = rОіrT Оі , AОј = nL Ој(nL Ој)T + nR Ој (nR Ој )T , BОј = ПүgОј(nR Ој (nL Ој)T вҲ’ nL Ој(nR Ој )T ), RT = пҝҪr1, . . . , rm пҝҪ , NT = пҝҪ nL 1 , nR 1 , . . . , nL l , nR l пҝҪ . (A5) For the admittance [see right panel of Fig. 5 (a)], the syn- thesis procedure is very similar and we directly provide the 10 Generic two port circuit coupled through an admittance or impedance response plus direct inductive coupling. For such circuits unconstrained Hamiltonian dynamics can be systematically constructed from the admittance, but not the impedance, response. summary DвҲһ = VCVT , D0 = UL вҲ’1UT , DОі = rОіrT Оі , DОј = nL Ој(nL Ој)T + nR Ој (nR Ој )T , EОј = ПүgОј(nL Ој(nR Ој )T вҲ’ nR Ој (nL Ој)T ), EвҲһ = NвҲһYG вҲһNT вҲһ, R = пҝҪr1, . . . , rm пҝҪ , N = пҝҪ nL 1 , nR 1 , . . . , nL l , nR l пҝҪ . (A6) Here, we have used the convention LrОі = LgОј = 1, CrОі = 1/Пү2 rОі and RОј = ПүgОј. The capacitive stage is synthetized analogously as in the impedance case. The inductive stage is synthesized with the orthogonal transformer matrix U, and the inductors given by the inverse of the eigenvalues of D0 (i.e., the diagonal entries of L). Similarly, the transformer ratios are given by rОі = пҝҪ О»ОіО»Оі (nL,R Ој = пҝҪ О»L,R Ој О»L,R Ој ), where О»Оі (О»L,R Ој ) are the normalized eigenvectors with nonzero eigen- value of DОі (DОј), and have dimension [L]вҲ’1/2. The nonrecip- rocal stage EвҲһ can be formally synthetized with a transformer matrix NвҲһ and a set of ideal gyrators represented by the block matrix YG вҲһ. However, as we do not need this synthesis for any of our results, we do not give explicit expressions for it here. We stress that the transformer (gyration) ratios and reac- tive elements for a given admittance and impedance synthesis when one is the inverse of the other are different. We have chosen the same notation for both to make the duality appar- ent. However, in general the inverse of the impedance (ad- mittance) is not its dual. We now make this statement more precise. In the context of circuit theory, electromagnetic dual- ity refers to the invariance of the equations of motion for volt- ages (v) and currents (i) under the transformation v вҶ’ z0i and i вҶ’ v/z0, where z0 depends on the units chosen for volt- age and currents. In particular, two immittance responses Z(s) and Yd(s) are dual if the equations of motion for voltages (v) and currents (i) at the ports are invariant under the transfor- mation Z(s) вҶ’ Yd(s), v вҶ’ z0i and i вҶ’ v/z0. It follows that Yd(s) = Z(s)/z2 0, where the Cauer representation of Yd(s) is obtained from the Cauer representation of Z(s), by changing capacitors to inductors (and viceversa), transposing the trans- former matrices, and using the LC-oscillators (gyrators) ad- mittance instead of impedance representations. For Josephson junction-based circuits, the shunting capac- itances accompanying these JJs introduce an asymmetry in the poles between the impedance and admittance approaches, see Eq. (A3), breaking therefore electromagnetic duality be- tween the two approaches. This leads to the possibility of encountering distinct singular cases for the admittance and impedance representations when constructing their respective Lagrangian. We proceed to show that this is indeed the case. Let us focus first on the singular cases of circuits in which the external ports are shunted by dipoles described by their flux degree of freedom. In this context, the kinetic matrix of the Lagrangian derived from the Cauer representation of the impedance (admittance) will be singular if A0 (DвҲһ) is singular. Specifically, circuits featuring direct inductive cou- pling (as depicted in Fig. 6) between qubit ports render A0 singular. This can be proven using the current-voltage rela- tion between the inductor ports, which implies that for dc cur- rent the voltage drop across the inductor is zero and thus acts as a short circuit between the ports equalling their voltages. That is, limsвҶ’0 v1 = limsвҶ’0 v2 implies limsвҶ’0 Z1j(s) = for all j. In other words A0 = limsвҶ’0 sZ(s) has two linearly dependent rows and is singular. Notice that this statement is true even in the presence of a parallel (shunting) capacitor to the Lc. By the same token, if there is a shunting inductance on port i, then limsвҶ’0 vi = 0 implying that (A0)ij = 0 for all j and A0 is singular. However, this last case can be reme- died by extracting the shunting inductance out of the response and dressing the bare inductance of the dipole with it. In con- trast, within the admittance framework, DвҲһ will always be full rank due to the shunting capacitances at the ports, hence the derived Lagrangian is not singular and derivation of the corresponding Hamiltonian and subsequent quantization, can always be done. Finally, we note that thanks to electromagnetic duality, our results extend to weakly anharmonic qubits described by their (loop) charge degree of freedom such as phase-slip flux qubit [38вҖ“40, 50]. This is so because the dual circuit of an impedance shunted by Josephson junctions in parallel with capacitors, corresponds to its dual admittance with the ports shunted by phase-slips in series with inductors, see Fig. 5 (b). Therefore, the formulas found in this work for qubits de- scribed by their flux-degree of freedom can be easily adapted to the case where the qubits are described by their loop charge- degree of freedom. Singular cases for loop charge-based cir- cuits are dual to the ones presented above. Appendix B: Symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff transformation Here, we develop a form of symplectic perturbation theory in classical phase-space analogous to the standard quantum Schrieffer-Wolff perturbation theory . Consider a Hamil- 11 tonian H defined by the quadratic form H as H = 1 2XT HX, (B1) where X is the vector of generalized phase-space coordinates. Without loss of generality we divide it into two sectors A and B such that XT = (xT A, pT A, xT B, pT B), where position and momenta obey the standard Poisson bracket {xa, pb} = Оҙa,b. With this division, the quadratic form H in block form reads H = пҝҪ HA HAB HT AB HB пҝҪ . (B2) Consequently its symplectic form J is also in block form, i.e., J = пҝҪ JA 0 0 JB пҝҪ (B3) with JA = пҝҪ 0 1n вҲ’1n 0 пҝҪ , JB = пҝҪ 0 1m вҲ’1m 0 пҝҪ , (B4) where n (m) corresponds to the number of conjugate pair vari- ables in A (B). The equations of motion of the system read МҮX = JHX . We are seeking a symplectic transformation S that block diagonalizes H, (ST )вҲ’1HSвҲ’1 вүЎ пҝҪH = пҝҪпҝҪHA 0 0 пҝҪHB пҝҪ , (B5) with пҝҪX = SX the transformed coordinates, such that the Hamiltonian now reads H = 1 2XT HX = 1 2 пҝҪXT пҝҪH пҝҪX. (B6) This symplectic transformation must satisfy SJST = J and, for any symmetric matrix A, it must hold that S = exp(AJ) is a symplectic transformation . Thus, any symmetric matrix A is a generator of symplectic transformations, and we are interested in the generator A such that Eq. (B5) is satisfied. Because (ST )вҲ’1HSвҲ’1 = exp(JA)H exp(вҲ’AJ), we cannot use the well-known Baker-Cambpbell-Hausdorff expansion of exp(B)H exp(вҲ’B) to directly evaluate the transformation. In- stead, we use the general expansion exp{D}H exp{B} = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 1 n! n пҝҪ k=0 пҝҪn k пҝҪ DnвҲ’kHBk. (B7) Substituting with JA = D and вҲ’AJ = B we have пҝҪH = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 1 n! n пҝҪ k=0 пҝҪn k пҝҪ (вҲ’1)k(JA)nвҲ’kH(AJ)k. (B8) Furthermore, we define the transpose anticommutator of two matrices {D, B}T вүЎ DB + BT DT . With this notation, we can show that {D, . . . {D, пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪ n times B}T , . . . }T = n пҝҪ k=0 пҝҪn k пҝҪ (D)nвҲ’kB(DT )k вүЎ{D, B}(n) T , (B9) which can be easily proved by induction. As (JA)T = вҲ’AJ, it follows that пҝҪH = вҲһ пҝҪ n=0 1 n!{JA, H}(n) T . (B10) Now, we write the off-diagonal block of H coupling the two sectors as HAB вүЎ О»HAB with О» the customary pertur- bation parameter. Additionally, we express the block diagonal quadratic forms as HA = H(0) A + О»HвҖІ A where H(0) A and О»HвҖІ A correspond to its diagonal and nondiagonal entries within that sector, respectively. With similar expressions for sector B, we have H = пҝҪ H(0) A + О»HвҖІ A 0 0 HвҖІ B + О»H(1) B пҝҪ + О» пҝҪ 0 HAB HT AB 0 пҝҪ вүЎ H(0) + О»HвҖІ D + О»HND. (B11) As is customary, we also expand A as a power series in О»: A = вҲһ пҝҪ n=1 О»nA(n). (B12) Substituting Eqs. (B11) and (B12) into Eq. (B10) while also imposing condition Eq. (B5), we obtain the set of equations for generator A order by order: {JA(1), H(0)}T = вҲ’HND, (B13a) D}T , (B13b) and so on. These expressions are analogous to those ob- tained for the standard quantum Schrieffer-Wolff transforma- tion . Using these results, we find that the transformed quadratic form of the Hamiltonian up to third-order in О» reads пҝҪH =H(0) + О»HвҖІ D + О»2 2 {JA(1), HND}T + О»3 пҝҪ {JA(2), HND}T + 1 2{JA(1), HвҖІ T пҝҪ . (B14) Thus, up to second-order in О» only the first-order generator is HвҖІ D = 0 (HвҖІ D Мё= 0), and therefore taking into account only the first-order generator the expansion of пҝҪH will be accurate up to fourth (third) order in О». To solve Eq. (B13a) and find A(1) note that its diagonal (even) sector will be zero and only its nondiagonal (odd) block sector will be nonzero, and therefore we let пҝҪ 0 A(1) AB AB)T 0 пҝҪ , (B15a) A(1) AB = пҝҪ A(1) xaxb A(1) xapb A(1) paxb A(1) papb пҝҪ . (B15b) 12 We also write HAB = пҝҪ Kxaxb Kxapb Kpaxb Kpapb пҝҪ , (B16a) H(0) A = diag(wa x1, . . . , wa xn, wa p1, . . . , wa pn), (B16b) where we have chosen the dimension of all the entries to be of frequency for reasons that will become apparent below. Sub- ting the perturbation parameter О» = 1 we find after some al- gebraic manipulations that xaxb)Оұ,ОІ = ОҳвҲ’1 Оұ,ОІ(wa pОұKОұ,ОІ xapb вҲ’ wb pОІKОұ,ОІ paxb), (B17a) xapb)Оұ,ОІ = ОҳвҲ’1 Оұ,ОІ(вҲ’wa pОұKОұ,ОІ xaxb вҲ’ wb xОІKОұ,ОІ papb), (B17b) paxb)Оұ,ОІ = ОҳвҲ’1 Оұ,ОІ(wa xОұKОұ,ОІ papb + wb pОІKОұ,ОІ xaxb), (B17c) papb)Оұ,ОІ = ОҳвҲ’1 Оұ,ОІ(вҲ’wa xОұKОұ,ОІ paxb + wb xОІKОұ,ОІ xapb), (B17d) where ОҳОұ,ОІ вүЎ wa xОұwa pОұ вҲ’ wb xОІwb pОІ = w2 Оұ вҲ’ Пү2 ОІ with wОұ (ПүОІ) the oscillation frequency associated with the conjugate pair xОұ, pОұ (xОІ, pОІ) when only H(0) is considered. As usual, we call these frequencies the вҖҳbareвҖҷ frequencies of the problem. Here KОұ,ОІ xaxb is the Оұ, ОІ entry of Kxaxb. The above expressions for the first order generator of the transformations gives us the perturbative criteria k вҲҶab вүӘ 1, (B18) where k is the largest entry of matrix H вҲ’ H(0) and вҲҶab is the smallest frequency gap |wa Оұ вҲ’ wb ОІ| between the bare oscilla- tors in subsectors A, B. Continuing with the general deriva- tion, we substitute Eq. (B17) into Eq. (B11) and, after some algebra, we obtain the corrections up to O(k3/вҲҶ2 ab) of the quadratic forms of both subsectors A, B: (пҝҪHA xx)Оұ,ОұвҖІ = 1 2 m пҝҪ ОІ=1 пҝҪпҝҪ wpОІKОұ,ОІ xaxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ xaxb + wxОІKОұ,ОІ xapbKОұвҖІ,ОІ xapb пҝҪпҝҪ 1 ОҳОұ,ОІ + 1 ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ + wxОұ ОҳОұ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұ,ОІ papbKОұвҖІ,ОІ xaxb вҲ’ KОұ,ОІ paxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ xapb пҝҪ + wxОұвҖІ ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұвҖІ,ОІ papbKОұ,ОІ xaxb вҲ’ KОұвҖІ,ОІ paxbKОұ,ОІ xapb пҝҪпҝҪ , (B19a) (пҝҪHA xp)Оұ,ОұвҖІ = 1 2 m пҝҪ ОІ=1 пҝҪпҝҪ wpОІKОұ,ОІ xaxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ paxb + wxОІKОұ,ОІ xapbKОұвҖІ,ОІ papb пҝҪпҝҪ 1 ОҳОұ,ОІ + 1 ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ + wxОұ ОҳОұ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұ,ОІ papbKОұвҖІ,ОІ paxb вҲ’ KОұ,ОІ paxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ papb пҝҪ + wqОұвҖІ ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұвҖІ,ОІ xaxbKОұ,ОІ xapb вҲ’ KОұвҖІ,ОІ xapbKОұ,ОІ xaxb пҝҪпҝҪ , (B19b) ((пҝҪHA pp)Оұ,ОұвҖІ = 1 2 m пҝҪ ОІ=1 пҝҪпҝҪ wpОІKОұ,ОІ paxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ paxb + wxОІKОұ,ОІ papbKОұвҖІ,ОІ papb пҝҪпҝҪ 1 ОҳОұ,ОІ + 1 ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ + wpОұ ОҳОұ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұ,ОІ xaxbKОұвҖІ,ОІ papb вҲ’ KОұ,ОІ xapbKОұвҖІ,ОІ paxb пҝҪ + wpОұвҖІ ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ KОұвҖІ,ОІ xaxbKОұ,ОІ papb вҲ’ KОұвҖІ,ОІ xapbKОұ,ОІ paxb пҝҪпҝҪ . (B19c) To obtain the corrections to пҝҪHB, we simply exchange Оұ with ОІ, m with n and use KT in the above formulas. For пҝҪHA xp, the diagonal entry corrections Оұ = ОұвҖІ are equal to zero. Example of a symplectic SW transformation As a simple example, take three LC oscillators. Two of the oscillators are nonreciprocally coupled to the third oscil- lator via gyrators. Moreover, all three oscillators are capaci- tively coupled. Writing the Lagrangian using the flux variable on the inductances of the oscillators one readily obtains the 13 Hamiltonian H = пҝҪ i пҝҪ qA i 2 2Ci + ПҶA i 2 2Li пҝҪ + qB 1 2 2C3 + ПҶB 1 2 2L3 + qA 1 qA 2 Ck + пҝҪ i пҝҪqA i qB 1 Ck пҝҪ + qA 1 qA 2 Ck + пҝҪ i kg(ПҶA i qB 1 вҲ’ qA i ПҶB 1 ) (B20a) where i вҲҲ {1, 2}. The phase space variables respect the Poisson brackets {ПҶa i , qb j} = ОҙijОҙab, and thus we identify ПҶ вҶ’ x, q вҶ’ p. The forms of parameters Ci, Li, Ck, kg can be easily obtained following the standard approach . Organizing the phase-space coordinate vector as X = (ПҶA 1 , ПҶA 2 , qA 1 , qA 2 , ПҶB 1 , qB 1 )T , and rescaling them such that ПҶi вҶ’ ПҶi/вҲҡzi, qi вҶ’ qiвҲҡzi with zi = пҝҪ Li/Ci, the quadratic and symplectic forms read H = пҝҪ HA HAB HT AB HB пҝҪ , J = пҝҪ JA 0 0 JB пҝҪ , (B21a) with HA = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ ПүA 1 0 0 0 0 ПүA 2 0 0 0 0 ПүA 1 kq 0 0 kq ПүA 2 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё, HB = ПүB HAB = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 k1,1 ПҶaqb 0 k2,1 ПҶaqb вҲ’k1,1 qaПҶb k1,1 qaqb вҲ’k2,1 qaПҶb k2,1 qaqb пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , JA = пҝҪ 0 12 вҲ’12 0 пҝҪ , JB = пҝҪ 0 1 вҲ’1 0 пҝҪ . (B21b) Here, we have defined ПүA i = 1/вҲҡLiCi, ПүB 1 = 1вҲҡL3C3, kq = 1/вҲҡz1z2Ck, ki,1 qaqb = 1/вҲҡziz3Ck, ki,1 ПҶaqb = пҝҪ zi/z3kg, and ki,1 qaПҶb = пҝҪ z3/zikg. Using these expressions, we can now obtain the perturba- tive corrections from Eq. (B19) to find the effective quadratic form of sector A: (пҝҪHA ПҶПҶ)i,j = 1 2ПүB 1 ki,1 ПҶaqbkj,1 ПҶaqb пҝҪ 1 Оҳi,1 + 1 Оҳj,1 пҝҪ вҲ’ ПүA i 2Оҳi,1 ki,1 qaПҶbkj,1 ПҶaqb вҲ’ ПүA j 2Оҳj,1 kj,1 qaПҶbki,1 ПҶaqb, (B22a) (пҝҪHA ПҶq)i,j = 1 2ПүB 1 ki,1 ПҶaqbkj,1 qaqb пҝҪ 1 Оҳi,1 + 1 Оҳj,1 пҝҪ + ПүA i 2Оҳi,1 пҝҪ ki,1 qaqbkj,1 qaПҶb вҲ’ ki,1 qaПҶbkj,1 qaqb пҝҪ , (B22b) (пҝҪHA qq)i,j = ПүB 1 2 пҝҪ ki,1 qaПҶbkj,1 qaПҶb + ki,1 qaqbkj,1 qaqb пҝҪпҝҪ 1 Оҳi,1 + 1 Оҳj,1 пҝҪ вҲ’ ПүA i 2Оҳi,1 ki,1 ПҶaqbkj,1 qaПҶb вҲ’ ПүA j Оҳj,1 kj,1 ПҶaqbki,1 qaПҶb + kq(1 вҲ’ Оҙi,j), (B22c) where Оҳi,1 = [ПүA i )2 вҲ’ (ПүB 1 )2]. For these expressions to be accurate, the perturbative criteria max(ki,1 qaПҶb, ki,1 qaqb, ki,1 ПҶaqb, kq) min(|ПүA i вҲ’ ПүB 1 |) вүӘ 1 (B23) must be satisfied. For the sake of completeness, let us briefly comment on the connection of this approach to the standard quantum SW method used in . There, due to the presence of just recipro- cal (capacitive) connection, only flux-flux coupling terms had to be considered. Explicitly, after arranging the phase-space coordinates as XT = (ОҰT a , ОҰT b , qT a , qT b ), the quadratic form has the structure H = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ О©A KПҶПҶ 0 0 KT ПҶПҶ О©B 0 0 0 0 О©A 0 0 0 0 О©B пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё, (B24) with О©A (О©B) the normal mode frequencies of sector A (B). With the rescaling ПҶi вҶ’ ПҶi/вҲҡwi, qi вҶ’ qiвҲҡwi the quadratic form is H = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ О©2 A MПҶПҶ 0 0 MT ПҶПҶ О©2 B 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё, (B25) It follows that S will be both symplectic and orthogonal, and Eq. (B19) reduces to (пҝҪHA ПҶПҶ)Оұ,ОұвҖІ = 1 2 m пҝҪ ОІ=1 MОұ,ОІ ПҶПҶ MОұвҖІ,ОІ ПҶПҶ пҝҪ 1 ОҳОұ,ОІ + 1 ОҳОұвҖІ,ОІ пҝҪ , (B26) which is the same as Eq. (B.15) of Ref. . Yet, in sce- narios involving both flux-flux and charge-charge couplings, or flux-charge couplings, as shown here, Eq. (B19) deviates from conventional SW formulas. Appendix C: Derivation of the main results including direct capacitive, inductive, and nonreciprocal couplings In this appendix, we obtain the effective Lindbladians and Hamiltonians for the general case with direct electrostatic and inductive coupling between the ports. In the closed system, we introduce two different approaches to include the direct capacitive (electrostatic) and inductive (magnetostatic) cou- plings. First, for the admittance (impedance) representation, in Appendix C 1 (Appendix C 3), we apply a numerical di- agonalization of both the kinetic and inductive matrices of the junction sector and then decouple qubit modes from in- ner modes using SW perturbation theory. Second, in Ap- pendix C 2 (Appendix C 4) we obtain analogous coupling for- mulas by treating the direct couplings as a perturbation. The main advantage of the first method is that strong direct electro- static and/or magnetostatic coupling can be accounted for ex- actly, but at the cost of dressing the modes, something which can potentially obscure the nonreciprocal coupling between the external ports. 14 Subsequently, our focus shifts towards the derivation of the perturbative dissipative contribution of the drive ports by de- riving closed admittance and impedance formulas for the cor- related decay rates in Appendix C 5 and Appendix C 6, re- spectively. Finally, we compute the drive amplitudes and clas- sical crosstalks for the admittance (impedance) representation in Appendix C 7 (Appendix C 8). To help the reader navigate this appendix, Table I summarizes some of the important def- initions and the notation that is used. AвҲ’1 0 = пҝҪ CJ CJD CT JD CD пҝҪ DвҲһ = пҝҪ CJ CJD CT JD CD пҝҪ AвҲһ = 0 D0 = пҝҪ LвҲ’1 J LвҲ’1 JD (LвҲ’1 JD)T LвҲ’1 D пҝҪ BвҲһ = 0 EвҲһ = пҝҪ YG J YG JD вҲ’(YG JD)T YG D пҝҪ ZR(s) = Z(s)+Z(s)T 2 YR(s) = Y(s)+Y(s)T 2 ZNR(s) = Z(s)вҲ’Z(s)T 2 YNR(s) = Y(s)вҲ’Y(s)T 2 Zac(s) = пҝҪ ОІ AОІs+BОІ Пү2 ОІ+s2 Yac(s) = пҝҪ ОІ DОІs+EОІ Пү2 ОІ+s2 Zac,R(s) = Zac(s)+Zac(s)T 2 Yac,R(s) = Yac(s)+Yac(s)T 2 Zac,NR(s) = Zac(s)вҲ’Zac(s)T 2 Yac,NR(s) = Yac(s)вҲ’Yac(s)T 2 Zdc(s) = A0/s Ydc(s) = D0/s + sDвҲһ + EвҲһ Zdrive(s) = Z0 + CвҲ’1 D /s Ydrive(s) = ZвҲ’1 0 + sCD + LвҲ’1 D /s AОі = 1 CrОі rОіrT Оі DОі = 1 LrОі rОіrT Оі RT = пҝҪ RT J RT D пҝҪ = пҝҪr1, . . . , rm пҝҪ R = пҝҪ RJ RD пҝҪ = пҝҪr1, . . . , rm пҝҪ NT = пҝҪ NT J NT D пҝҪ = пҝҪ nL 1 , . . . , nR l пҝҪ N = пҝҪ NJ ND пҝҪ = пҝҪ nL 1 , . . . , nR l пҝҪ T = пҝҪTJ TD пҝҪ , TJ = пҝҪRJ NJ пҝҪ , TD = пҝҪRD ND пҝҪ AОј = 1 CgОј [nL Ој(nL Ој)T + nR Ој (nR Ој )T ] BОј = RgОјПү2 gОј[nR Ој (nL Ој)T вҲ’ nL Ој(nR Ој )T ] DОј = 1 LgОј [nL Ој(nL Ој)T + nR Ој (nR Ој )T ] EОј = Пүg2Ој RОј [nL Ој(nR Ој )T вҲ’ nR Ој (nL Ој)T ] (пҝҪLJ)ij = Оҙij пҝҪLJi, пҝҪLJi = ПҶ2 0 EJi CJОҙ = diag CJ, LвҲ’1 JОҙ = diag LвҲ’1 J (пҝҪО©J)ij = Оҙij МғПүi, МғПүi = 1/ пҝҪ пҝҪLJiCJi 1. Admittance coupling formulas with numerical diagonalization of direct coupling We start by deriving the effective Hamiltonian from the ad- mittance response. Here, and up to Appendix C 5, we will not consider the drive ports. Using the Cauer circuit representa- tion of the admittance, explained in details in Appendix A, we obtain the system of equations вҲ’iJ = OCiC + OLiL + RJiR + NJiG + NвҲһiGвҲһ, (C1a) vC = OT CvJ, (C1b) vL = OT LvJ, (C1c) vR = RT J vJ, (C1d) vG = NT J vJ, (C1e) vGвҲһ = NT вҲһvJ, (C1f) where vx, ix with x = j, r, c, l correspond to the voltage and current vectors of the junctions, reciprocal resonators, capac- itors and inductors respectively. The vectors vG, iG,vGвҲһ, iGвҲһ, correspond to the currents and voltages for the left- right branches of each gyrator vG = (vL g1, vR g1, . . . , vL gl, vR gl). Moreover, OC, OL, NвҲһ, RJ = (r1, . . . , rm), and NJ = (nL 1 , nR 1 , . . . , nL l , nR l ) are the transformer matrices defined in terms of the admittance response of the junctions sector, see Eq. (A6). Here, we changed the notation of Appendix A U вҶ’ OL and V вҶ’ OC for two reasons. First, to make more apparent their orthogonality, and second, to stress the differ- ence with the full orthogonal decomposition of DвҲһ = VCVT (D0 = UL вҲ’1UT ) when the dissipative ports are included. This will be important in Apps. C 5 to C 8. With an appropriate choice of flux and charge coordinates, we obtain a Lagrangian describing the dynamics of the circuit . For junctions, ca- pacitors, inductors and pure gyrators we use flux variables in writing the Lagrangian. On the other hand, for the reciprocal and nonreciprocal resonators we use charge variables. With this choice, Eq. (C1) reads вҲ’вҲӮU(ОҰJ) вҲӮОҰJ = OC(CJ МҲОҰC) + OL(L вҲ’1 J ОҰL) + RJ МҮQR + NJ МҮQG + NвҲһYG вҲһ МҮОҰGвҲһ, МҮОҰC = OT C МҮОҰJ, МҮОҰL = OT L МҮОҰJ, МҲQR + CвҲ’1 r QR = RT J МҮОҰJ, МҲQG + Zg МҮQG = NT J МҮОҰJ, МҮОҰGвҲһ = NT вҲһ МҮОҰJ. (C2) In these expressions, CJ, L вҲ’1 J , and Cr are diagonal matrices with entries CJi, LJi, CrОі respectively. Moreover, YG вҲһ is the admittance matrix of the ideal gyrators, and Zg the impedance 15 matrix of those forming the nonreciprocal resonators YG вҲһ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ iПғyR1 ... 0 0 iПғyRk пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C3a) Zg = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ вҲ’iПғy/R1 ... 0 0 вҲ’iПғy/Rl пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё = вҲ’iО©gОЈy, (C3b) ОЈОұ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ ПғОұ ... 0 0 ПғОұ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C3c) О©g = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ ... 0 0 Пүgl12 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C3d) where as above we have used LgОј = 1 implying ПүgОј = 1/RОј, and ПғОұ corresponds to the pauli matrix Оұ = x, y, z. Substitut- ing Eq. (A6) in Eq. (C2) and rearranging we obtain the set of equations вҲ’вҲӮU(ОҰJ) вҲӮОҰJ = LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ + CJ МҲОҰJ + TJ МҮQ + YG J МҮОҰJ, МҲQR = RT J МҮОҰJ вҲ’ CвҲ’1 r QR, МҲQG = NT J ОҰJ вҲ’ Zg МҮQG. (C4) These Euler-Lagrange equations can be obtained from the La- grangian L =1 2 МҮОҰT J CJ МҮОҰJ вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT J LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ вҲ’ U(ОҰJ) + 1 2 МҮОҰT J YG J ОҰJ + МҮОҰT J TJQ + 1 2 МҮQT МҮQ вҲ’ 1 2QT CвҲ’1 I Q + 1 2 МҮQT ZeQ, (C5) with QT = пҝҪ QT R QT G пҝҪ the charges of the reciprocal and nonreciprocal inner modes resonators respectively, TJ = пҝҪ RT J NT J пҝҪT the transformer matrix, and CI = пҝҪ Cr 0 0 0 пҝҪ , Ze = пҝҪ 0 0 0 Zg пҝҪ . (C6) Assuming that CJ is not singular, we immediately obtain the classical Hamiltonian H =1 2(qJ вҲ’ 1 2YG J ОҰJ вҲ’ TJQ)T CвҲ’1 J (qJ вҲ’ 1 2YG J ОҰJ вҲ’ TJQ) + 1 2ОҰT J LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ + U(ОҰJ) + 1 2(О  вҲ’ 1 2ZeQ)T (О  вҲ’ 1 2ZeQ) + 1 2QT CвҲ’1 I Q, (C7) where qJ, О  are the conjugate momenta of ОҰJ, Q respec- tively with Poisson brackets {ОҰJ, qT J } = 1n, {Q, О T } = 1m+2l, where n, m (l) are the number of qubit ports, and reciprocal (nonreciprocal) resonator modes respectively, see Eq. (A3). Linearizing the junction potential, we write the linear part of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (C7) as H = XT HX/2, with XT = (ОҰT J , qT J , QT , О T ) and the quadratic form H = пҝҪHJ K KT HI пҝҪ , (C8a) where HJ = пҝҪ LвҲ’1 J + пҝҪLвҲ’1 J + (YG J )T CвҲ’1 J YG J /4 YG J CвҲ’1 J /2 CвҲ’1 J (YG J )T /2 CвҲ’1 J пҝҪ , (C8b) HI = пҝҪ ZT e Ze/4 + CI + O(T2 J) Ze/2 ZT e /2 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C8c) K = пҝҪ O(T2 J) 0 вҲ’CвҲ’1 J TJ 0 пҝҪ . (C8d) In these expressions, пҝҪLJ is the diagonal matrix with entries LJi = ПҶ2 0/EJi obtained from the linear part of U(ОҰJ), with ПҶ0 = Д§/2e the reduced flux quanta. We assume ||TJ|| вҲј ||YG J || and ignore the second-order terms in the coupling O(T2 J), as they give rise to third and higher order corrections. Furthermore, from now on, we also ignore the second-order terms in the inner modes sector as these would give fourth and higher order corrections in the effective junction sector Hamiltonian after the symplectic Schrieffer-Wolff block diag- onalization, see Appendix B for details. For clarity, we separate the nonreciprocal sector from the reciprocal sector of the inner modes H = XT HX/2 with XT = (ОҰT J , qT J , QT R, О T r , QT G, О T g ) HI = пҝҪ Hr 0 0 Hg пҝҪ Hr = пҝҪ О©2 r 0 0 1m пҝҪ , Hg = пҝҪZT g Zg/4 Zg/2 ZT g /2 12l пҝҪ , (C9) and the coupling matrix to first order then becomes K = пҝҪ 0 0 0 0 вҲ’CвҲ’1 J RJ 0 вҲ’CвҲ’1 J NJ 0 пҝҪ . (C10) Since every gyrator imposes a constraint in phase-space, there is only one dynamical pair of conjugate variables (instead of two) per capacitor-gyrator-capacitor circuit. In other words, we have redundant nondynamical variables in the above Hamiltonian, see Ref. for further details. In Appendix D we exactly eliminate these nondynamical modes to obtain a Hamiltonian which can be immediately quantized. Here, we take an alternative approach and approximately eliminate these nondynamical modes ignoring the second-order terms in 16 the inner mode sector. To second-order in perturbation theory, both the exact and the approximate elimination give the same result. Continuing our derivation, we now proceed with the ap- proximate elimination of the nondynamical modes with the following symplectic transformation SI = пҝҪ Sr 0 0 Sg пҝҪ , Sr = пҝҪ О©1/2 r 0 0 О©вҲ’1/2 r пҝҪ , Sg = пҝҪ 12l/2 вҲ’ОЈx ОЈx/2 12l пҝҪпҝҪ О©1/2 g 0 0 О©вҲ’1/2 g пҝҪ . (C11) For convenience, we have rescaled the inner modes such that every entry in the transformed quadratic form has dimensions of frequency. By mixing charge and fluxes of the nonrecip- rocal resonators, Sg diagonalizes the nonreciprocal sector and decouples dynamical from nondynamical modes. Indeed, we have that (ST g )вҲ’1HgSвҲ’1 g вүЎ Hg = пҝҪ О©g 0 0 О©g пҝҪ , (C12a) О©g = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ Пүg1(12 + Пғz)/2 ... 0 0 Пүgl(12 + Пғz)/2 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё. (C12b) The flux-flux and charge-charge subsectors of HJ are diago- nalized with the additional symplectic transformation SJ = пҝҪ О© 1/2 J OT О©C 1/2 J OT C 0 0 О© вҲ’1/2 J OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT C пҝҪ , (C13) where OО© is the orthogonal matrix that diagonalizes C вҲ’1/2 J OT C(LвҲ’1 J + пҝҪLвҲ’1 J )OCC вҲ’1/2 J , such that the dressed fre- quencies of the junction sector due to the direct coupling be- tween junction ports excluding the coupling from YG J are О© 2 J = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT C(LвҲ’1 J + пҝҪLвҲ’1 J )OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©. (C14) After this transformation, the quadratic form in the junction sector (ST J )вҲ’1HjSвҲ’1 J вүЎ Hj reads Hj = пҝҪ О©J + О©YG J О© вҲ’1/2 J Y G J О© 1/2 J /2 О© 1/2 J (Y G J )T О© вҲ’1/2 J /2 О©J пҝҪ , Y G J вүЎ OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CYG J OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©, (C15) with О©YG J = О© вҲ’1/2 J (Y G J )T Y G J О© вҲ’1/2 J /4. Applying both trans- formations S = пҝҪ SJ 0 0 SI пҝҪ , (C16) we get the quadratic form (ST )вҲ’1HSвҲ’1 вүЎ H = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ Hj Kr Kg K T r Hr 0 K T g 0 Hg пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C17a) where Kr = пҝҪ 0 0 KqQ r 0 пҝҪ , Kg = пҝҪ 0 0 KqQ g KqО  g пҝҪ , (C17b) and KqQ r = вҲ’О© 1/2 J RJО©вҲ’1/2 r , KqQ g = вҲ’О© 1/2 J NJО©вҲ’1/2 g , KqО  g = вҲ’О© 1/2 J NJОЈxО©вҲ’1/2 g , RJ = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CRJ, NJ = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CNJ. (C17c) To get the effective junction sector Hamiltonian up to second- order in the couplings we can now directly apply our formulas Eq. (B19) derived in Appendix B. Doing so, we obtain the effective quadratic form of the junction sector пҝҪHJ with entries (пҝҪHqq J )ij = ОҙijПүi + 1 2 m пҝҪ Оі=1 ПүrОі(KqQ r )i,Оі(KqQ r )j,Оі пҝҪ 1 Оҳi,Оі + 1 Оҳj,Оі пҝҪ + 1 2 2l пҝҪ ОІ=1 ПүgОІ пҝҪ (KqQ g )i,ОІ(KqQ g )j,ОІ + (KqО  g )i,ОІ(KqО  g )j,ОІ пҝҪпҝҪ 1 Оҳi,ОІ + 1 Оҳj,ОІ пҝҪ , (C18a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 2l пҝҪ ОІ=1 Пүi Оҳi,ОІ пҝҪ (KqО  g )i,ОІ(KqQ g )j,ОІ вҲ’ (KqQ g )i,ОІ(KqО  g )j,ОІ) пҝҪ + 1 2 пҝҪ Пүj Пүi (Y G J )ij, (C18b) (пҝҪHПҶПҶ J )ij = ОҙijПүi + (О©YG J )ij, (C18c) 17 where Пүi are the diagonal entries of О©J, and Оҳi,Оі = Пү2 i вҲ’Пү2 rОі, Оҳi,ОІ = Пү2 i вҲ’ Пү2 gОІ. Moreover, ПүgОІ is the ОІth diagonal entry of О©g, which for odd ОІ is the nonreciprocal oscillator frequency ПүgОІ = ПүgОј with Ој = (ОІ + 1)/2 while ПүgОІ = 0 for even ОІ. From Eqs. C17 we have (KqQ r )i,Оі = вҲ’ пҝҪ Пүi/ПүrОі(rОі)i, (C19a) (KqQ g )i,ОІ = пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nL Ој)i, for odd ОІ вҲ’ пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nR Ој )i, for even ОІ (C19b) (KqО  g )i,ОІ = пҝҪ вҲ’ пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nR Ој )i, for odd ОІ вҲ’ пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nL Ој)i, for even ОІ, (C19c) where rОі, nОј are the row vectors of R, N, and Ој = (ОІ + Eq. (C19) and rearranging the term we obtain (пҝҪHqq J )ij = ОҙijПүi + пҝҪПүiПүj 2 m пҝҪ Оі=1 (rОі)i(rОі)j пҝҪ 1 Оҳi,Оі + 1 Оҳj,Оі пҝҪ + пҝҪПүiПүj 2 l пҝҪ Ој=1 пҝҪ [(nL Ој)i(nL Ој)j + (nR Ој )i(nR Ој )j] Г— пҝҪ 1 Оҳi,Ој + 1 Оҳj,Ој пҝҪпҝҪ , (C20a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 пҝҪ Пүj Пүi (EвҲһ)ij + пҝҪПүiПүj 2 l пҝҪ Ој=1 пҝҪ [(nL Ој)i(nR Ој )j вҲ’ (nR Ој )i(nL Ој)j] Г— 1 ПүgОј пҝҪ 1 Пүi вҲ’ Пүi Оҳi,Ој пҝҪпҝҪ . (C20b) Once again rearranging, and substituting in Eq. (C20) with Eq. (A6) (remembering our choice of LgОј = LrОі = 1) we get (пҝҪHqq J )ij = ОҙijПүi + i 2 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪY ac,R ij (Пүi) Пүi + Y ac,R ij (Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ , (C21a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 пҝҪ Пүj Пүi Y NR ij (Пүi), (C21b) with Y(s) = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CY(s)OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©, (C22a) Y ac,R(s) = пҝҪ Оі DОіs Пү2rОі + s2 + пҝҪ Ој DОјs Пү2gОј + s2 , (C22b) Y NR(s) = EвҲһ + пҝҪ Ој EОј Пү2gОј + s2 , (C22c) DОі(Ој) = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CDОі(Ој)OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©, (C22d) EОј(вҲһ) = OT О©C вҲ’1/2 J OT CEОј(вҲһ)OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©. (C22e) Hence, the classical effective Hamiltonian for the junctions sector will be пҝҪHJ = 1 2 пҝҪ i пҝҪ Пүi(пҝҪПҶ2 i + пҝҪq2 i ) вҲ’ Im пҝҪ Y ac,R ij (Пүi) пҝҪ пҝҪq2 i пҝҪ + пҝҪ iМё=j пҝҪ(О©YG J )ij 2 пҝҪПҶi пҝҪПҶj + (пҝҪHqq J )ij 2 пҝҪqiпҝҪqj + (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij пҝҪПҶiпҝҪqj пҝҪ + Unl(пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪq). (C23) Where Unl(пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪq) stands for the nonlinear part of the junctions potential, now a function of both flux and charges in this new frame. These final frame coordinates are connected to the original ones through the transformation пҝҪX = SswSX. (C24) How to obtain Ssw to any desired order is explained in Ap- pendix B. Promoting the classical variables to quantum oper- ators (Д§ = 1) пҝҪПҶi = (ЛҶbвҖ  i + ЛҶbi)/ вҲҡ 2, (C25a) пҝҪqi = i(ЛҶbвҖ  i вҲ’ ЛҶbi)/ вҲҡ 2, (C25b) rearranging, and applying the rotating wave approximation (RWA) we finally obtain the effective quantum Hamiltonian ЛҶHJ = пҝҪ i пҝҪ Пүi вҲ’ Im[Y ac,R ii 2 пҝҪ ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi + пҝҪ iМё=j пҝҪ JijЛҶbiЛҶbвҖ  j + JвҲ— ijЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbj пҝҪ + Unl(пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪq), (C26) with Jij = i 4 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪ Y ОЈ ij(Пүi) Пүi + Y ОЈ ij(Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ G J )T Y G J )ij 8пҝҪПүiПүj , (C27) where Y ОЈ(s) = Y ac,R(s) + Y NR(s). When including the non- linearities, the correction to the frequencies done in the main text (Eq. (6)) will hold to first order if the nondiagonal ele- ments of the OC (OL) transformations are in the same order as the transformer ratios. If that is not the case, a fully numer- ical treatment of the nonlinearities can be done in a systematic manner, see Appendix E for details. Finally, in the case with neither direct capacitive, inductive or nonreciprocal coupling (OC = OL = OО© = 1n, YG J = 0) we obtain Eq. (7) of the main text. 2. Fully perturbative admittance coupling formulas We now proceed to derive the effective Hamiltonian for the qubit sector, treating the direct coupling between qubit ports 18 as a perturbation. We let LвҲ’1 JОҙ (CвҲ’1 JОҙ ) and LвҲ’1 JПҮ (CвҲ’1 JПҮ ) respec- tively be the diagonal and off-diagonal entries of LвҲ’1 J (CвҲ’1 J ). We treat these off-diagonal terms as first order perturbations. The derivation follows the same steps as above up to Eq. (C12) and, as a result, the quadratic form of the junction sector reads HJ = пҝҪ L вҲ’1 J + LвҲ’1 JПҮ YG J CвҲ’1 J /2 CвҲ’1 J (YG J )T /2 CвҲ’1 JОҙ + CвҲ’1 JПҮ пҝҪ , (C28) where L вҲ’1 J = пҝҪLвҲ’1 J + LвҲ’1 JОҙ . (C29) Hence, following Appendix B we simply add the direct cou- plings at the end of our perturbative treatment to obtain the effective Hamiltonian for the junction sector. Now, instead of transforming the junction sector with Eq. (C13) we simply rescale it with SJ = пҝҪ G 1/2 J 0 0 G вҲ’1/2 J пҝҪ , (C30) where GJ = (CJОҙ/LJ)1/2. Thus, for the rescaled junction sector, we have HJ = [(SJ)T ]вҲ’1HJS вҲ’1 J = пҝҪ О©J + О©LПҮ + О©YG J KПҶq/2 KT ПҶq/2 О©J + О©CПҮ пҝҪ , (C31) with О©J = (LJCJОҙ)вҲ’1/2, О©LПҮ = О© вҲ’1/2 J CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ LвҲ’1 JПҮ CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ О© вҲ’1/2 J , О©CПҮ = О© 1/2 J C1/2 JОҙ CвҲ’1 JПҮ C1/2 JОҙ О© 1/2 J , О©YG J = О© вҲ’1/2 J (YG J )T YG J О© вҲ’1/2 J /4, (C32) and KПҶq = G вҲ’1/2 J YG J CвҲ’1 J G 1/2 J = О© вҲ’1/2 J Y G J О© 1/2 J + G вҲ’1/2 J YG J CвҲ’1 JПҮ G 1/2 J , (C33) where Y G J = CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ YG J CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ . The symplectic transformation S of Eq. (C16) here takes the same form except for the replacement SJ вҶ’ SJ, and Eqs. C17 are also the same under the mappings О©J вҶ’ (LJCJОҙ)вҲ’1/2, (C34a) R вҶ’ (CJОҙ)1/2CвҲ’1 J R = CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ R + CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ CвҲ’1 JПҮ R, (C34b) N вҶ’ (CJОҙ)1/2CвҲ’1 J N = CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ N + CвҲ’1/2 JОҙ CвҲ’1 JПҮ N. (C34c) Ignoring the second-order coupling terms proportional to CвҲ’1 JПҮ R, CвҲ’1 JПҮ N, YG J CJПҮ which give rise to third-order correc- tions and higher, it follows that Eq. (C18c) and Eq. (C21) here take the form (пҝҪHqq J )ij = ОҙijПүi + (О©CПҮ)ij + i 2 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪY ac,R ij (Пүi) Пүi + Y ac,R ij (Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ , (C35a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 пҝҪ Пүj Пүi Y NR ij (Пүi), (C35b) (пҝҪHПҶПҶ J )ij = ОҙijПүi + (О©LПҮ)ij + (О©YG J )ij, (C35c) with Y ac,R(s), Y NR(s), Y G J defined as in Eq. (C22) and Eq. (C15) with OC = OО© = 1n. Therefore, the effective quantum Hamiltonian for the junc- tion sector after applying the rotating-wave approximation is ЛҶHJ = пҝҪ i пҝҪ Пүi вҲ’ 1 2 Im пҝҪ Y ac ii (Пүi) пҝҪпҝҪ ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi + пҝҪ iМё=j пҝҪ JijЛҶbiЛҶbвҖ  j + JвҲ— ijЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbj пҝҪ + Unl(пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪq), (C36a) with Jij = i 4 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪ Y ОЈ ij(Пүi) Пүi + Y ОЈ ij(Пүj) Пүj пҝҪ +1 2 пҝҪ (О©CПҮ)ij + (О©LПҮ)ij пҝҪ + (О©YG J )ij/2, (C36b) and Y ОЈ(s) = Y ac,R(s) + Y NR(s), i.e., the rescaled admittance response excluding the reciprocal dc part of the admittance (D0, DвҲһ). The frequencies in the second line are given in Eq. (C32), where О©CПҮ (О©LПҮ) captures the correction from direct capacitive (inductive) coupling, and О©YG J is a second- order correction from the direct nonreciprocal coupling be- tween the ports. In Appendix E, we shift the frequencies en- tering Eq. (C32), Eq. (C35) and Eq. (C36) to include the non- linearities up to first order in perturbation theory. 3. Impedance coupling formulas with numerical diagonalization of direct coupling We now derive the effective Hamiltonian from the Cauer representation (see Fig. 5) of the impedance response. The derivation is similar to the one above for the admittance with some key differences that we highlight. From the transformers constitutive equations we have vJ = OT CvC + RT J vR + NT J vG, (C37a) iC = вҲ’OCiJ, (C37b) iR = вҲ’RJiJ, (C37c) iG = вҲ’NJiJ. (C37d) We assume that CJ is of full rank, and thus OC is orthogo- nal. Assigning flux variables for each junction and capacitive 19 branch we have that the equations of motion of the circuit are derivable from the Lagrangian L = 1 2 МҮОҰT C МҮОҰ вҲ’ U(ОҰJ) вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT M0ОҰ + 1 2 МҮОҰT GОҰ, (C38) with ОҰT = (ОҰT J , ОҰT I ), where ОҰJ (ОҰI) correspond to the fluxes in the external ports (inner mode resonators and gyra- tors). The kinetic, inductive and nonreciprocal matrices read C = пҝҪ CJ вҲ’CJTT J вҲ’TJCJ 1n + TJCJTT J пҝҪ , (C39a) M0 = пҝҪ0 0 0 LвҲ’1 Re пҝҪ , LRe = пҝҪ LR 0 0 0 пҝҪ , (C39b) G = пҝҪ 0 0 0 Ye пҝҪ , Ye = пҝҪ 0 0 0 Y пҝҪ , (C39c) where CJ = OT CCJOC. Note that in Ref. the orthogo- nality of OC is also assumed, and the U used in Eq. (65) of that reference corresponds to our OT C. Moreover, LR is the diagonal inductive matrix of the inner mode resonators LrОі, TJ = пҝҪ RT J NT J пҝҪT is the transformer matrix, see Eq. (A5) and, Y is the admittance matrix of the gyrators Y = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ iПғyПүg1 ... 0 0 iПғyПүgk пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё = iОЈyО©g, (C40a) ОЈy вүЎ пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ Пғy ... 0 0 Пғy пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, О©g вүЎ пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ ... 0 0 Пүgl12 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё. (C40b) Linearizing the nonlinear potential, the Lagrangian reads L = 1 2 МҮОҰT C МҮОҰ вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT MОҰ + 1 2 МҮОҰT GОҰ + Unl(ОҰJ), (C41) with M = пҝҪпҝҪLвҲ’1 J 0 0 О©2 Re пҝҪ , О©Re = пҝҪ О©R 0 0 02l пҝҪ , (C42) where пҝҪLJ is the matrix of junction inductances LjОұ = ПҶ2 0/EjОұ obtained from the linear part of U(ОҰJ), and О©R is the diag- onal matrix with the inner modes reciprocal resonators fre- quencies. We focus here on the linear sector, and treat the nonlinearities in Appendix E. As discussed in the introduction of this appendix, we now consider the numerical diagonalization approach to include direct capacitive coupling. First, we dress the external modes with the transformation ОҰco = PcoОҰ, where Pco = пҝҪ C 1/2 J OC 0 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C43) after which the Lagrangian reads L = 1 2 МҮОҰT coCco МҮОҰco вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT coMcoОҰco + 1 2 МҮОҰT coGОҰco, (C44) with the transformed matrices Cco = пҝҪ 1n вҲ’TT co вҲ’Tco 1m+2l + TcoTT co пҝҪ , (C45a) Mco = пҝҪО©вҖІ2 J 0 0 О©2 Re пҝҪ , (C45b) with О©вҖІ2 J вүЎ C вҲ’1/2 J OCLвҲ’1 J OT CC вҲ’1/2 J which is in general not diagonal, and Tco = TJOT CC 1/2 J . Following Ref. we diagonalize the kinetic matrix Cco with the triangular point- transformation PвҲҶ = пҝҪ 1n вҲ’TT co 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C46) In this new frame, the capacitive matrix is transformed into the identity Cco вҶ’ 1n+m+2l, the gyration matrix remains invari- ant Gco вҶ’ G, and the inductive matrix encodes the coupling between inner and weakly-dressed qubit modes Mco вҶ’ пҝҪ О©вҖІ2 J О©вҖІ2 J TT co TcoО©вҖІ2 J О©2 Re + TcoО©вҖІ2 J TT co пҝҪ . (C47a) To obtain the normal modes of the qubit ports sector, we apply the transformation ОҰ = PО©PвҲҶPcoОҰ, with PО© = пҝҪ OО© 0 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C48) where the orthogonal matrix OО© diagonalizes the matrix OО©О©вҖІ2 J OT О© = О© 2 J. OО© can be easily found numerically. The frequencies О©J correspond to the normal modes of the capacitively coupled external (qubits) ports. In this frame, G = G, C = 1, and the inductive matrix reads M = пҝҪ О© 2 J О© 2 JT T J TJ О© 2 J О©2 Re + TJ О© 2 JT T J пҝҪ , (C49a) with TJ = TJOT CC 1/2 J OT О©. As C = 1, we directly obtain the classical Hamiltonian H = 1 2 пҝҪ q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ пҝҪT пҝҪ q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ пҝҪ + 1 2ОҰ T M ОҰ. (C50a) It is useful to express this as H = 1 2XT HX with XT = (ОҰj, qj, ОҰI, qI) and H = пҝҪHJ K KT HI пҝҪ , (C51a) HJ = пҝҪ О© 2 J 0 0 1n пҝҪ , (C51b) HI = пҝҪYT e Y/4 + О©2 Re Ye/2 YT e /2 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C51c) K = пҝҪ О© 2 JT T J 0 0 0 пҝҪ . (C51d) 20 As in the case of the admittance, we now approximately elimi- nate the nondynamical modes ignoring the second-order terms in the inner mode sector, as these will not change the final ef- fective Hamiltonian of the junctions up to O((k/вҲҶ)4). We note that the exact elimination of the nondynamical modes provides equivalent perturbative results, see Appendix D. To proceed, we now perform the symplectic transforma- tions S = пҝҪ SJ 0 0 SI пҝҪ , SJ = пҝҪ О© 1/2 J 0 0 О© вҲ’1/2 J пҝҪ , (C52) where the submatrices are SI = пҝҪ Sr 0 0 Sg пҝҪ , Sr = пҝҪ О©1/2 r 0 0 О©вҲ’1/2 r пҝҪ , Sg = пҝҪ ОЈx вҲ’ОЈx/2 12l пҝҪпҝҪ О©1/2 g 0 0 О©вҲ’1/2 g пҝҪ . (C53) The resulting quadratic form is H = (ST )вҲ’1HSвҲ’1 = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ Hj Kr Kg K T r Hr 0 K T g 0 Hg пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C54) with Kr = пҝҪ KПҶПҶ r 0 0 0 пҝҪ , Kg = пҝҪ KПҶПҶ g KПҶq g 0 0 пҝҪ , (C55a) and KПҶПҶ r = О© 3/2 J R T J О©вҲ’1/2 r , KПҶПҶ g = О© 3/2 J N T J О©вҲ’1/2 g , KПҶq g = вҲ’О© 3/2 J N T J ОЈxО©вҲ’1/2 g , RJ = RJOT CC 1/2 J OT О©, NJ = NJOT CC 1/2 J OT О©. (C55b) Here, Hj, Hr, Hg are Hj = пҝҪ О©J 0 0 О©J пҝҪ , (C56a) Hr = пҝҪ О©r 0 0 О©r пҝҪ , (C56b) Hg = пҝҪ О©g 0 0 О©g пҝҪ , (C56c) with О©g the same as in Eq. (C12b). On these expressions we perform the symplectic Schrieffer- Wolff transformation using the formulas Eq. (B19), and in analogous way as was done above for the admittance, we find the entries of the effective classical quadratic form (пҝҪHПҶПҶ J )ij = ОҙijПүi + i 2 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪ ПүjZ ac,R ij (Пүi) + ПүiZ ac,R ij (Пүj) пҝҪ , (C57a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 пҝҪ ПүiПүjПүiZ NR ij (Пүj), (C57b) (пҝҪHqq J )ij = ОҙijПүi, (C57c) where Z(s) = OО©C 1/2 J OCZ(s)OT CC 1/2 J OT О©, (C58a) Z ac,R(s) = пҝҪ Оі AОіs Пү2rОі + s2 + пҝҪ Ој AОјs Пү2gОј + s2 , (C58b) Z NR(s) = пҝҪ Ој BОј Пү2gОј + s2 , (C58c) AОі(Ој) = OО©C 1/2 J OCAОі(Ој)OT CC 1/2 J OT О©, (C58d) BОј = OО©C 1/2 J OCBОјOT CC 1/2 J OT О©. (C58e) Quantizing and rearranging as was done with the admittance- based expressions, we obtain the effective quantum Hamilto- nian for the junction sector ЛҶHJ = пҝҪ i Пүi пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ Пүi 2 Im[Z ac ii (Пүi)] пҝҪ ЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbi + пҝҪ i<j пҝҪ JijЛҶbiЛҶbвҖ  j + JвҲ— ijЛҶbвҖ  iЛҶbj пҝҪ + Unl(пҝҪПҶ, пҝҪq), (C59a) with Jij = i 4 пҝҪ ПүiПүj пҝҪ ПүiZij(Пүj) + ПүjZij(Пүi) пҝҪ . (C59b) In the case without direct capacitive or inductive coupling (OC = 1n, OО© = 1n) we obtain Eq. (8) of the main text. Moreover, when the response is purely reciprocal, we recover the effective coupling given in Eq. (5) of Ref. . 4. Fully perturbative impedance coupling formulas We now consider the cased where there is direct capacitive coupling between qubit ports, which we treat as a first order perturbation. Our starting point is the Lagragian of Eq. (C41). We first perform a triangular point-transformation PвҲҶ = пҝҪ 1n вҲ’TJ 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C60) 21 where the new coordinates are ОҰвҲҶ = PвҲҶОҰ, the kinetic and inductive matrices are CвҲҶ = пҝҪ CJ 0 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C61a) MвҲҶ = пҝҪ пҝҪLвҲ’1 J пҝҪLвҲ’1 J TT J TJпҝҪLвҲ’1 J LвҲ’1 Re + TJпҝҪLвҲ’1 J TT J пҝҪ . (C61b) Hence, we can immediately obtain the Hamiltonian H = 1 2 пҝҪ qвҲҶ вҲ’ G 2 ОҰвҲҶ пҝҪT CвҲ’1 вҲҶ пҝҪ qвҲҶ вҲ’ G 2 ОҰвҲҶ пҝҪ + 1 2ОҰT вҲҶ MвҲҶОҰвҲҶ. (C62) We let the matrices CвҲ’1 JОҙ and CвҲ’1 JПҮ respectively be the diagonal and offdiagonal entries of CвҲ’1 J . We rescale the junction sector with SJ = пҝҪ (пҝҪGJ)1/2 0 0 (пҝҪGJ)вҲ’1/2 пҝҪ , (C63) where пҝҪGJ = (CJОҙ/пҝҪLj)1/2 such that the Hamiltonian in that sector is HJ = ((SJ)T )вҲ’1Hj(SJ)вҲ’1 = пҝҪ пҝҪО©J 0 0 пҝҪО©J + О©CПҮ пҝҪ , (C64) with О©CПҮ = пҝҪG1/2 J CвҲ’1 JПҮ пҝҪG1/2 J and пҝҪО©J = (CJОҙпҝҪLJ)вҲ’1/2. We now use the symplectic transformations of Eq. (C53) for the inner modes. Doing so, it is clear that the final effective classical quadratic form entries are (пҝҪHПҶПҶ J )ij = Оҙij МғПүi + i 2 пҝҪ МғПүi МғПүj пҝҪ МғПүjZ ac,R ij ( МғПүi) + МғПүiZ ac,R ij ( МғПүj) пҝҪ , (C65a) (пҝҪHПҶq J )ij = 1 2 пҝҪ МғПүi МғПүj МғПүiZ NR ij ( МғПүj), (C65b) (пҝҪHqq J )ij = Оҙij МғПүi + i 2 пҝҪ МғПүi МғПүj пҝҪ МғПүiZ dc( МғПүi) + МғПүjZ dc( МғПүj) пҝҪ (1 вҲ’ Оҙij), (C65c) with МғПүi the frequencies пҝҪО©J, and Z ac,R(s), Z NR(s) given as in Eq. (C58) with OC = 1n, OL = 1n, and Z dc(s) = C1/2 JОҙ Zdc(s)C1/2 JОҙ вүғ C 1/2 J Zdc(s)C 1/2 J . With this choice, the final effective quantum Hamiltonian reads exactly the same as in Eq. (C59). The above formulas hold up to third-order in perturbation theory when the direct capacitive coupling be- tween all external ports is a first order perturbation. 5. Admittance dissipative rates and Purcell decays In this section, we address dissipation resulting from the coupling of qubit ports to external drive ports via a nonrecip- rocal environment characterized by its admittance response, see Fig. 5. As detailed in Appendix A, the drive ports are defined as the terminals at the ends of transmission lines that connect the circuit of interest, including the junctions and in- ner modes, to external classical voltage sources. Furthermore, we model these external transmission lines as purely ohmic lumped elements with a characteristic impedance Z0 . Setting aside the voltage sources for the moment, the multi- port synthesis of the admittance response illustrated in Fig. 5, leads to the following dissipative classical equations of mo- tion, CJ МҲОҰJ = вҲ’ вҲӮU вҲӮОҰJ вҲ’ LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ + YG J МҮОҰJ вҲ’ TJ МҮQ вҲ’ MОҰОҰ D вҲ— ОҰJ вҲ’ MОҰQ D вҲ— Q, (C66a) МҲQ = вҲ’CвҲ’1 I Q + TT J МҮОҰJ вҲ’ Ze МҮQ вҲ’ MQОҰ D вҲ— ОҰJ вҲ’ MQQ D вҲ— Q, (C66b) where ОҰJ and Q are respectively junction fluxes and inner modes loop charges. U(ОҰJ) corresponds to the junctionsвҖҷ co- sine potential. As already mentioned in Appendix C 1, the loop charge variable is the natural parametrization of the in- ner modes within the admittance representation. The matrices LJ, YG J , TJ, CI and Ze are defined in Appendix C 1 and вҲ— stands for time convolution, f вҲ— g(t) = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dП„f(П„)g(П„ вҲ’ t). Moreover, the (n+m+2l)Г—(n+m+2l) dissipation matrix MD(t) = пҝҪ MОҰОҰ D MОҰQ D MQОҰ D MQQ D пҝҪ is defined by the Fourier transform MD(Пү) = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dtMD(t)eвҲ’iПүt of its submatrices as MОҰОҰ D (Пү) = вҲ’(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD + iПүYG JD)Г— ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD вҲ’ iПүYG JD)T , (C67a) MОҰQ D (Пү) = вҲ’iПү(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD + iПүYG JD)Г— ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1TD, (C67b) MQОҰ D (Пү) = iПүTT D( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1Г— (LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD вҲ’ iПүYG JD)T , (C67c) MQQ D (Пү) = вҲ’Пү2TT D( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1TD, (C67d) for which we assumed that there is no direct gyration between drive ports (YG D = 0). The non-zero block matrices MОҰОҰ D , MОҰQ D and MQ,ОҰ D arise in the presence of direct coupling be- tween qubit and drive ports characterized by CJD, LвҲ’1 JD, YG JD Мё= 0. This generalizes prior studies such as Refs. [1, 54вҖ“56], where only MQ,Q D was considered as the non-vanishing entry of the dissipation matrix. At this point, it is important to note some general proper- ties of the dissipation matrix. First, MD(t) is real because MD(вҲ’Пү) = MD(Пү)вӢҶ. Additionally, the poles of MD(Пү) live 22 in the upper half of the complex plane defined by Im(z) > 0, ensuring the causality of MD(t) (i.e., MD(t) = 0 for t < 0) . Finally, unlike MQQ D , MОҰОҰ D is not symmetric (MОҰОҰT D Мё= MОҰОҰ D ), which reflects the presence of direct nonre- ciprocal interaction (YG JD Мё= 0) between qubit and drive ports. To construct a classical Lagrangian L that captures dissi- pation and reproduces classical equations of motion, we use an extended Caldeira-Leggett model by introducing a set of baths (collection of harmonic oscillators) that are lin- early coupled (minimal coupling) to our system through all quadratures. This Lagrangian reads L = LS + LB + LSB, (C68) where LS, LB, LSB are respectively system (junctions+inner modes), baths and interaction Lagrangians given by LS =1 2 МҮОҰT J CJ МҮОҰJ + 1 2 МҮQT МҮQ + 1 2 МҮQT ZeQ + 1 2 МҮОҰT J YG J ОҰJ вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT J LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ вҲ’ U(ОҰJ) + МҮОҰT J TJQ, (C69a) LB = пҝҪ i пҝҪ1 2 МҮxT ОұmОұ МҮxОұ вҲ’ 1 2xT ОұmОұw2 ОұxОұ пҝҪ , (C69b) LSB = вҲ’ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ ОјОұxОұ вҲ’ МҮОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ О·Оұ МҮxОұ вҲ’ ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ О»Оұ МҮxОұ вҲ’ МҮQT пҝҪ Оұ О¶ОұxОұ, (C69c) where xОұ = (xОұ1, . . . , xОұB), mОұ = diag(mОұ1, . . . , mОұB) and wОұ = diag(ПүОұ1, . . . , ПүОұB) are respectively baths flux coordinates, capacitances and eigenfrequencies with B = supПү rank[Im{MD(Пү)}] вүӨ nD is the number of baths needed to model dissipation, where nD is the number of drive ports . The system-baths coupling matrices in LSB cor- respond respectively to inductive (ОјОұ), capacitive (О·Оұ) and nonreciprocal (О»Оұ) couplings . While these two first type of couplings are invariant under time reversal symme- try ОҰ вҶ’ вҲ’ОҰ, Q вҶ’ Q, xОұ вҶ’ вҲ’xОұ, the charge-flux cou- pling arising from the gyrators breaks time reversal symme- try, leading to nonreciprocal system-baths interaction. Finally, the geometrical coupling (вҲқ МҮQ xОұ) that appears in the last term of LSB emerges naturally as a consequence of using a mixed flux-charge description to parameterize the system (junctions and inner modes). The coupling matrices Ој, О·, О» (of size nГ—B), О¶ (of size (m+2l)Г—B) and their correspond- ing quadratures are chosen to reproduce dissipative classical equations of motion. The resulting dissipation matrix is given by MОҰОҰ D (Пү) = пҝҪ Оұ (ОјОұ + О·ОұПү2 + iПүО»Оұ) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1(ОјОұ + О·ОұПү2 вҲ’ iПүО»Оұ)T , (C70a) MОҰQ D (Пү) = iПү пҝҪ Оұ (ОјОұ + О·ОұПү2 + iПүО»Оұ) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1О¶T Оұ , (C70b) MQОҰ D (Пү) = вҲ’iПү пҝҪ Оұ О¶ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1 Г— (ОјОұ + О·ОұПү2 вҲ’ iПүО»Оұ)T , (C70c) MQQ D (Пү) = Пү2 пҝҪ Оұ О¶ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1О¶T Оұ . (C70d) However, it is important to note that this matrix is not causal, since its poles are situated along the real line. Typically, to address this issue, the poles are shifted to the upper half of the complex plane following Ref. . This involves redefin- ing MD(Пү) вүЎ limОөвҶ’0+ MD(Пү вҲ’ iОө) which now fulfills the requirement of dissipation matrices discussed above . Fi- nally, it is worth noticing that in our case, system-bath cou- pling via a single quadrature, as introduced in the seminal pa- per of Leggett , is insufficient to reproduce the dissipative KirchhoffвҖҷs equations. It is thus important to include all the other couplings in LSB to match the classical dissipation ma- trix. To obtain the Hamiltonian, we perform a Legendre trans- form up to second-order in system-bath couplings, which leads to the usual form H = HS + HB + HSB, (C71) where HS = 1 2(qJ вҲ’ 1 2YG J ОҰJ вҲ’TJQ)T CвҲ’1 J (qJ вҲ’ 1 2YG J ОҰJ вҲ’TJQ) + 1 2ОҰT J LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ + U(ОҰJ) + 1 2(О  вҲ’ 1 2ZeQ)T (О  вҲ’ 1 2ZeQ) + 1 2QT CвҲ’1 I Q, (C72a) HB = 1 2 пҝҪ Оұ (pT ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ pОұ + xT ОұmОұw2 ОұxОұ), (C72b) HSB = ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ cОҰ,x Оұ xОұ + ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ cОҰ,p Оұ pОұ + qT J пҝҪ Оұ cq,p Оұ pОұ + QT пҝҪ Оұ cQ,x Оұ xОұ + QT пҝҪ Оұ cQ,p Оұ pОұ + О T пҝҪ Оұ cО ,x Оұ xОұ. (C72c) Here, the Hamiltonian coupling matrices {cОұ} are expressed 23 in terms of Lagrangian coupling matrices as cОҰ,x Оұ = ОјОұ cОҰ,p Оұ = О»ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ (C73a) cq,p Оұ = CвҲ’1 J О·ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ cО ,x Оұ = О¶Оұ (C73b) cQ,x Оұ = вҲ’Ze 2 О¶Оұ cQ,p Оұ = вҲ’TT J CвҲ’1 J О·ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ , (C73c) which leads to the following constraints cQ,x Оұ = вҲ’ Ze 2 cО ,x Оұ and cQ,p Оұ = вҲ’TT J cq,p Оұ . Inverting the previous equations, the dissipation matrix can be expressed in terms of {cОұ} matrices MОҰОҰ D (Пү) = пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,x Оұ + Пү2CJcq,p Оұ mОұ + iПүcОҰ,p Оұ mОұ) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1 Г— (cОҰ,x Оұ + Пү2CJcq,p Оұ mОұ вҲ’ iПүcОҰ,p Оұ mОұ)T , (C74a) MОҰQ D (Пү) = iПү пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,x Оұ + Пү2CJcq,p Оұ mОұ + iПүcОҰ,p Оұ mОұ) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1cО ,xT Оұ , (C74b) MQОҰ D (Пү) = вҲ’iПү пҝҪ Оұ cО ,x Оұ mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1 Г— (cОҰ,x Оұ + Пү2CJcq,p Оұ mОұ вҲ’ iПүcОҰ,p Оұ mОұ)T , (C74c) MQQ D (Пү) = Пү2 пҝҪ Оұ cО ,x Оұ mвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1cО ,xT Оұ . (C74d) Using the phase-space coordinates XT = (ОҰT J , qT J , QT R, QT G, О T R, О T G), the system-baths interac- tion Hamiltonian can be written compactly as HSB = XT пҝҪ Оұ cОұ пҝҪ xОұ pОұ пҝҪ . (C75) The coupling coefficients are regrouped as cОұ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ cОҰ,x Оұ cОҰ,p Оұ 0 cq,p Оұ 0 cQR,p Оұ cQG,x Оұ cQG,p Оұ cО r,x Оұ 0 cО g,x Оұ 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C76) To analyze how the coupling coefficients transform when di- agonalizing the junctions and inner modes Hamiltonian HS, we employ the symplectic transformations computed in Ap- pendix C 1. This process involves two sequential steps. First, we perform the symplectic transformation S = пҝҪ SJ 0 0 SI пҝҪ de- fined in Eq. (C16), allowing us to obtain normal modes for both junctions and inner modes sectors separately. Under this transformation, the coupling coefficients become cОұ пҝҪвҶ’ cвҖІ Оұ вүЎ (ST )вҲ’1cОұ. (C77) Expanding this transformation explicitly, cвҖІ Оұ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCcОҰ,x Оұ О© вҲ’ 1 j 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCcОҰ,p Оұ 0 О© 1 2 J OО©C 1 2 J OCcq,p Оұ 0 О© вҲ’ 1 2 R cQR,p Оұ О© вҲ’ 1 2 G cQG,x Оұ вҲ’ ОЈx 2 О© 1 2 GcО G,x Оұ О© вҲ’ 1 2 G cQG,p Оұ О© 1 2 RcО R,x Оұ 0 ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G cQG,x Оұ + О© 1 2 G 2 cО G,x Оұ ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G cQG,p Оұ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C78) The next step consists in eliminating the inner modes, parameterized by the classical phase-space coordinates (QR, QG, О R, О G), through Schrieffer-Wolff transforma- tion (see Eq. (B17) in Appendix B), leading to effective cou- plings defined by МғcОұ = (ST sw)вҲ’1cвҖІ Оұ. They are related to the original coupling matrices {cОұ} as follows МғcОҰ,x Оұ = О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCcОҰ,x Оұ + ОӣОҰ,О R x cО R,x Оұ + ОӣОҰ,QG x cQG,x Оұ + ОӣОҰ,О G x cО G,x Оұ , (C79a) МғcОҰ,p Оұ = О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCcОҰ,p Оұ + ОӣОҰ,QG p cQG,p Оұ , (C79b) Мғcq,x Оұ = Оӣq,QG x cQG,x Оұ + Оӣq,О G x cО G,x Оұ , (C79c) Мғcq,p Оұ = О© 1 2 J OО©C 1 2 J OCcq,p Оұ + Оӣq,QR p cQR,p Оұ + Оӣq,QG p cQG,p Оұ , (C79d) where the Schrieffer-Wolff matrices {Оӣx, Оӣp} involved in the 24 previous equations are defined as ОӣОҰ,О R x iОі = О© 3 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 RОі (RJ)iОі, (C80a) ОӣОҰ,QG x i2k = вҲ’ О© вҲ’ 1 2 Ji О©Gk О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (NJ)i2kвҲ’1, (C80b) ОӣОҰ,QG x i2kвҲ’1 = О© вҲ’ 1 2 Ji О©Gk О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (NJ)i2k, (C80c) ОӣОҰ,О G x i2k = О© вҲ’ 1 Ji2 2 (1 + О© 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk )(NJ)i2k, (C80d) ОӣОҰ,О G x i2kвҲ’1 = О© вҲ’ 1 Ji2 2 (1 + О© 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk )(NJ)i2kвҲ’1, (C80e) ОӣОҰ,QG p i2k = вҲ’ О© вҲ’ 1 2 Ji О©Gk О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N J)i2kвҲ’1, (C80f) ОӣОҰ,QG p i2kвҲ’1 = О© вҲ’ 1 2 Ji О©Gk О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N J)i2k, (C80g) Оӣq,QG x i2k = вҲ’ О© 1 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (NJ)i2k, (C80h) Оӣq,QG x i2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 1 2 ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk (NJ)i2kвҲ’1, (C80i) Оӣq,О G x i2k = вҲ’ О© 1 2 JiО©Gk 2(О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (NJ)i2kвҲ’1, (C80j) Оӣq,О G x i2kвҲ’1 = О© 1 2 JiО©Gk 2(О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (NJ)i2k, (C80k) Оӣq,QR p iОі = вҲ’ О© 1 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 RОі (RJ)iОі, (C80l) Оӣq,QG p i2k = вҲ’ О© 1 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 RОі (NJ)i2k, (C80m) Оӣq,QG p i2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 1 2 Ji О© 2 Ji вҲ’ О©2 RОі (NJ)i2kвҲ’1. (C80n) In Eq. (C79), the effective junctions-baths coupling ma- trices МғcОұ incorporate two contributions. The first one arises from the dressing with inner modes as a result of SW trans- formations (terms proportional to Оӣx,p) while the second con- tribution comprises direct couplings between qubit and drive ports (terms proportional to the dressed frequency О©J). The system-baths interaction Hamiltonian can be expressed in this final frame as HSB =ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ МғcОҰ,x Оұ xОұ + ОҰT J пҝҪ Оұ МғcОҰ,p Оұ pОұ + qT J пҝҪ Оұ Мғcq,x Оұ xОұ + qT J пҝҪ Оұ Мғcq,p Оұ pОұ, (C81) which captures the most general linear system-bath couplings. Using standard quantization method and using the results of Appendix F, the correlated decay rates are given in terms of this new effective couplings as ОіjjвҖІ = ПҖ 2 B пҝҪ b=1 пҝҪ Оұ (sОұjb + itОұjb)вӢҶ(sОұjвҖІb + itОұjвҖІb)Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb), (C82) where sОұjb = МғcОҰ,x Оұjb вҲҡmОұbПүОұb + вҲҡmОұbПүОұb Мғcq,p Оұjb, (C83) tОұjb = вҲҡmОұbПүОұb МғcОҰ,p Оұjb вҲ’ Мғcq,x Оұjb вҲҡmОұbПүОұb , (C84) The squared terms in Eq. (C82) can be written as ПҖ 2 B пҝҪ b=1 пҝҪ Оұ sОұjbsОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) + tОұjbtОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) = ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪпҝҪ МғcОҰ,x Оұ + Мғcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ пҝҪ mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) ( МғcОҰ,x Оұ + Мғcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ)T + ( Мғcq,x Оұ вҲ’ МғcОҰ,p Оұ mОұwОұ)mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Г— Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ)( Мғcq,x Оұ + МғcОҰ,p Оұ mОұwОұ)T пҝҪ jjвҖІ , (C85) where Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) вүЎ diag{Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұ1), . . . , Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұB)}. Expressing { МғcОұ} using Eq. (C79), and within the dispersive regime О© 1 2 j Оӣp вүӘ 1, Eq. (C85) is equivalent to ПҖ 2 пҝҪ О©J вҲ’ 1 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OC{cОҰ,x Оұ + CJcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ 2} + ОӣОҰ,О R x cО R,x Оұ +ОӣОҰ,QG x cQG,x Оұ + ОӣОҰ,О G x cО G,x Оұ пҝҪ mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(О©J вҲ’ wОұ) Г— пҝҪ О©J вҲ’ 1 2 C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OC{cОҰ,x Оұ + CJcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ 2} + ОӣОҰ,О R x cО R,x Оұ +ОӣОҰ,QG x cQG,x Оұ + ОӣОҰ,О G x cО G,x Оұ пҝҪT jjвҖІ . (C86) The next step is to identify the terms present in the last equation that also appear in the dissipation matrix MD(Пү). To achieve this, we use the causality requirement limОөвҶ’0+ MD(ПүвҲ’iОө) together with the SokhotskiвҖ“Plemelj for- mula lim ОөвҶ’0+ 1 (Пү вҲ’ iОө)2 вҲ’ Пү2Оұ = P пҝҪ 1 Пү2 вҲ’ Пү2Оұ пҝҪ +iПҖ 2 ПүвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(ПүвҲ’ПүОұ), (C87) 25 where P(.) corresponds to Cauchy principal value, and we obtain the following identification 1 2 пҝҪ Im пҝҪ MОҰОҰ D пҝҪ + Im пҝҪ MОҰОҰ D T пҝҪпҝҪ = ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,x Оұ + CJcq,p Оұ Г— mОұwОұ 2) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(Пү вҲ’ wОұ)(cОҰ,x Оұ + CJcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ 2)T + ПҖ 2 Пү2 пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,p Оұ mОұ)mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(Пү вҲ’ wОұ)(cОҰ,p Оұ mОұ)T , (C88a) 1 2 пҝҪ Im пҝҪ MОҰQ D iПү пҝҪ + Im пҝҪ MQОҰ D T вҲ’iПү пҝҪпҝҪ = ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,x Оұ + CJcq,p Оұ mОұwОұ 2) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(Пү вҲ’ wОұ)(cО ,x Оұ )T , (C88b) 1 2 пҝҪ Re пҝҪ MQОҰ D T вҲ’iПү пҝҪ вҲ’ Re пҝҪ MОҰQ D iПү пҝҪпҝҪ = ПҖ 2 Пү пҝҪ Оұ (cОҰ,p Оұ mОұ) Г— mвҲ’1 Оұ wвҲ’1 Оұ Оҙ(Пү вҲ’ wОұ)(cО ,x Оұ )T . (C88c) On the other hand, the classical equations of motion Eqs. (C67a) to (C67d) enable us to evaluate this set of equa- tions as a function of the circuitвҖҷs admittance parameters, 1 2 пҝҪ Im пҝҪ MОҰОҰ D пҝҪ + Im пҝҪ MОҰОҰ D T пҝҪпҝҪ = вҲ’(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD), Г— Im пҝҪ ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1 пҝҪ (LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD)T вҲ’ Пү2YG JD Im пҝҪ ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1 пҝҪ YG JD, (C89a) 1 2 пҝҪ Im пҝҪ MОҰQ D iПү пҝҪ + Im пҝҪ MQОҰ D T вҲ’iПү пҝҪпҝҪ = вҲ’(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD) Г— Im пҝҪ ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1 пҝҪ TD, (C89b) 1 2 пҝҪ Re пҝҪ MQОҰ D T вҲ’iПү пҝҪ вҲ’ Re пҝҪ MОҰQ D iПү пҝҪпҝҪ = вҲ’ПүYG JD Г— Im пҝҪ ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1 пҝҪ TD. (C89c) Substituting these terms in Eq. (C85) and using definitions of SW matrices {Оӣx, Оӣp} yields ПҖ 2 B пҝҪ b=1 пҝҪ Оұ sОұjbsОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) + tОұjbtОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) = О©j пҝҪ Y R JD(О©j)J(О©j)Y R JD(О©j)вҖ  +Y NR JD (О©j)J(О©j)Y NR JD (О©j)вҖ пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C90) Here, the Kernel J(Пү) is given by nD Г— nD positive semi- definite matrix, J(Пү) = вҲ’ Im пҝҪ ( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D )вҲ’1 пҝҪ , Пү вүҘ 0 where nD is the number of drive ports. As defined previously in the non-dissipative case, the dressed admittance М„Y is related to the bare Y via the following similitude transformation, М„Y(Пү) = МғOО© МғC вҲ’ 1 2 J МғOCY(Пү) МғOT C МғC вҲ’ 1 2 J МғOT О©, (C91) where МғOО© = пҝҪ OО© 0 0 1nD пҝҪ , (C92) МғOC = пҝҪ OC 0 0 1nD пҝҪ , (C93) МғCJ = пҝҪ CJ 0 0 1nD пҝҪ , (C94) with the n Г— n matrices OC, OО©, and CJ were previously de- fined in Appendix C1 during the diagonalization of the junc- tion sector. As outlined in Appendix A, the reciprocal Y R and nonreciprocal Y NR parts of the admittance are defined as the symmetric and antisymmetric responses М„YR = 1 2( М„Y + М„YT ), (C95) М„YNR = 1 2( М„Y вҲ’ М„YT ). (C96) On the other hand, the cross terms in Eq. (C82) are computed similarly iПҖ 2 B пҝҪ b=1 пҝҪ Оұ sОұjbtОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) вҲ’ tОұjbsОұjвҖІbОҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) = О©j пҝҪ М„YR JD(О©j)J(О©j) М„YNR JD (О©j))вҖ  + М„YNR JD (О©j)J(О©j) М„YR JD(О©j)вҖ пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C97) Regrouping the square and cross terms together to finally ob- tain correlated dissipation rates, ОіjjвҖІ = О©j пҝҪ YJD(О©j)J(О©j)YJD(О©j)вҖ пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C98) with М„Y = М„YR + М„YNR the total dressed admittance. Further- more, the kernel J(Пү) can be written as J(Пү) = 1 Пү Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(Пү) пҝҪ , (C99) where Ydrive(Пү) = ZвҲ’1 0 1nD + LвҲ’1 D iПү + iПүCD вүЎ ZвҲ’1 0 1nD + Ydc D (Пү). (C100) 26 We interpret Ydrive as the external admittance seen by the inner modes, filtered by the shunting capacitances CD and induc- tances LD located at drive ports. Therefore, the correlated de- cay rates are fully determined by the admittance that connects qubits and drive ports Y as well as the value of the characteris- tic impedance Z0 of the external transmission lines according to ОіjjвҖІ = пҝҪ YJD(О©j) Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ YJD(О©j)вҖ пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C101) The Purcell decays are given by diagonal elements of the dis- sipative rates, that is ОіjОә = пҝҪ YJD(О©j) Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ YJD(О©j)вҖ пҝҪ jj . (C102) 6. Impedance dissipative rates and Purcell decays In this section, we derive analytical expressions for corre- lated decay rates and Purcell decays, akin to was done in the previous section, but here as a function of the impedance re- sponse. Applying KirchoffвҖҷs equations to Cauer circuit of the impedance representation (see Apps. A and C 3) we obtain the dissipative equation of motion C МҲОҰ = вҲ’вҲӮU вҲӮОҰ вҲ’ M0ОҰ вҲ’ G МҮОҰ вҲ’ MD вҲ— ОҰ, (C103) where ОҰ = (ОҰT J , ОҰT I )T regrouped the junctions and inner modes fluxes, C, M0, G, are defined in Appendix C 3 and U = U(ОҰJ) is the junctionsвҖҷ cosine potential. Similarly to the admittance case, the dissipation matrix MD(t) = пҝҪ MJJ D MJI D MIJ D MII D пҝҪ (C104) is defined by its Fourier transform MJJ D (Пү) = вҲ’Пү4CJD( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD)вҲ’1CT JD, (C105) MJI D (Пү) = Пү4CJD( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD)вҲ’1CDTT D, (C106) MIJ D (Пү) = Пү4TDCD( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD)вҲ’1CT JD, (C107) MII D (Пү) = вҲ’Пү4TDCD( iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD)вҲ’1CDTT D. (C108) Here, J and I stand for junction and inner modes sectors re- spectively. Unlike the admittance case, the dissipation matrix is here symmetric, i.e., MT D = MD. This symmetry is a con- sequence of two factors: First, the absence of direct gyration in the impedance response (BвҲһ = 0) results in the symmetry of the diagonal blocks. Second, the use of the same descrip- tion (flux-flux, in this case) to parameterize both the junctions and inner modes in the impedance representation implies that the off-diagonal blocks of the dissipation matrix only differ by transposition. The equations of motions can be obtained from the Caldeira-Leggett Lagrangian L = LS + LB + LSB, (C109) LS = 1 2 МҮОҰT C МҮОҰ вҲ’ U(ОҰJ) вҲ’ 1 2ОҰT M0ОҰ + 1 2 МҮОҰT GОҰ, (C110) LB = пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ1 2 МҮxT ОұmОұ МҮxОұ вҲ’ 1 2xT ОұmОұw2 ОұxОұ пҝҪ , (C111) LSB = вҲ’ МҮОҰT пҝҪ Оұ О»Оұ МҮxОұ, (C112) where the minimal coupling LSB describes the direct capac- itive coupling between qubits and drive ports. The couplings matrices {О»Оұ} are chosen to reproduce the classical dissipa- tive equation of motion MD(Пү) = lim ОөвҶ’0+ M(Пү вҲ’ iОө), (C113) where M(Пү) = Пү4 пҝҪ Оұ О»ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2 Оұ)вҲ’1О»T Оұ. (C114) Up to correction O(О»2 Оұ), the classical Hamiltonian can be expressed as H = HS + HB + HSB with HS = 1 2(q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ)T CвҲ’1(q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ) + U(ОҰJ) + 1 2ОҰT M0ОҰ, (C115) HB = пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ1 2pT ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ pОұ + 1 2xT ОұmОұw2 ОұxОұ пҝҪ , (C116) HSB = qT пҝҪ Оұ cq,p Оұ pОұ + ОҰT пҝҪ Оұ cОҰ,p Оұ pОұ, (C117) where the Hamiltonian coupling matrices are now given by cq,p Оұ вүЎ пЈ« пЈӯ cqJ,p Оұ cQR,p Оұ cQG,p Оұ пЈ¶ пЈё = CвҲ’1О»ОұmвҲ’1 Оұ , (C118) cОҰ,p Оұ = G 2 cq,p Оұ . (C119) Moreover, the dissipation matrix can be written in terms of {cq,p Оұ } as M(Пү) = Пү4C пҝҪпҝҪ Оұ cq,p Оұ (Пү2 вҲ’ w2)вҲ’1mОұcq,p Оұ T пҝҪ CT . (C120) In contrast to Refs , the system-bath HSB in Eq. (C115) contains a charge-flux couplings arising from the presence of gyrators in the inner modes description (G Мё= 0). 27 Similar to the non-dissipative case, we apply successively the transformations Pcu = пҝҪ C 1/2 J OC 0 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C121a) PвҲҶ = пҝҪ 1n вҲ’TT cu 0 1m+2l пҝҪ , (C121b) Po = пҝҪ OО© 0 0 1n пҝҪ , (C121c) to obtain the normal modes of the junctions sectors. Hence, the couplings cОұ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ cОҰJ,p Оұ cqJ,p Оұ cОҰR,p Оұ cОҰG,p Оұ cQR,p Оұ cQG,p Оұ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё (C122) transform to пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 OО©C 1/2 J OCcqJ,p Оұ вҲ’OО©C 1/2 J OCRT J cQR,p Оұ вҲ’OО©C 1/2 J OCNT J cQG,p Оұ 0 cQR,p Оұ cОҰG,p Оұ cQG,p Оұ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё (C123) and the system-bath coupling is written compactly as HSB = XT пҝҪ Оұ cОұpОұ with X = (ОҰT J , qT J , ОҰT R, ОҰT G, QT R, QT G)T the corresponding phase-space coordinate. The second step con- sists in diagonalizing the gyrator-inner modes (and thus elim- inating the zero modes as well) via the symplectic transfor- mations given by Eq. (C53). Consequently, the new effective couplings denoted cвҖІ Оұ are given by пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ 0 OО©C 1/2 J OCcqJ,p Оұ вҲ’OО©C 1/2 J OCRT J cQR,p Оұ вҲ’OО©C 1/2 J OCNT J cQG,p Оұ 0 О© вҲ’ 1 2 G cОҰG,p Оұ + ОЈx 2 О© 1 2 GcQG,p Оұ О© 1 2 RcQR,p Оұ вҲ’ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G cОҰG,p Оұ + О© 1 2 G 2 cQG,p Оұ пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C124) Finally, we eliminate dispersively the inner modes via the symplectic SchriefferвҖ“Wolff transfromation Ssw = exp(AJ), see Appendix B. Using Eq. (B13a) and Eq. (C55), the non- vanishing matrix elements of the generator A are given by (Axp)ОұОІ = вҲ’ О© 5 2 JОұО© вҲ’ 1 2 RОІ О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 RОІ (R T J )ОұОІ, (C125a) (Apx)ОұОІ = О© 3 2 JОұО© 1 2 RОІ О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 RОІ (R T J )ОұОІ, (C125b) (Axx)Оұ2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 5 2 JОұО© вҲ’ 1 2 Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2k, (C125c) (Axx)Оұ2k = вҲ’О© 1 2 JОұО© вҲ’ 1 2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C125d) (Axp)Оұ2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 5 2 JОұО© вҲ’ 1 2 Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C125e) (Axp)Оұ2k = вҲ’О© 1 2 JОұО© вҲ’ 1 2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2k, (C125f) (Apx)Оұ2kвҲ’1 = О© 3 2 JОұО© 1 2 Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C125g) (App)Оұ2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 3 2 JОұО© 1 2 Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2k. (C125h) To first order, this leads to the following couplings, cОұ пҝҪвҶ’ МғcОұ = (1 + JA + O(A2))cвҖІ Оұ. (C126) Projecting on the junctionsвҖҷ subspace, one obtain the final couplings as a function of the original ones МғcОҰJ,p Оұ = ОӣОҰ,ОҰG p cОҰG,p Оұ + ОӣОҰ,QG p cQG,p Оұ , (C127) МғcqJ,p Оұ = О© 1 2 J OО©C 1 2 J OCcqJ,p Оұ + Оӣq,ОҰG p cОҰG,p Оұ + Оӣq,QR p cQR,p Оұ + Оӣq,QG p cQG,p Оұ , (C128) 28 where the SchriefferвҖ“Wolff (SW) matrices are defined as (ОӣОҰ,ОҰG p )Оұ2kвҲ’1 = О© 3 2 JОұ О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C129a) (ОӣОҰ,ОҰG p )Оұ2k = О© 3 2 JОұ О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2k, (C129b) (ОӣОҰ,QG p )Оұ2kвҲ’1 = вҲ’ О© 3 2 JОұО©Gk 2(О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (N T J )Оұ2k, (C129c) (ОӣОҰ,QG p )Оұ2k = О© 3 2 JОұО©Gk 2(О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C129d) (Оӣq,ОҰG p )Оұ2kвҲ’1 = О© 1 2 JОұО©Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2k, (C129e) (Оӣq,ОҰG p )Оұ2k = вҲ’ О© 1 2 JОұО©Gk О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C129f) (Оӣq,QR p )ОұОІ = О© 1 2 JОұО©2 RОІ О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk (R T J )ОұОІ, (C129g) (Оӣq,QG p )Оұ2kвҲ’1 = О© 1 2 JОұО©2 Gk 2(О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (N T J )Оұ2kвҲ’1, (C129h) (Оӣq,QG p )Оұ2k = О© 1 2 JОұО©2 Gk 2(О© 2 JОұ вҲ’ О©2 Gk) (N T J )Оұ2k. (C129i) Similar to the admittance analysis of Eq. (C127), the effective junctions-baths coupling matrices МғcОұ contains two contribu- tions, one coming from the dressing with inner modes result- ing from SW transformations (terms proportional to Оӣp) and direct couplings between qubit and drive ports (terms propor- tional to the dressed frequency О©J). Besides, this coupling matrices allow us to compute the quantum dissipative rates (see Appendix F for the derivation of the master equation) ОіjjвҖІ = ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪпҝҪ МғcqJ,p Оұ + i МғcОҰJ,p Оұ пҝҪвӢҶ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) Г— пҝҪ МғcqJ,p Оұ + i МғcОҰJ,p Оұ пҝҪT пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C130) Using the definitions of МғcОұ, the squared terms in the last equa- tion can be written in terms of the dissipation matrix as ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcqJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcqJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcОҰJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcОҰJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ = пҝҪ (О¶J 1 , О¶R 1 , О¶G 1 )CвҲ’1 Im пҝҪ MD(О©j) О© 2 j пҝҪ CвҲ’T (О¶J 1 , О¶R 1 , О¶G 1 )T пҝҪ jjвҖІ + пҝҪ (0, 0, О¶G 2 )CвҲ’1 Im пҝҪ MD(О©j) О© 2 j пҝҪ CвҲ’T (0, 0, О¶G 2 )T пҝҪ jjвҖІ , (C131) where О¶J 1 = О© 1 2 J OО©C 1 2 J OC, О¶R 1 = Оӣq,QR p , О¶G 1 = Оӣq,ОҰG p Y 2 + Оӣq,QG p , О¶G 2 = ОӣОҰ,ОҰG p Y 2 + ОӣОҰ,QG p , (C132) with Y = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ iПғyПүg1 ... 0 0 iПғyПүgk пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (C133a) CвҲ’1 = пҝҪ CвҲ’1 J TT J TJ 1m+2l пҝҪ . (C133b) Using the definitions of SW matrices {Оӣp} to evaluate the last set of equation which leads to ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcqJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcqJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ + ПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcОҰJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcОҰJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ = О© 2 j пҝҪ Z R(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z RвҖ  (О©j) пҝҪ jjвҖІ + О© 2 j пҝҪ Z NR(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z NRвҖ  (О©j) пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C134) The cross terms are obtained similarly iПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcqJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcОҰJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ вҲ’ iПҖ 2 пҝҪ Оұ пҝҪ МғcОҰJ,p Оұ mОұwОұОҙ(О©j вҲ’ wОұ) МғcqJ,pT Оұ пҝҪ jjвҖІ = О© 2 j пҝҪ Z R(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z NRвҖ  (О©j) пҝҪ jjвҖІ + О© 2 j пҝҪ Z NR(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z RвҖ  (О©j) пҝҪ jjвҖІ . (C135) 29 Regrouping the squared and cross terms together, we finally obtain the correlated decay rates ОіjjвҖІ = О© 2 j пҝҪ ZJD(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z вҖ  JD(О©j) пҝҪ jjвҖІ , (C136) and the Purcell decays are given by the diagonal elements, ОіjОә = О© 2 j пҝҪ ZJD(О©j) Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(О©j) пҝҪ Z вҖ  JD(О©j) пҝҪ jj , (C137) with Zdrive given by Zdrive(Пү) = Z01nD + CвҲ’1 D iПү вүЎ Z01nD + Zdc D (Пү), (C138) Similarly to Eq. (C100), we interpret Zdrive as the external impedance seen by the inner modes, filtered by the capaci- tances CD connected in series with drive ports. 7. Admittance formulas for driving amplitudes We now compute the qubit-drives Hamiltonian ЛҶHv that re- sult from (time-dependent) classical voltage sources V(t) = (V1(t), . . . , VnD(t))T present in the nD drives ports, see Fig. 5. The classical equations of motion are given by CJ МҲОҰJ = вҲ’ вҲӮU вҲӮОҰJ вҲ’ LвҲ’1 J ОҰJ + YG J МҮОҰJ вҲ’ TJ МҮQ вҲ’ MОҰОҰ D вҲ— ОҰJ вҲ’ MОҰQ D вҲ— Q вҲ’ MОҰ V вҲ— V(t), (C139a) МҲQ = вҲ’ CвҲ’1 I Q + TT J МҮОҰJ вҲ’ Ze МҮQ вҲ’ MQОҰ D вҲ— ОҰJ вҲ’ MQQ D вҲ— Q вҲ’ MQ V вҲ— V(t), (C139b) which differs from the equation of motion Eq. (C66) by sim- ply adding a voltage source term MV вҲ— V(t). Here, the (n + m + 2l) Г— nD voltage-source matrix MV (t) is defined by its Fourier transform MОҰ V (Пү) = вҲ’(LвҲ’1 JD вҲ’ Пү2CJD + iПүYG JD) Г— пҝҪ iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D пҝҪвҲ’1 ZвҲ’1 0 , (C140a) MQ V (Пү) = iПүTT D пҝҪ iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD + LвҲ’1 D пҝҪвҲ’1 ZвҲ’1 0 . (C140b) The existence of non-zero MОҰ V arises from the direct coupling between the qubit and drive ports (CJD, LвҲ’1 JD, YG JD Мё= 0). The Lagrangian is given by L = LV=0 + LV where LV=0 = LS + LB + LSB is the time independent Lagrangian (i.e., without drives) given in Eq. (C69). The drives-Lagrangian is given by LV(t) = вҲ’ОҰT J (MОҰ V вҲ— V(t)) вҲ’ QT (MQ V вҲ— V(t)), (C141) where LV depends only on the generalized coordinates {ОҰJ, Q}. We note that one could choose to drive the system via { МҮОҰJ, МҮQ}, both frames being related via a canonical trans- formation . However, in the former gauge, the Hamilto- nian takes a simpler form H = HV=0+HV where HV=0 was computed previously in Eq. (C8) and HV(t) takes the form HV(t) = ОҰT J (MОҰ V вҲ— V(t)) + QT (MQ V вҲ— V(t)) = XT (MV вҲ— V(t)), (C142) with XT = (ОҰT J , qT J , QT R, QT G, О T R, О T G) the phase space co- ordinate and MV given by the 2(n + m + 2l) Г— nD matrix MV = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ MОҰ V 0 MQR V MQG V 0 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C143) Here, we remind the reader that n, m, l are the number of junction ports, LC-oscillators (reciprocal poles of the re- sponse) and gyrators (nonreciprocal poles of the response) re- spectively. The voltage-source matrix transforms under a symplectic transformation S as MV (t) пҝҪвҶ’ пҝҪ MV (t) вүЎ (SвҲ’1)T MV (t). By linearity of the Fourier transform, it translates in frequency domain as MV (Пү) пҝҪвҶ’ пҝҪ MV (Пү) вүЎ (SвҲ’1)T MV (Пү). Applying successively пҝҪ SJ 0 0 SI пҝҪ (C144) given by Eq. (C52) and Eq. (C53) to diagonalize both junc- tions and inner modes sectors separately, and the symplec- tic SW Ssw = exp(AJ) to eliminate dispersively the inner modes (reciprocal and nonreciprocal poles) as detailed in Ap- pendix B, the transformed voltage-source matrix пҝҪ MV (Пү) pro- jected on the junctions subspace is given by пҝҪ MV ОҰJ = О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCMОҰ V + Apx пҝҪ О© вҲ’ 1 2 R MQR V О© вҲ’ 1 2 G MQG V пҝҪ + App пҝҪ 0 ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G MQG V пҝҪ , (C145a) пҝҪ MV qJ = вҲ’Axx пҝҪ О© вҲ’ 1 2 R MQR V О© вҲ’ 1 2 G MQG V пҝҪ вҲ’ Axp пҝҪ 0 ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G MQG V пҝҪ , (C145b) where the generators {Axx, Axp, Apx, App} are computed as in Eq. (B13a) in Appendix B. This leads to пҝҪ MV ОҰJ(Пү) = О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 пҝҪ Y NR(О©J) + Y dc(Пү) пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(Пү)/Z0, пҝҪ MV qJ(Пү) = вҲ’О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 Im[Y ac,R(О©J)]YdriveвҲ’1(Пү)/Z0, (C146) 30 where Ydrive is given by: Ydrive(Пү) = ZвҲ’1 0 1nD + LвҲ’1 D iПү + iПүCD. (C147) Similarly, the off-diagonal dc part of the admittance Ydc JD is Ydc JD(Пү) = 1 iПү LвҲ’1 JD + iПүCJD. (C148) Therefore, the quantum Hamiltonian due to the external drives takes the form ЛҶHv = n пҝҪ j=1 nD пҝҪ d=1 пҝҪ Оөjd(t)ЛҶbj + ОөвӢҶ jd(t)ЛҶbвҖ  j пҝҪ , (C149) where the driving amplitude contribution of junction port j from drive port d is Оөjd(t) = 1 вҲҡ 2 пҝҪ пҝҪ MV ОҰJ вҲ’ iпҝҪ MV qJпҝҪ jd вҲ— Vd(t) = О© вҲ’ 1 2 j 2ПҖ вҲҡ 2 пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dПүeiПүt Г— пҝҪпҝҪ Y ac JD(О©J) + Y dc JD(Пү) пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(Пү)/Z0 пҝҪ jd Vd(Пү), (C150) with the ac part of the admittance given by Yac = Yac,R + YNR. For a single tone drive Vd(t) = vd sin(Пүdt), we obtain ex- plicitly Оөjd(t) = вҲ’iО© вҲ’ 1 j 2 vd 2 вҲҡ 2Z0 пҝҪ Оұjd[Пүd]eiПүdt вҲ’ Оұjd[вҲ’Пүd]eвҲ’iПүdtпҝҪ , (C151) with Оұjd[Пүd] = пҝҪпҝҪ Y ac JD(О©j) + Y dc JD(Пүd) пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1(Пүd) пҝҪ jd = nD пҝҪ dвҖІ=1 пҝҪ Y ac jdвҖІ(О©j) + Y dc jdвҖІ(Пүd) пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 dвҖІd (Пүd). (C152) For realistic pulse drives with finite rise and fall times, one can either use the integral formula Eq. (C150) or decompose the pulse into its Fourier series Vd(t) = пҝҪ Пүd vd sin(Пүdt) to account for the effect of other harmonics {Пүd}, and the to- tal drive amplitudes is simply the sum of single-tone drives amplitudes, i.e., Оөtot jd(t) = пҝҪ Пүd Оөjd(t), (C153) with Оөjd(t) being the single-tone drives amplitude associated to frequency Пүd given by Eq. (C151). The analytical formula obtained in Eq. (C150) allows us to characterize the classical crosstalk Xij experienced by qubit i while driving from the port d(j) associated to the control line of qubit j, taking into account not only the possible coupling between junction port i and drive port d(j) but also the possi- ble stray coupling between drivesвҖҷ ports d(i) and d(j) which occurs whenever Ydrive is not diagonal. Thus, we extend the definition of classical crosstalks Xij, as given in Ref. , to account for both direct and nonreciprocal couplings: Xij = 20 log10 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оұid(j) Оұjd(j) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ (dB). (C154) The matrix element Оұjd is obtained from an nГ—nD matrix Оұ, defined as Оұ = {Y ac JD(О©J) + Y dc JD(Пүd)}YdriveвҲ’1(Пүd), where Пүd is the drive frequency and using the notation [Y(О©J)]jd = Yjd(О©j). In summary, the matrix Оұ enables the computa- tion of drive amplitudes Оөjd(t) (see Eq. (C151)) and classical crosstalks between qubit ports during drive operations from different control lines (see Eq. (C154)). 8. Impedance formulas for driving amplitudes We now obtain analytical expressions for the qubit- drives Hamiltonian in terms of the impedance response. Taking into account classical voltage sources V(t) = (V1(t), . . . , VnD(t))T , the KirchhoffвҖҷs equations are given by C МҲОҰ = вҲ’вҲӮU вҲӮОҰ вҲ’M0ОҰвҲ’G МҮОҰвҲ’MD вҲ—ОҰвҲ’MV вҲ—V(t), (C155) where ОҰ = (ОҰT J , ОҰT R, ОҰT G)T . The (n+m+2l)Г—nD voltage- matrix MV (t) = пЈ« пЈӯ MJ V (t) MR V (t) MG V (t) пЈ¶ пЈё (C156) is defined by its Fourier transform MJ V (Пү) = вҲ’Пү2CJD пҝҪ iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD пҝҪвҲ’1 ZвҲ’1 0 , (C157a) MR V (Пү) = +Пү2RDCD пҝҪ iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD пҝҪвҲ’1 ZвҲ’1 0 , (C157b) MG V (Пү) = +Пү2NDCD пҝҪ iПү Z0 1nD вҲ’ Пү2CD пҝҪвҲ’1 ZвҲ’1 0 . (C157c) As in the admittance case, the Lagrangian can be divided in two parts, namely a time-independent Lagrangian LV=0 given by Eq. (C109) and a time-dependent part LV L = LV=0 + LV(t), (C158) where LV(t) = вҲ’ОҰT J пҝҪ MJ V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ вҲ’ ОҰT R пҝҪ MR V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ вҲ’ ОҰT G пҝҪ MG V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ . (C159) 31 Also as in the admittance case, we make a gauge choice in which we drive the system via the generalized coordinates (ОҰJ, ОҰR, ОҰG). This choice is to be contrasted to Ref. where the choice of driven quadratures is instead ( МҮОҰJ, МҮОҰR). By definition, both pictures reproduce classical equations of motion and the corresponding lagrangians are related by a to- tal derivative. In this frame, the Legendre transform is simple to perform and we obtain a compact expression for the total Hamiltonian H = HV=0 + HV(t), (C160) where HV=0 is given in Eq. (C51). The drive Hamiltonian HV(t) is: HV(t) = ОҰT J пҝҪ MJ V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ + ОҰT R пҝҪ MR V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ + ОҰT G пҝҪ MG V вҲ— V(t) пҝҪ = XT (MV вҲ— V(t)) , (C161) with XT = (ОҰT J , qT J , ОҰT R, ОҰT G, QT R, QT G), (C162) MV = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ MJ V 0 MR V MG V 0 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C163) After diagonalizing the junctions modes, the voltage-matrix is transformed as MV пҝҪвҶ’ пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCMJ V 0 MR V + RJMJ V MG V + NJMJ V 0 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C164) Repeating the same steps of diagonalizing the inner modes and rescaling by dressed frequencies leads to MвҖІ V = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCMJ V 0 О© вҲ’ 1 2 R MR V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 R RJMJ V О© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V 0 вҲ’ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V вҲ’ ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё . (C165) Finally, eliminating dispersively the inner modes via a SW transformation yields the following voltage-matrices cou- plings пҝҪ MV ОҰJ = О© вҲ’ 1 J 2 OО©C вҲ’ 1 J 2 OCMJ V + Apx пҝҪ О© вҲ’ 1 2 R MR V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 R RJMJ V О© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V пҝҪ + App пҝҪ 0 вҲ’ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V вҲ’ ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V пҝҪ , (C166a) пҝҪ MV qJ = вҲ’Axx пҝҪ О© вҲ’ 1 2 R MR V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 R RJMJ V О© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V + О© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V пҝҪ вҲ’ Axp пҝҪ 0 ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G MG V вҲ’ ОЈxО© вҲ’ 1 2 G NJMJ V пҝҪ , (C166b) where A is the generator of the SW transformation given in Eq. (C125). Consequently, the previous equations can be writ- ten in terms of the impedance response (пҝҪ MV ОҰJ)jd = пҝҪпҝҪ О© вҲ’ 1 j 2 Пү Im пҝҪ Z dc JD(Пү) пҝҪ +О© 1 2 j Im пҝҪ Z ac,R JD (О©j) пҝҪпҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(Пү) пҝҪ jd , (C167a) (пҝҪ MV qJ)jd = пҝҪ О© 1 2 j Z NR JD (О©j)ZdriveвҲ’1(Пү) пҝҪ jd . (C167b) After quantizing the junction modes , the quantum Hamiltonian accounting for the the external drives takes the form ЛҶHv = n пҝҪ j=1 nD пҝҪ d=1 пҝҪ Оөjd(t)ЛҶbj + ОөвӢҶ jd(t)ЛҶbвҖ  j пҝҪ , (C168) where the drive amplitudes between junction port j and drive port d are Оөjd(t) = 1 вҲҡ 2 пҝҪ пҝҪ MV ОҰJ вҲ’ iпҝҪ MV qJпҝҪ jd вҲ— Vd(t) = вҲ’ iО© 1 2 j 2ПҖ вҲҡ 2 пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dПүeiПүt Г— пҝҪпҝҪ Z ac JD(О©J) + ПүО© вҲ’1 J Z dc JD(Пү) пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(Пү) пҝҪ jd Vd(Пү), (C169) where the ac part of the impedance is given by Zac = Zac,R + ZNR. For a single tone drive Vd(t) = vd sin(Пүdt), we obtain explicitly Оөjd(t) = вҲ’О© 1 2 j vd 2 вҲҡ 2 пҝҪ Оұjd[Пүd]eiПүdt вҲ’ Оұjd[вҲ’Пүd]eвҲ’iПүdtпҝҪ , (C170) with Оұjd[Пүd] = пҝҪпҝҪ Z ac JD(О©j) + ПүdО© вҲ’1 J Z dc JD(Пүd) пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(Пүd) пҝҪ jd = nD пҝҪ dвҖІ=1 пҝҪ Z ac jdвҖІ(О©j) + ПүdО© вҲ’1 j Z dc jdвҖІ(Пүd) пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1 dвҖІd (Пүd). (C171) 32 Analogously to the admittance analysis, we can compute the classical crosstalk Xij experienced by a qubit i while driving from the control line d(j) associated to the qubit j to find Xij = 20 log10 пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ Оұid(j) Оұjd(j) пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ (dB), (C172) with Оұjd is the matrix element of n Г— nD matrix Оұ = пҝҪ Z ac JD(О©J) + ПүО© вҲ’1 J Z dc JD(Пүd) пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1(Пүd). Here, Пүd is the drive frequency, and we use the notation [Z(О©J)]jd = Zjd(О©j). Appendix D: Exact elimination of nondynamical modes Because in the perturbative regime the approximate and exact elimination yield the same effective models, in Ap- pendix C we have approximately eliminated the nondynam- ical modes. Here, we perform an exact elimination of these nondynamical modes, extending the validity beyond the dis- persive regime, partially in line with the approach outlined in Ref. . We emphasize that despite its ad-hoc nature this ap- proach is equivalent to the novel method for zero-mode elim- ination proposed in . For the admittance, our starting point is Eq. (C7). From there, we perform the symplectic triangular transformation SвҲҶy : пҝҪ ОҰJ вҶ’ ОҰJ, qJ вҶ’ qJ вҲ’ TJQ Q вҶ’ Q О  вҶ’ О  вҲ’ TT J ОҰJ. (D1) Following, to eliminate the nondynamical modes we apply the symplectic transformation done in the main derivation Eq. (C11). After these transformations, the quadratic form of the Hamiltonian (exluding the linear terms from the junction potentials) is H = пҝҪHJ K KT HI пҝҪ , (D2) with HJ = пҝҪ TJTT J YG J CвҲ’1 J /2 (YG J CвҲ’1 J )T /2 CвҲ’1 J пҝҪ , HI = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ О©r О©r 0 0 О©g О©g пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (D3) and K = пҝҪ 0 вҲ’RJО©1/2 r NR J О©1/2 g вҲ’NL J О©1/2 g 0 0 0 0 пҝҪ (D4) NL(R) J = пҝҪ nL(R) 1 , . . . nL(R) l пҝҪ . (D5) As we have not linearized the junction potential in this elimi- nation, the full Hamiltonian is H = XT HX/2 + U(ПҶJ) with the junctions potential U(ПҶJ) = вҲ’ пҝҪ n EJn cos(ПҶJn/ПҶ0), and X = (ОҰJ, qJ, QR, О r, QD G, О D g ). The superscript D stands for dynamical, as all the modes in the gyrator sector now correspond to dynamical modes, and its dimension has been reduced by half, from 2l вҶ’ l. For the impedance, we start directly from the Lagrangian Eq. (C38). Instead of doing a triangular transformation, we directly obtain the inverse of C using known formulas for the inversion of 2 Г— 2 block matrices CвҲ’1 = пҝҪ CвҲ’1 J + TT J TJ TT J TJ 1m+2l пҝҪ . (D6) Then, the Hamiltonian is simply H = 1 2(q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ)T CвҲ’1(q вҲ’ G 2 ОҰ) + 1 2ОҰT r LвҲ’1 r ОҰr + U(ПҶJ). (D7) We eliminate the nondynamical modes applying the same symplectic transformations as in the main derivation Eq. (C53). The quadratic form of the Hamiltonian (once again exluding the linear terms from the junction potentials) finally read as Eq. (D2) now with HJ = пҝҪ0 0 0 CвҲ’1 J + TT J TJ пҝҪ , HI = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈӯ О©r О©r 0 0 О©g О©g пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈё, (D8) and K = пҝҪ0 0 0 0 0 RT J О©1/2 r (NR J )T О©1/2 g (NL J )T О©1/2 g пҝҪ . (D9) The full Hamiltonian is H = XT HX/2 + U(ПҶJ) with X = пҝҪОҰJ, qJ, О r, QR, О D g , QD G пҝҪ , and U(ПҶJ) the junctions potential. We stress that for a proper quantization of the whole re- sponse beyond the perturbative regime, Hamiltonians where the nondynamical modes have been exactly eliminated must be used . Appendix E: Josephson junctionsвҖҷ nonlinearities We now derive the first order corrections from the weakly anharmonic nonlinear potential of the Josephson junctions. We obtain qubit anharmonicities, dispersive shifts and linear corrections from normal ordering of a Taylor expansion of the junction potential. We do so with a general derivation of the corrections from the dressing of the junctions mode, which is valid for both admittance and impedance approaches. Con- sider the general case in which the initial Josephson flux vari- ables МғОҰJ are related to the final frame variables X = (ОҰ, q), expressed in dimensions of (energy Г— time)1/2 via a dimen- sionless transformation matrix Оұ of shape (n Г— t) МғОҰJ = Z1/2 J ОұX = Z1/2 J (ОұПҶОҰ + Оұqq), (E1) 33 with Z1/2 J the necessary diagonal rescaling to obtain dimen- sions of flux, n the number of junctions and t = (n + m + l) the total number of dynamical modes. We have separated the flux from charge sectors in the final frame to simplify the fol- lowing calculations. The nonlinear terms in the original frame are МғHnl = вҲ’ пҝҪ i 1 24пҝҪLJiПҶ2 0 МғПҶ4 Ji (E2) such that in the final frame we have Hnl = вҲ’ n пҝҪ i=1 1 24пҝҪLJiПҶ2 0 z2 Ji( t пҝҪ k=1 ОұПҶ ikПҶk + Оұq ikqk)4. (E3) Introducing ЛҶПҶk = пҝҪ Д§ 2(ЛҶbвҖ  k + ЛҶbk), ЛҶqk = i пҝҪ Д§ 2(ЛҶbвҖ  k вҲ’ ЛҶbk), (E4) substituting and rearranging we get Hnl = вҲ’ пҝҪ i E(i) C 12 z2 Ji пҝҪz2 Ji ( пҝҪ k пҝҪОұikЛҶbk + пҝҪОұвҲ— ikЛҶbвҖ  k)4, (E5) with ECi = e2/2CJi, пҝҪzJi = пҝҪ пҝҪLJi/CJi, пҝҪОұ = ОұПҶ вҲ’ iОұq. Here, CJi is simply (CJ)ii obtained from either DвҲһ or A0. We expand the series using the general formula пҝҪ пҝҪ k ОұkЛҶbk + ОұвҲ— kЛҶbвҖ  k пҝҪN = пҝҪ j,s пҝҪ CN j,s пҝҪ пҝҪ k ОұвҲ— kЛҶbвҖ  k пҝҪs Г— пҝҪ пҝҪ k ОұkЛҶbk пҝҪtпҝҪ пҝҪ k |Оұk|2пҝҪjпҝҪ , (E6) where t, j, s are nonnegative integers, CN j,s = (N!/j!s!t!2j), 0 вүӨ j вүӨ N, 0 вүӨ s вүӨ N вҲ’ 2j, and t = N вҲ’ 2j вҲ’ s. We obtained the above expression with a rearrangement of the formulas presented in Ref. . Hence, expanding Eq. (E5) we have Hnl = HОҪ + HОІ + O(ПҶ6 J) with HОҪ = вҲ’ t пҝҪ rs пҝҪ ОҪrsЛҶbrЛҶbs + 2ОҪrsЛҶbвҖ  rЛҶbs + ОҪrsЛҶbвҖ  rЛҶbвҖ  s пҝҪ HОІ = вҲ’ t пҝҪ pqrs пҝҪ 6ОІpqrsЛҶbвҖ  pЛҶbвҖ  qЛҶbrЛҶbs + (4ОІpqrsЛҶbвҖ  pЛҶbвҖ  qЛҶbвҖ  rЛҶbs + h.c.) + (ОІpqrsЛҶbpЛҶbqЛҶbrЛҶbs + h.c.) пҝҪ , (E7) where the coefficients are ОІpqrs = n пҝҪ i E(i) C 12 z2 Ji пҝҪz2 Ji пҝҪОұipпҝҪОұiqпҝҪОұirпҝҪОұis, ОҪrs = 6 пҝҪ p ОІpprs. (E8) The bar over the subindexes refer to conjugation, for example ОІpqrs = n пҝҪ i E(i) C 12 z2 Ji пҝҪz2 Ji пҝҪОұвҲ— ipпҝҪОұвҲ— iqпҝҪОұirпҝҪОұis. (E9) The inclusion of these conjugate coefficients is crucial be- cause, in contrast to the expansion for the nonlinearities given in Ref. and used in Ref. , we are allowing Оұ to mix flux and charge variables. Now, assuming that all the nondiagonal terms of пҝҪОұ are lar fashion as to what was done in Ref. , to first order we obtain for the linear coefficients between qubit modes Оіij вүғ E(i) c 2 пҝҪzJi пҝҪzJi пҝҪ2 пҝҪОұiiпҝҪОұij + E(j) c 2 пҝҪzJj пҝҪzJj пҝҪ2 пҝҪОұjj пҝҪОұвҲ— ji, (E10) between qubit and inner modes ОҪik вүғ E(i) c 2 пҝҪzJi пҝҪzJi пҝҪ2 пҝҪОұiiпҝҪОұik, (E11) and all other ОҪrs вүғ 0 + O(k2/Оҙ2). This implies that we can write the coefficients in matrix form пҝҪОҪ = пҝҪОұвҖ Z1/2 J ОӣZ1/2 J пҝҪОұ, (E12) with Оӣ = пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ E(1) c 2пҝҪzJ1 вҲҡ О¶1 ... E(n) c 2пҝҪzJn вҲҡ О¶n 0 0 пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈ· пЈё , (E13) where О¶i вүЎ (пҝҪLJi/LJi), such that ОҪrs вүғ (пҝҪОҪ)rs. Therefore, we obtain to first order HОі = вҲ’2 Д§(ОұПҶОҰ + Оұqq)T Z1/2 J ОӣZ1/2 J (ОұПҶОҰ + Оұqq) = вҲ’1 2ОҰT J (Lnl J )вҲ’1ОҰJ, (E14) where Lnl J = пҝҪLJ пЈ« пЈ¬ пЈ¬ пЈӯ Д§Пү1 2E(1) c ... Д§Пүn 2E(n) c пЈ¶ пЈ· пЈ· пЈё, (E15) similar to Eq. (138) of Ref. . We note that Пүi = 1 пҝҪ LJiCJi here corresponds to the frequencies in the bare basis after in- cluding a possible frequency shift due to LвҲ’1 J , with LJi the di- agonal entries of (LJ)ii defined in Eq. (C29) (Eq. (C64) for the impedance), and not to the final frame frequencies. Then, if at the beginning of our treatment to Hamiltonian H0 Eq. (C7) (Eq. (C62) for the impedance) we add and substract HОі H = H0 + HОі вҲ’ HОі = HвҖІ 0 вҲ’ HОі, (E16) 34 we can account for the linear corrections coming from the nonlinearities to first order if we satisfy the condition Пү2 i = пҝҪПү2 Ji пҝҪ 1 + О¶i вҲ’ 2E(i) c Д§Пүi пҝҪ , (E17) with пҝҪПүJi = 1/ пҝҪ CJi пҝҪLJi and О¶i = пҝҪ пҝҪLJi/LJi. Solving this expression for small anharmonicities E(i) c /Д§ПүJi вүӘ 1 we ob- tain Пүi = пҝҪПүJi пҝҪ 1 + О¶i пҝҪ 1 вҲ’ E(i) c /Д§пҝҪПүJi (1 + О¶i)3/2 вҲ’ E(i) c /Д§пҝҪПүJi пҝҪ , (E18) which for О¶i вҶ’ 0 (the case with no inductive poles) reduces to Пүi = пҝҪПүJi вҲ’ E(i) c /Д§ 1 вҲ’ E(i) c /Д§пҝҪПүJi , (E19) recovering as a special case Eq. (144) of Ref. . These for- mulas are valid for both the admittance and impedance meth- ods. As for the self kerrs and dispersive shifts to first order in the expansion of Eq. (E7) they are Оҙi = вҲ’12ОІiiii, ПҮik = вҲ’24ОІiikk. (E20) To explicitly obtain their values, we have to obtain the entries of Оұ. For convenience of notation we divide Оұ in submatrices Оұ = пҝҪ ОұПҶ J Оұq J ОұО  R ОұQ R ОұО  NR ОұQ NR пҝҪ . (E21) From the derivation done in Appendix C, for the admittance we have Оұ = (пҝҪSПҶ J)вҲ’1PПҶ JSвҲ’1 sw, (E22) where PПҶ J is the projector onto the junctions flux subspace, (пҝҪSПҶ J)вҲ’1 = Z вҲ’1/2 J OCC вҲ’1/2 J OО©О© вҲ’1/2 J , and ZJ = (LJ/CJ)1/2. In the full perturbative approach and taking SвҲ’1 sw to first order we obtain (ОұПҶ J)ПҶJ ij = Оҙij, (Оұq J)ij = 0, (ОұО  R)iОі = вҲ’ОҳвҲ’1 i,Оі пҝҪПүiПүrОі(rОі)i, (ОұQ R)iОі = 0, (ОұО  NR)iОј = вҲ’ОҳвҲ’1 i,Ој пҝҪПүiПүgОј(nL Ој)i, (ОұQ NR)iОј = ОҳвҲ’1 i,Ој пҝҪПүiПүgОј(nR Ој )i. (E23) with Оҳi,Оі = Пү2 i вҲ’ Пү2 rОі. Whereas for the impedance Оұ = пҝҪпҝҪSПҶ J 0 пҝҪSПҶ I пҝҪSq I пҝҪ SвҲ’1 sw, (E24) with пҝҪSПҶ J = Z вҲ’1/2 J OT CC вҲ’1/2 J OT О©О© вҲ’1/2 J , пҝҪSПҶ I = пҝҪ Z вҲ’1/2 J RT J О©вҲ’1/2 R Z вҲ’1/2 J NT J О©вҲ’1/2 g пҝҪ , пҝҪSq I = пҝҪ 0 вҲ’Z вҲ’1/2 J NT J ОЈxО©вҲ’1/2 g пҝҪ . (E25) By simply substituting and rearranging we explicitly obtain (ОұПҶ J)ij = Оҙij вҲ’ Im[Zac,R ij пҝҪzJizJj , (Оұq J)ij = вҲ’ 2Пү2 j пҝҪzizj пҝҪ Ој ОҳвҲ’1 jОј ПүgОј Im{Res(ZNR(ПүgОј))ij}, (ОұО  R)ij = 1 вҲҡzJi (rОі)i вҲҡПүrОі пҝҪ Пү2 rОі Пү2rОі вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ , (ОұQ R)ij = 0, (ОұО  NR)ij = 1 вҲҡzJi (nL Ој)i вҲҡПүgОј пҝҪ Пү2 gОј Пү2gОј вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ , (ОұQ NR)ij = вҲ’ 1 вҲҡzJi (nR Ој )i вҲҡПүgОј пҝҪ Пү2 gОј Пү2gОј вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ , (E26) with the residue given by Res(ZNR(ПүgОј)) = limsвҶ’iПүgОј (s вҲ’ iПүgОј)ZNR(s) = вҲ’iBОј/2ПүgОј, the nonreciprocal part of the impedance residue at frequency ПүgОј. Thus, we recover as a subset Eqs. (120-122) of Ref. with the difference steaming from the different final frame we are taking. It follows that the self-kerrs anharmonicities for both the admittance and the impedance approaches are Оҙi = вҲ’E(i) C (ПүJi/Пүi)2. (E27) After rearranging, the dispersive shifts in the admittance ap- proach are ПҮiОі = 2Оҙi пҝҪ ПүrОіgqQ iОі Пү2rОі вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 , ПҮiОј = 2Оҙi пҝҪ ПүgОј Пү2gОј вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 ((gqQ iОј )2 + (gqО  iОј )2), (E28a) with gqQ iОі = пҝҪ Пүi/ПүrОі(rОі)i/ пҝҪ Ci, gqQ iОј = пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nL Ој)i/ пҝҪ Ci, gqО  iОј = пҝҪ Пүi/ПүgОј(nR Ој )i/ пҝҪ Ci, (E28b) where the last three correspond to the bare couplings between qubit and inner modes given in Eq. (C17c) with OC = OL = 35 OО© = 1n. Whereas for the impedance, the dispersive shifts are ПҮiОі = 2Оҙi пҝҪ ПүrОіgПҶО  iОі Пү2rОі вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 , ПҮiОј = 2Оҙi пҝҪ ПүgОј Пү2gОј вҲ’ Пү2 i пҝҪ2 ((gПҶО  iОј )2 + (gПҶQ iОј )2), (E29a) with gПҶО  iОі = пҝҪПүiПүrОі(rОі)i пҝҪ Ci, gПҶО  iОј = пҝҪПүiПүgОј(nL Ој)i пҝҪ Ci, gПҶQ iОј = пҝҪПүiПүgОј(nR Ој )i пҝҪ Ci, (E29b) where the last three correspond to the bare couplings given in Eq. (C55b) with OC = OО© = 1n. For the reciprocal resonators, we recover the dispersive shift given in Eq. (63) of Ref. . The transformer ratios rОі, nL,R Ој can be ob- tained directly from the residues of the response as explained in Appendix A. Moreover, if higher order nonlinear correc- tions are desired these can be straightforwardly obtained us- ing Eq. (E6). For example, if the sixth order terms of the expansion are included the dispersive shifts are corrected to second-order in perturbation theory by the factor ПҮiОј вҶ’ (1 вҲ’ 2E(i) C /Д§Пүi)ПҮiОј. Additionally, we note that the dispersive shifts for the impedance and admittance approaches are different. This is to be expected due to the different frames used for quanti- zation in one approach or another, however and as we have highlighted several times throughout this work, this difference is negligible in the dispersive regime. Going further, analyt- ical formulas for qubits cross-kerrs can in principle be ob- tained considering higher order terms of SвҲ’1 sw, as was done in . Moreover, it is useful to note that a numerical treatment beyond the perturbative regime can be done using the exact Hamiltonians after elimination of the nondynamical modes given in Appendix D. Appendix F: Derivation of master equation In this appendix, we derive a completely positive trace pre- serving (CPTP) master equation for the qubits, taking into ac- count any possible quasi-degeneracies. In the standard ap- proach to open quantum systems, the master equation is de- rived from a microscopic model (system, bath, and interaction Hamiltonians) using the Born-Markov and secular approxi- mations [64вҖ“67]. However, the secular approximation turns out to be restrictive and fails whenever the spectral gap вҲҶПү of the qubits Hamiltonian ЛҶHq is of the order of the natural linewidth О“ dictated by dissipation, i.e., вҲҶПү вүІ О“. In this case, the rotating-wave approximation typically used to trans- form the Bloch-Redfield equation into a master equation in Lindblad form (CPTP) breaks down . Recent works have introduced the partial secular approximation to extend LindbladвҖҷs equation to systems whose energy levels are not necessarily strongly separated (i.e., вҲҶПү вүІ О“) while preserv- ing complete positivity [68вҖ“71]. The starting point of our derivation is the Caldeira-Leggett Hamiltonian ЛҶH = ЛҶHq + ЛҶHB + ЛҶHqB with interaction term of the form of Eq. (C81) ЛҶHq = пҝҪ j О©j 2 пҝҪ ЛҶq2 j + ЛҶПҶ2 j пҝҪ , (F1) ЛҶHB = пҝҪ Оұb пҝҪ ЛҶp2 Оұb 2mОұb + 1 2mОұbПү2 ОұbЛҶx2 Оұb пҝҪ , (F2) ЛҶHqB = пҝҪ j пҝҪ ЛҶПҶj пҝҪ Оұb МғcОҰ,x Оұ ЛҶxОұb + ЛҶПҶj пҝҪ Оұb МғcОҰ,p Оұ ЛҶpОұb +ЛҶqj пҝҪ Оұb Мғcq,x Оұ ЛҶxОұb + ЛҶqj пҝҪ Оұb Мғcq,p Оұ ЛҶpОұb пҝҪ . (F3) Here, we consider the system-bath Hamiltonian ЛҶHqB вҲј O(О“) (Born approximation), which is valid when the qubits are cou- pled dispersively to the inner modes and when direct capaci- tive, inductive and nonreciprocal couplings between qubit and drive ports are weak, which is the regime of interest here . The main idea of the partial secular approximation con- sists on separating the set of qubits (energy transitions) based on their frequency difference. With that objective, we define an equivalence relation F between qubit ports j, jвҖІ such that (j, jвҖІ) вҲҲ F if and only if their energy difference is smaller or of the order of the natural linewidth, that is пҝҪпҝҪО©j вҲ’ О©jвҖІ пҝҪпҝҪ вүІ О“. This separation of energy-scales allow us to perform the ro- tating wave-approximation whenever (j, jвҖІ) /вҲҲ F. However, if (j, jвҖІ) вҲҲ F, the qubits are considered to be degenerate in first order of perturbation theory in the system-bath coupling . Therefore, tracing out the baths yields the master equa- tion dЛҶПҒ dt = вҲ’i[ ЛҶHq, ЛҶПҒ] + пҝҪ (j,jвҖІ)вҲҲF Оө,ОөвҖІ={ПҶ,q} ОіОөОөвҖІ jjвҖІ( ЛҶAОөвҖІ jвҖІ ЛҶПҒ ЛҶAОөвҖ  j вҲ’ 1 2{ ЛҶAОөвҖ  j ЛҶAОөвҖІ jвҖІ, ЛҶПҒ}), (F4) where we have omitted the Lamb-shift Hamiltonian which in- troduces, in the dispersive and weak direct coupling regime, just a small renormalization on the system Hamiltonian ЛҶHq. Notably, as shown in Ref. , in the adiabatic limit when Z0 вүӘ Ydc D вҲ’1, the Lamb-shift Hamiltonian is exactly can- celled by the second-order terms in the system bath couplings that we have neglected in our Hamiltonian (Eq. (C71)). In typ- ical circuit parameters, this limit is satisfied. In the previous equation, the collapse operators are defined as ЛҶAПҶ j = пҝҪ EвҖІвҲ’E=О©j ЛҶО (E)ЛҶПҶj ЛҶО (EвҖІ), (F5) ЛҶAq j = пҝҪ EвҖІвҲ’E=О©j ЛҶО (E)ЛҶqj ЛҶО (EвҖІ), (F6) 36 where ЛҶО (E) is the projector over the eigenspace of ЛҶHq with energy E. The spectral densities ОіОөОөвҖІ jjвҖІ are defined as the Fourier transform of the bathвҖҷs correlations functions ОіОөОөвҖІ jjвҖІ = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dП„eiО©jП„ пҝҪ ЛҶBОөвҖ  j (П„) ЛҶBОөвҖІ jвҖІ(0) пҝҪ . (F7) Using Eq. (C81), the bathвҖҷs eigen-operators are defined as ЛҶBПҶ j = пҝҪ Оұ ( МғcОҰ,x Оұ ЛҶxОұ + МғcОҰ,p Оұ ЛҶpОұ), (F8) ЛҶBq j = пҝҪ Оұ ( Мғcq,x Оұ ЛҶxОұ + Мғcq,p Оұ ЛҶpОұ). (F9) Writing the normalized flux and charge operators in terms of the bosonic modes ЛҶПҶj = 1 вҲҡ 2(ЛҶbвҖ  j + ЛҶbj), ЛҶqj = i вҲҡ 2(ЛҶbвҖ  j вҲ’ ЛҶbj), the master equation can be expressed in a compact way dЛҶПҒ dt = вҲ’i[ ЛҶHq, ЛҶПҒ] + пҝҪ (j,jвҖІ)вҲҲF ОіjjвҖІ(ЛҶbjвҖІ ЛҶПҒЛҶbвҖ  j вҲ’ 1 2{ЛҶbвҖ  jЛҶbjвҖІ, ЛҶПҒ}), (F10) with ОіjjвҖІ = 1 2 пҝҪ ОіПҶПҶ jjвҖІ + Оіqq jjвҖІ вҲ’ iОіПҶq jjвҖІ + iОіqПҶ jjвҖІ пҝҪ . (F11) At cryogenic temperatures ОІвҲ’1 = kBT вүӘ О©j such that the number of thermal photons is negligible n = 1/eОІД§О©jвҲ’1 вүӘ 1 and the bath can be approximated to be in its ground state. In this case, one can easily compute the bath correlation func- tions and ОіОө,ОөвҖІ jjвҖІ , which leads to ОіjjвҖІ = ПҖ 2 B пҝҪ b=1 пҝҪ Оұ (sОұjb + itОұjb)вӢҶ(sОұjвҖІb + itОұjвҖІb)Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb), (F12) where sОұjb = МғcОҰ,x Оұjb вҲҡmОұbПүОұb + вҲҡmОұbПүОұb Мғcq,p Оұjb, (F13) tОұjb = вҲҡmОұbПүОұb МғcОҰ,p Оұjb вҲ’ Мғcq,x Оұjb вҲҡmОұbПүОұb . (F14) By symmetrizing the delta function, i.e., Оҙ(О©j вҲ’ ПүОұb) = the matrix ОіjjвҖІ is positive semi-definite within the Born ap- proximation. This ensures that the master equation represents a completely positive trace-preserving (CPTP) map. Appendix G: Circuit examples In this appendix, we provide further examples of circuits demonstrating the application of our results. This appendix is divided in four parts. First, we start with a comparison of the admittance and impedance approaches, revealing their equiv- alence in the dispersive regime. We then focus on a specific singular circuit relying solely on the admittance response in a situation where the impedance approach cannot be applied. In the third part of this appendix, we show how to use our results to estimate Purcell decay rates, and we compare these rates to master equation simulations and previous one-port analyses. Finally, we give a detailed analysis of the nonreciprocal circuit presented in the main text. We provide here both admittance and impedance responses of this three-port device, and give a simple explanation for the conditions which achieve chiral dynamics with complete population transfer. 1. Effective coupling rates: admittance vs impedance mission line resonator and (b) an effective circuit with only one inner-mode of the latter. Canonical circuits representions of the (c) impedance (Z) and (d) admittance (Y) response matrices from the Josephson ports. 37 The circuit we consider is the two-port circuit of Fig. 7, al- ready studied in Ref. . It consist of two linearized qubits (J) interacting via an inner mode (r) which we take to be a simple LC circuit. Our objective here is to compare the ad- mittance and the impedance methods. The impedance can be obtained with an ABCD analysis to find Z(s) = A0 s + A1s Пү2rz + s2 , A0 = пҝҪ 1/ пҝҪCJ 0 0 1/ пҝҪCJ пҝҪ , A1 = r2 z пҝҪ 1 1 1 1 пҝҪ , (G1) rcj + 1)1/2, Пүr = 1/вҲҡLrCr, rz вүғ rcj/вҲҡCr, where rcr = (Cc/Cr) and rcj = (Cc/CJ). On the other hand, the admit- tance response is Y(s) = sDвҲһ + D1s Пү2ry + s2 , DвҲһ = пҝҪ CJ C C CJ пҝҪ , D1 = r2 y пҝҪ 1 1 1 1 пҝҪ , (G2) with CJ вүғ пҝҪCJ(1 вҲ’ rcjrcr), C вүғ Ccrcr, Пүry вүғ Пүrz(1 вҲ’ rcjrcr), and ry вүғ rcr/вҲҡLr. These approximate values are accurate in the dispersive regime where rcj, rcr вүӘ 1. 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 Cc/CJ 10 5 10 4 |Пүeff вҲ’ Пүexact|/|Пүeff| Y Z 0 1 2 Ck/CJ 10 5 10 4 10 3 (a) (b) the circuit in Fig. 7 (b) as a function of Cc/CJ with Ck = 0. Dark (light) blue lines are the normalized differences from the admittance (impedance) methods. (b) Difference between effective and exact normal modes of the circuit in Fig. 7 (b) as a function of Ck with Cc = 0.1CJ. We plot the differences obtained from the numeri- cal diagonalization of the direct coupling (full perturbative) method shown with dashed (solid) lines. Circuit parameters CJ = 51.0 fF, ПүJ/2ПҖ = 5.57 GHz, Пүr/2ПҖ = 7.07 GHz, zr = 50 О©. To compare the two approaches, we show in Fig. 8(a) the normalized difference between the normal mode frequen- cies obtained from the effective classical Hamiltonian de- rived in Appendix C and the exact normal modes of the cir- cuit obtained from the standard Hamiltonian circuit analy- sis (dark-blue: admittance, light-blue: impedance). This is plotted as a function of Cc/CJ with the qubit-resonator cou- pling in the dipersive limit, see parameters in the figure cap- tion. We find an excellent agreement in the dispersive, where Cc/CJ вүӘ 1. As Cc/CJ increases, the accuracy dimin- ishes because the coupling between qubit and resonator modes g = вҲҡПүJПүrCc/вҲҡCJCr increases and we get out of the per- turbative regime. It is worth noting that the larger error of the admittance approach can be attributed to the direct capacitive coupling in its dc response between the external ports (see C in Eq. (G2)), in contrast to the impedanceвҖҷs dc response which is directly diagonal such that the exact dressing of the capac- itances is in this case automatic. As already mentioned in the main text, we stress that this difference between the two ap- proaches arises from our perturbative derivation, which leads to different final effective frames. Of course, when an exact Hamiltonian from the impedance and the admittance response can be constructed, the normal modes of both are exactly the same [28, 74вҖ“76]. In Fig. 8 (b) we compare the fully perturbative approach (solid) with the previous diagonalization method, where the direct coupling is treated exactly (dashed), developed in Ap- pendix C. There, we plot the normalized normal mode fre- quency difference for both approaches when varying Ck/CJ ratios. Clearly, even in the strong coupling regime Ck вү« CJ, the previous diagonalization approach maintains its accuracy. 2. Direct inductive coupling and JJsвҖҷ nonlinearities tween qubit ports. For circuits with direct inductive coupling be- tween inductive qubit ports (i.e. described in configuration space by their flux) AвҲһ = 0, A0 will be singular and unconstrained Hamiltonian dynamics cannot be systematically obtained from the impedance response. We now turn to the circuit of Fig. 9 where we replace the direct capacitive coupling of Fig. 7 between the linearized qubit modes with a direct inductive coupling. This is the simplest circuit that allows us to verify our extension of Ref. to include direct inductive coupling between qubit ports. As discussed in Appendix A, for circuits with di- rect inductive coupling between the qubit ports we have that A0 = limsвҶ’0 sZ(s) in the impedance characterization. Due to this, the Lagrangian obtained from the Cauer representation is singular, preventing to obtain directly the Hamiltonian. In contrast, the Lagrangian for the Cauer representation of the admittance response is not singular at any pole and the circuit 38 10 5 10 4 |Пүeff вҲ’ Пүexact|/|Пүeff| (a) Y 0.05 0.1 LJ/Lc -20 -10 0 ПүZZ (MHz) (b) effective exact and exact Hamiltonians of the circuit in Fig. 9. (b) ZZ-interaction obtained from the diagonalization of the effective and exact quantum Hamiltonians as functions of LJ/Lc. Circuit parameters CJ = 100 fF, Cc = 0.1CJ, EJ1/h = 20.4 GHz, EJ2/h = 12.6 GHz and Пүr/2ПҖ = 7.8 GHz. Hamiltonian can thus can be systematically obtained. Hence, we study only the admittance response. To do so, we note that Y(s) is the same as the one given in Eq. (G2) with the addi- tion of the inductive poles D0/s, where D0 = (1/Lc)(1вҲ’Пғx). normal modes in the effective and exact linear sectors, similar to the above example. It is evident that our approach achieves a remarkably high level of precision. To benchmark the effective nonlinearities presented in the main text and derived in Appendix E, we compare the effec- tive ZZ-interaction obtained from numerical diagonalization of the effective Hamiltonian, with the one obtained from nu- merical diagonalization of the Hamiltonian after full exact circuit quantization. In the qubit subspace, the diagonalized Hamiltonian takes the form ЛҶH = Пү1 2 Пғ1 z + Пү2 2 Пғ2 z + ПүZZПғ1 zПғ2 z. (G3) The effective and exact ZZ-interactions (ПүZZ) are shown in Fig. 10 (b). The figure shows how a zero ZZ-interaction can be obtained by tuning the ratio between the junction and cou- pling inductances LJ/Lc. Importantly, the results above show that the effective ZZ interaction is accurate when deep in the dispersive regime and weak direct coupling, but this accuracy decreases quickly with increasing coupling strength. This dis- crepancy arises from the omission of both higher order terms in the expansion of Ssw and the non-rotating terms in the non- linear expansion Eq. (E7). For reciprocal impedances these higher-order corrections are given in Ref. . For the most general nonreciprocal case for both impedance and admit- tance, analytical inclusion of these higher-order corrections remains an open-task that can be completed following the guidelines provided in Appendix B. We also note that if the residues of the admittance response can be obtained, then a complete numerical treatment beyond the dispersive regime using the exact classical Hamiltonians we give in Appendix D is feasible. 3. Readout and drive induced Purcell decays We use the circuit in Fig. 11 to present a comparison between the analytical formulas derived for dissipation in Eqs. (18) and (19) and resulting from the coupling between the qubit and drive ports, incorporating both impedance and admittance responses. We assess the accuracy of these for- mulas by comparing them to master equation simulation and previous one port results presented in Ref. , see Fig. 12. For the circuit of Fig. 11, the number of qubit and drive ports are n = 1 and nD = 2 respectively. Once the 3Г—3 immittance response matrix is determined, which we do not present here due to its noncompact form, we can apply our results Eqs. (18) and (19) to estimate the qubit-relaxation rate 1/T1. To do so, dispersive readout routine. It consists of a capacitively coupled qubit to its control line with characteristic impedance Z0 = 50 О© con- nected to a voltage source Vd(t). The qubit is also coupled to its Z0 = 50 О© readout line via two LC oscillators, corresponding to a standard scheme involving a capacitively coupled readout resonator and Purcell filter. The readout line is typically driven by a classical voltage source VRO(t). we first extract the DC part of the immittance response given and A0 = limsвҶ’0 sZ(s). This allows us to compute Ydrive, Zdrive given by Ydrive = ZвҲ’1 0 12 + пҝҪ Ydc 22 Ydc 23 Ydc 32 Ydc 33 пҝҪ , (G4) and similarly Zdrive = Z012 + пҝҪ Zdc 22 Zdc 23 Zdc 32 Zdc 33 пҝҪ , (G5) where Z0 is the characteristic impedance of the external trans- mission lines. Here, index 1 represents the qubit port, whereas 39 1 from the readout line, (b) drive-induced relaxation T D 1 , as a function of the coupling capacitances Cjr = Cc, Cjd = 0.1Cc. We compare our results obtained with both impedance and admittance formulas Eqs. (18) and (19) (light and dark blue) with the ones obtained from integrating the master equation of the three modes system (brown). We used realistic circuit parameters LJ = 10 nH, CJ = 77 fF giving a plasmon frequency МғПүJ/2ПҖ = 5.73 GHz. The frequency of readout resonator and Purcell filter are Пүr/2ПҖ = 7.50 GHz, Пүf/2ПҖ = 7.51 GHz respectively, and their impedances are zr = zf = Z0 = 50 О©. The external coupling and shunting capacitance to the ground are Ck = 20 fF, Cd = 100 fF respectively. the drive and readout ports are 2 and 3 respectively, see Fig. 11. Equipped with these matrices, we can now express the Purcell decay rates as 1 T1,Y = 1 C 2 пҝҪ d,dвҖІ=1 Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 ddвҖІ (Пү) пҝҪ Y1d+1(Пү)YвӢҶ 1dвҖІ+1(Пү), (G6) 1 T1,Z = 1 LJ 2 пҝҪ d,dвҖІ=1 Re пҝҪ ZdriveвҲ’1 ddвҖІ (Пү) пҝҪ Z1d+1(Пү)ZвӢҶ 1dвҖІ+1(Пү), (G7) where C is the first entry of DвҲһ and CвҲ’1 that of A0, i.e., C = (DвҲһ)11 such that for weak values of the coupling ca- pacitances, it is approximately given by Cj + Cjd + Cjr. The qubit frequency is expressed as Пү = МғПүJ(1 вҲ’ Ec/ПүJ(1 вҲ’ Ec ПүJ )) where МғПүJ = 1/вҲҡLJC, Ec = e2/2C and LJ = 1/(CПү2). In the case of the circuit of Fig. 11, the drive ports are decou- pled, as evidenced by the diagonal nature of Ydrive, Zdrive, i.e., Ydc 23 = Ydc 32 = 0 and Zdc 23 = Zdc 32 = 0. Consequently, the total relaxation rate can be decomposed into the sum of a Purcell decay rate resulting from the readout line and a drive-induced decay rate originating from the direct coupling with the drive line 1 T1 = 1 T RO 1 + 1 T D 1 , (G8) where 1 T RO 1,Y = 1 C Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 11 (Пү) пҝҪ |Y12(Пү)|2, (G9) 1 T D 1,Y = 1 C Re пҝҪ YdriveвҲ’1 22 (Пү) пҝҪ |Y13(Пү)|2, (G10) and similar expressions are obtained for the impedance. In the limit of weak couplings Cjd, Cjr, Crp, Ck вүӘ Cj, Cr, Cp, we obtain 1 T RO 1 = Z0C2 rpC2 jrC2 k (1 + Пү2(Cd + Ck)2Z2 0)CjC2pC2r Г— Пү10 (Пү2r вҲ’ Пү2)2(Пү2 f вҲ’ Пү2)2 , (G11) 1 T D 1 = Z0Пү2C2 jd C(1 + Z2 0Пү2(Cd + Cjd)2). (G12) To facilitate comparison with prior studies, we rephrase the Purcell decay rate in terms of the qubit-readout resonator cou- pling strength g, the readout resonator-Purcell filter coupling J, and Оәf, the bare decay rate of the Purcell mode. Using our formulas Eqs. (6) and (18) in the weak coupling regime, we obtain g вүғ Cjr(ПүПүr/4CjCr) 1 2 , J вүғ Crp(ПүrПүf/4CrCp) 1 2 , and Оәf вүғ (Пү2 fC2 kZ0)/Cp(1 + Пү2 fZ2 0(Cd + Ck)2) вүЎ Оә(Пүf). Using these expressions, Eq. (G11) can be concisely written as 1 T RO 1 = Оәq пҝҪ gJ вҲҶrqвҲҶfq пҝҪ2 (1 вҲ’ О¶r)2(1 вҲ’ О¶f)2 Г— (1 вҲ’ О¶r 1 + О¶r )2(1 вҲ’ О¶f 1 + О¶f ), (G13) where Оәq = (Пү2C2 kZ0)/Cp(1 + Пү2Z2 0(Cd + Ck)2) = Оә(Пү), вҲҶrq = Пүr вҲ’ Пү, вҲҶfq = Пүf вҲ’ Пү and О¶Ој = вҲҶОјq/ОЈОјq with ОЈОјq = ПүОј + Пү and Ој = r, f. From this equation, we ob- tain corrections to the usual Purcell protection formula given by пҝҪ gJ вҲҶrqвҲҶfq пҝҪ2 Оәf of Refs. coming from two distinct contributions. First, the qubit probes the bath at its own fre- quency, rather than at the filter frequency which is reflected in Оәq = Оә(Пү), in accordance with Ref. . This correction is significant when the bath is not entirely flat, something which cannot be captured by the standard master equation as dis- cussed, e.g., in Sec. IV of Ref. , see also Fig. 12. Second, there is a correction of order О¶Ој originating from the counter terms in the interaction between the qubit and the resonator- filter modes. Notably, this correction become particularly rel- evant in the deep dispersive regime (i.e., when вҲҶОјq вҲј ОЈОјq), as highlighted in Ref. . In Fig. 12, we present a quantitative comparison between our immittance results (light and dark blue) and the integration 40 of the master equation (brown) obtained after the exact quan- tization of the three-mode system (qubit, readout-resonator, Purcell filter). In this simulation, the values of Оәf and T D 1 are taken from previous one-port results, in particular, here from Eqs. (2.18) and (3.1) of Ref. yielding to Оәf = Re пҝҪ iПүfCk(ZвҲ’1 0 + iПүfCd)/Cp(ZвҲ’1 0 + iПүf(Cd + Ck)) пҝҪ and similar expression for 1/T D 1 by substituting Cp by CJ, Ck by Cjd and Пүf by Пү. 4. Three-port circulator circuit from the main text with capacitive filter We provide the calculations required to obtain the results for the example of Fig. 2 of the main text. We obtain the ad- mittance of the circuit in Fig. 2(a) with the ПҖ-capacitive filter of panel (b) using the admittance representation of the ideal circulator described by a scattering matrix S(ПҶ), and the com- bination of additional parallel and series capacitors Пүy(ПҶ)2 + s2 , DвҲһ = CJ13, E1(ПҶ) = вҲҡ (G14) In the dispersive regime, and up to second-order in rcg, rcj вүӘ 1 with rcg = Cc/Cg and rcj = Cc/CJ, we have CJ вүғ (CJ(1 + rcj) вҲ’ Cgr2 cg), G(ПҶ) вүғ tan(ПҶ/2)r2 cg/ вҲҡ Оұ(ПҶ) вүғ tan(ПҶ/2)2r2 cg/3R2Cg. The matrix S(ПҶ) corresponds to the scattering matrix defined in Eq. (21) of the main text. The inverse of the admittance gives the impedance response Z(s) = A0 s + A1s + B1 Пү2z + s2 B1 = вҲҡ (G15) with пҝҪCJ вүғ CJ + 2 пҝҪCk, пҝҪCk вүғ Ccrcg/3, Пүz(ПҶ) вүғ Пүy(ПҶ)(1 вҲ’ rcgrcj), and ОІ вүғ r2 cj/3Cg. As clear from above, the fre- quencies of the poles are slightly different in both immittance presentations. This clearly leads to Hamiltonians with dif- ferent frequencies for the inner modes after the exact circuit quantization. This difference however, is insubstantial, as the quantization is done with different frames for each response. When accounting for the exact frames within which each re- sponse is defined, all observables are predicted to be identical regardless of the chosen approach. Furthermore, the one third ratio needed to achieve full chiral population transfer dynamics can be readily under- stood by examining the exact Hamiltonian of the circuit. By introducing the quasi-momenta mode operators ЛҶBk = пҝҪ j ei2ПҖkj/3ЛҶbвҖ  j/ вҲҡ 3 for the qubit modes, the linearized Hamil- tonian in terms of ПҶ reads as follows ЛҶH(ПҶ) = пҝҪ i Пү ЛҶBвҖ  i ЛҶBi + Пүy(ПҶ)ЛҶaвҖ ЛҶa вҲ’ J(ПҶ)( ЛҶBвҖ  вҲ’1a + ЛҶBвҖ  1ЛҶaвҖ  + h.c.), (G16) where J(ПҶ) = пҝҪ ПүJПүy(ПҶ) пҝҪ rcjrcg/6 . By considering separately the beam-splitter-like (two-mode squeezing) inter- action between the k = вҲ’1 (k = 1) mode and the in- ner resonator mode, the elementary shifts О»Вұ1 in the fre- quencies of the modes ЛҶBВұ1 are О»вҲ’1 вүғ вҲ’2J(ПҶ)2/вҲҶ and tion transfer is obtained when the quasi-momentum modes energies are equally spaced . This equal spacing is ap- proximately obtained for a detuning вҲҶ вүғ 2Пүy(ПҶ)/3, which leads to Пү = Пүy(ПҶ)/3. For this condition to be accurate, the perturbative criteria k(ПҶ)/вҲҶ(ПҶ) вүӘ 1 must be satisfied, where the qubits and the inner mode, and вҲҶ(ПҶ) = |Пү вҲ’ Пүy(ПҶ)|. In particular, when Пү = Пүy(ПҶ)/3, the perturbative criteria Cg вҲј CJ and rcg вүӘ 1, it will remain accurate for all values of ПҶ. Finally, it is noteworthy that the couplings within the Hamiltonian provide a clear explanation for the feasibility of achieving chiral dynamics for any value of ПҶ, contingent on a straightforward frequency condition. Explicitly, as ПҶ changes, the Hamiltonian in Eq. (G16) remains invariant, with only the strength of the coupling J(ПҶ) and the frequency Пүy(ПҶ) chang- ing, hence by setting Пүi = Пүy(ПҶ)/3 only the time scale of the resulting dynamic changes. 5. Three-port circulator circuit from the main text with resonator filter Here, we provide details of the simulation performed to ob- tain the qubit population transfer dynamics shown in Fig. 3 (b) using the LC filter shown in Fig. 2 (c). Additionally, we show how our simple formulas can be used to engineer the linear re- sponse of multimode nonreciprocal systems. In particular, we obtain an ideal circulator response for the circuit with the LC filter in Fig. 2 (c) and match the effective scattering matrix of Sec. II in Ref. . The full Hamiltonian was constructed using the impedance representation following Appendix D. The admittance ap- proach is equally valid, but the former is preferred due to the lack of poles at infinity, a feature that simplifies the construc- tion. The effective Hamiltonian Eq. (3) is constructed as pre- scribed in the main text. We fix the parameters Cjr, Crs, Cg, and R, as well as the frequency and impedance of the filter resonators Пүrf and zrf . Using Eq. (9), we solve for Пү of Eq. (6) such that Оёij = ПҖ/6. In particular, the resulting ex- pression is a second-degree polynomial in the qubit frequency Пү, which admits a physical solution for any degree of non- reciprocity in the central element (i.e., ПҶ Мё= {0, ПҖ}) provided one can tune the remaining circuit parameters (e.g. resonator 41 frequencies, coupling strengths, capacitances to ground). The quantum simulations are performed by truncating the maxi- mum photon number to four, and convergence was checked by comparing with simulations with five photons. the desired quantum linear response (dashed) obtained using Eq. (21) of Ref. . To obtain the classical response, we first for simplicity take the limit Cg вҶ’ 0, where the non- reciprocal circuit becomes identical to the one studied in Sec. II of Ref. . Then, we set the filter resonator frequency using Eq. (22) such that the effective hopping phase between the resonators are Оёij = ПҖ/6. Finally, the response is ob- tained from the impedance matrix Z(Пү) of the circuit , as measured with reference probes of R0 = 50 О©, i.e., sponse from Ref. is computed here by setting its two free parameters to Пүr = Пүc and Оә = |J| (see Eq. (13) of that refer- ence together with the condition ОәвҖІ = 2Оә). Here, Пүc is the fre- quency where ideal circulator response is obtained, and J the effective coupling between resonator modes obtained using Eq. (8). The observed small discrepancy between the two ap- proaches arises because the targeted response (dashed line) as- sumes symmetric spacing between the three harmonic modes obtained after diagonalizing the effective Hamiltonian for the three resonators. Specifically, if О»0 < О»1 < О»2 are the three lowest eigenvalues of the effective Hamiltonian in the ideal case, it holds that О»1 вҲ’ О»0 = О»2 вҲ’ О»1. However, when the full Hamiltonian is taken into account, the resulting eigenvalues exhibit a slight asymmetry, such that О»1 вҲ’ О»0 = О»2 вҲ’ О»1 + вҲҶ. This small вҲҶ is the source of the observed minor discrepancy. This, however, does not prevent ideal circulation. Remarkably, the desired circulator response can be ob- tained for arbitrary small values of ПҶ, i.e., low nonreciprocity in the central element. This example shows how our meth- 0.98 1.0 1.02 Пү/Пүc 0.0 0.5 1.0 |Sij|2 |S11|2 |S21|2 |S31|2 computed from the impedance matrix Z of the circuit in Fig. 2 (a, i) using the LC filter Fig. 2 (c) with reference probe transmission lines with characteristic impedance R0 = 50 О©, with the effective one (dashed) obtained as in Sec. II of Ref. , see text for details. The frequency at which ideal circulation is achieved (Пүc) is shifted from the bare frequency of the filter resonators (Пүrf). The system parameters are CJ = 10.0 nF, Cjr = 10.0 nF, Crs = 5.6 nF, Пүrf = Пүy(ПҶ)/3 = 2ПҖ Г— 12.08 GHz, zrf = 50 О©, R = 100 О©, ПҶ вүғ 0.081ПҖ, which leads to Пүc вүғ 0.977Пүrf. ods can be useful not only in designing effective quantum Hamiltonian models but also in engineering desired scatter- ing responses. All the codes to reproduce the main results are available at . F. Solgun, D. P. DiVincenzo, and J. M. Gambetta, Simple impedance response formulas for the dispersive interaction rates in the effective hamiltonians of low anharmonicity su- perconducting qubits, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and Techniques 67, 928 (2019). M. Devoret and R. Schoelkopf, Superconducting circuits for quantum information: An outlook, Science 339, 1169 (2013). N. Ofek, A. Petrenko, R. Heeres, P. Reinhold, Z. Leghtas, B. Vlastakis, Y. Liu, L. Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, L. Jiang, M. Mir- rahimi, M. H. Devoret, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Extending the life- time of a quantum bit with error correction in superconducting circuits, Nature 536, 441 (2016). F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, D. Bacon, J. C. Bardin, R. Barends, R. Biswas, S. Boixo, F. G. S. L. Brandao, D. A. Buell, et al., Quantum supremacy using a programmable super- conducting processor, Nature 574, 505 (2019). P. Campagne-Ibarcq, A. Eickbusch, S. Touzard, E. Zalys- Geller, N. E. Frattini, V. V. Sivak, P. Reinhold, S. Puri, S. Shankar, R. J. Schoelkopf, L. Frunzio, M. Mirrahimi, and M. H. Devoret, Quantum error correction of a qubit encoded in grid states of an oscillator, Nature 584, 368 (2020). S. Krinner, N. Lacroix, A. Remm, A. Di Paolo, E. Genois, C. Leroux, C. Hellings, S. Lazar, F. Swiadek, J. Herrmann, G. J. Norris, C. K. Andersen, M. M МҲuller, A. Blais, C. Eichler, and A. Wallraff, Realizing repeated quantum error correction in a distance-three surface code, Nature 605, 669 (2022). Y. Zhao, Y. Ye, H.-L. Huang, Y. Zhang, D. Wu, H. Guan, Q. Zhu, Z. Wei, T. He, S. Cao, F. Chen, T.-H. Chung, H. Deng, D. Fan, M. Gong, C. Guo, S. Guo, L. Han, N. Li, S. Li, Y. Li, F. Liang, J. Lin, H. Qian, H. Rong, H. Su, L. Sun, S. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Ying, J. Yu, C. Zha, K. Zhang, Y.-H. Huo, C.-Y. Lu, C.-Z. Peng, X. Zhu, and J.-W. Pan, Realization of an error-correcting surface code with superconducting qubits, Physical Review Letters 129, 030501 (2022). Google Quantum AI, Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code logical qubit, Nature 614, 676 (2023). B. D. Josephson, Possible new effects in superconductive tun- nelling, Physics Letters 1, 251 (1962). A. Blais, A. L. Grimsmo, S. M. Girvin, and A. Wallraff, Circuit quantum electrodynamics, Review Modern Physics 93, 025005 J. Koch, T. M. Yu, J. Gambetta, A. A. Houck, D. I. Schus- ter, J. Majer, A. Blais, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Charge-insensitive qubit design derived from the cooper pair box, Physical Review A 76, 042319 (2007). A. Wallraff, D. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.-S. Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S. Girvin, and R. Schoelkopf, Strong cou- pling of a single photon to a superconducting qubit using circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nature 431, 162 (2004). A. Blais, R.-S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S. M. Girvin, and R. J. 42 Schoelkopf, Cavity quantum electrodynamics for supercon- ducting electrical circuits: An architecture for quantum com- putation, Physical ReviewA 69, 062320 (2004). S. E. Nigg, H. Paik, B. Vlastakis, G. Kirchmair, S. Shankar, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, R. J. Schoelkopf, and S. M. Girvin, Black-box superconducting circuit quantization, Physical Re- view Letters 108, 240502 (2012). F. Solgun, D. W. Abraham, and D. P. DiVincenzo, Blackbox quantization of superconducting circuits using exact impedance synthesis, Physical Review B 90, 134504 (2014). F. Solgun and D. DiVincenzo, Multiport impedance quantiza- tion, Annals of Physics 361, 605 (2015). Z. K. Minev, Z. Leghtas, S. O. Mundhada, L. Christakis, I. M. Pop, and M. H. Devoret, Energy-participation quantization of Josephson circuits, npj Quantum Information 7, 131 (2021). R. W. Newcomb, Linear Multiport Synthesis (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1966). J. Koch, A. A. Houck, K. L. Hur, and S. M. Girvin, Time- reversal-symmetry breaking in circuit-qed-based photon lat- tices, Physical Review A 82, 043811 (2010). J. C. Owens, M. G. Panetta, B. Saxberg, G. Roberts, S. Chakram, R. Ma, A. Vrajitoarea, J. Simon, and D. I. Schus- ter, Chiral cavity quantum electrodynamics, Nature Physics 18, B. M. Anderson, R. Ma, C. Owens, D. I. Schuster, and J. Simon, Engineering topological many-body materials in microwave cavity arrays, Physical Review X 6, 041043 (2016). F. Hassler, J. Stubenrauch, and A. Ciani, Equation of mo- tion approach to black-box quantization: Taming the multi- mode jaynes-cummings model, Physical Review B 99, 014515 M. F. Gely, A. Parra-Rodriguez, D. Bothner, Y. M. Blanter, S. J. Bosman, E. Solano, and G. A. Steele, Convergence of the multi- mode quantum rabi model of circuit quantum electrodynamics, Physical Review B 95, 245115 (2017). M. Malekakhlagh, A. Petrescu, and H. E. T МҲureci, Cutoff-free circuit quantum electrodynamics, Physical Review Letters 119, A. Parra-Rodriguez, E. Rico, E. Solano, and I. L. Egusquiza, Quantum networks in divergence-free circuit QED, Quantum Science and Technology 3, 024012 (2018). A. Parra-Rodriguez, PhD Thesis: Canonical Quantization of Superconducting Circuits (Universidad del Pais Vasco, Leioa, A. Parra-Rodriguez, I. L. Egusquiza, D. P. DiVincenzo, and E. Solano, Canonical circuit quantization with linear nonrecip- rocal devices, Physical Review B 99, 014514 (2019). I. L. Egusquiza and A. Parra-Rodriguez, Algebraic canoni- cal quantization of lumped superconducting networks, Physical Review B 106, 024510 (2022). A. O. Caldeira and A. J. Leggett, Influence of dissipation on quantum tunneling in macroscopic systems, Physical Review Letters 46, 211 (1981). A. J. Leggett, Quantum tunneling in the presence of an arbi- trary linear dissipation mechanism, Physical Review B 30, 1208 This correction is accurate provided the qubit potential is still accurately described by a single-well. L. A. Correa and J. Glatthard, Potential renormalisation, Lamb shift and mean-force Gibbs state вҖ“ to shift or not to shift?, arXiv:2305.08941 [quant-ph] (2023). Here, we assume that the inner circuit mode is always on its ground state. As a result, the cross-Kerr Hamiltonian ЛҶHПҮ is omitted in the master equation. A. Metelmann and A. A. Clerk, Nonreciprocal photon trans- mission and amplification via reservoir engineering, Physical Review X 5, 021025 (2015). A. A. Clerk, Introduction to quantum non-reciprocal interac- tions: from non-Hermitian Hamiltonians to quantum master equations and quantum feedforward schemes, SciPost Phys. Lect. Notes 44, 9 (2022). A. Miano, V. Joshi, G. Liu, W. Dai, P. Parakh, L. Frunzio, and M. Devoret, Hamiltonian extrema of an arbitrary flux-biased josephson circuit, PRX Quantum 4, 030324 (2023). D. Willsch, D. Rieger, P. Winkel, M. Willsch, C. Dickel, J. Krause, Y. Ando, R. Lescanne, Z. Leghtas, N. T. Bronn, et al., Observation of josephson harmonics in tunnel junctions, Nature Physics , 1 (2024). J. E. Mooij and C. J. P. M. Harmans, Phase-slip flux qubits, New Journal of Physics 7, 219 (2005). J. Mooij and Y. Nazarov, Superconducting nanowires as quan- tum phase-slip junctions, Nature Physics 2, 169 (2006). K. Arutyunov, D. Golubev, and A. Zaikin, Superconductivity in one dimension, Physics Reports 464, 1 (2008). W. C. Smith, A. Kou, U. Vool, I. M. Pop, L. Frunzio, R. J. Schoelkopf, and M. H. Devoret, Quantization of induc- tively shunted superconducting circuits, Physical Review B 94, P. Roushan, C. Neill, A. Megrant, Y. Chen, R. Babbush, R. Barends, B. Campbell, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, A. Fowler, E. Jeffrey, J. Kelly, E. Lucero, J. Mutus, P. J. J. OвҖҷMalley, M. Neeley, C. Quintana, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, T. White, E. Kapit, H. Neven, and J. Martinis, Chi- ral ground-state currents of interacting photons in a synthetic magnetic field, Nature Physics 13, 146 (2017). Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-X. Wang, S. van Geldern, T. Connolly, A. A. Clerk, and C. Wang, Dispersive non-reciprocity between a qubit and a cavity, arXiv:2307.05298 [quant-ph] (2023). Y.-X. Wang, C. Wang, and A. A. Clerk, Quantum nonreciprocal interactions via dissipative gauge symmetry, PRX Quantum 4, R. Navarathna, D. T. Le, A. R. Hamann, H. D. Nguyen, T. M. Stace, and A. Fedorov, Passive superconducting circulator on a chip, Physical Review Letters 130, 037001 (2023). T. Ozawa, H. M. Price, A. Amo, N. Goldman, M. Hafezi, L. Lu, M. C. Rechtsman, D. Schuster, J. Simon, O. Zilberberg, and I. Carusotto, Topological photonics, Reviews Modern Physiscs F. Solgun and S. Srinivasan, Direct calculation of zz interaction rates in multimode circuit quantum electrodynamics, Physical Review Applied 18, 044025 (2022). L. Labarca, O. Benhayoune-Khadraoui, A. Blais, and A. Parra- Rodriguez, Toolbox for nonreciprocal dispersive models in cQED simulation code (2024). A. Ciani, D. P. DiVincenzo, and B. M. Terhal, Lecture Notes on Quantum Electrical Circuits, arXiv:2312.05329 [quant-ph] J. E. Mooij and Y. V. Nazarov, Quantum phase slip junctions, cond-mat/0511535 [cond-mat] (2005). S. Bravyi, D. DiVincenzo, and D. Loss, Schrieffer-wolff trans- formation for quantum many-body systems, Annals of Physics H. Goldstein, Classical mechanics (Pearson Education India, R. Winkler, Quasi-Degenerate Perturbation Theory, in SpinвҖ”Orbit Coupling Effects in Two-Dimensional Electron and Hole Systems, Springer Tracts in Modern Physics, edited by R. Winkler (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2003) pp. 43 G. Burkard, R. H. Koch, and D. P. DiVincenzo, Multilevel quantum description of decoherence in superconducting qubits, Physical Review B 69, 064503 (2004). G. Burkard, Circuit theory for decoherence in superconducting charge qubits, Physical Review B 71, 144511 (2005). G. Burkard and F. Brito, Nonadditivity of decoherence rates in superconducting qubits, Phys. Rev. B 72, 054528 (2005). Note that if the Fourier transform is defined with opposite phase MD(Пү) = пҝҪ +вҲһ вҲ’вҲһ dtMD(t)e+iПүt, then the poles of MD(Пү) should live in the lower-half complex plane Im(z) < 0, to en- sure causality. U. Vool and M. Devoret, Introduction to quantum electromag- netic circuits, International Journal of Circuit Theory and Ap- plications 45, 897 (2017). The limit should be understood in the sense of distributions пҝҪ dПүMD(Пү)f(Пү) = limОөвҶ’0+ пҝҪ dПүMD(Пү вҲ’ iОө)f(Пү) with f any smooth (Schwartz) function. A. Parra Rodriguez and I. L. Egusquiza, Geometrical descrip- tion and Faddeev-Jackiw quantization of electrical networks, arXiv:2304.12252 [quant-ph] (2023). A. Parra Rodriguez and I. L. Egusquiza, Faddeev-Jackiw quan- tisation of nonreciprocal quasi-lumped electrical networks, arXiv:2401.09120 [quant-ph] (2024). T.-T. Lu and S.-H. Shiou, Inverses of 2Г— 2 block matrices, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 43, 119 (2002). J. Morales and A. Flores-Riveros, The generalization of the binomial theorem, Journal of mathematical physics 30, 393 E. B. Davies, Markovian master equations, Communications in Mathematical Physics 39, 91 (1974). H. P. Breuer and F. Petruccione, The theory of open quan- tum systems (Oxford University Press, Great Clarendon Street, R. Alicki and K. Lendi, Quantum Dynamical Semigroups and Applications (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007). МҒA. Rivas and S. F. Huelga, Open quantum systems (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012). G. McCauley, B. Cruikshank, D. I. Bondar, and K. Jacobs, Accurate Lindblad-form master equation for weakly damped quantum systems across all regimes, npj Quantum Information F. Nathan and M. S. Rudner, Universal lindblad equation for open quantum systems, Physical Review B 102, 115109 (2020). D. Farina and V. Giovannetti, Open-quantum-system dynamics: Recovering positivity of the redfield equation via the partial sec- ular approximation, Physical Review A 100, 012107 (2019). A. Trushechkin, Unified gorini-kossakowski-lindblad- sudarshan quantum master equation beyond the secular approximation, Physical Review A 103, 062226 (2021). In this section, we consider that the only impact of the nonlin- earity is to define the qubit subspace. For higher-excited states, the effect of anharmonicity on the treatment of dissipation can be found in Ref . The validity of the Markovian regime is determined by the poles of the dissipation matrix, which exhibit exponential decay in time domain with a rate proportional to ZвҲ’1 0 CвҲ’1 D . For typical values of circuit parameters, Z0CD вүӘ О“вҲ’1, which justifies the validity of the Markovian approximation. J. Williamson, On the algebraic problem concerning the normal forms of linear dynamical systems, American Journal of Math- ematics 58, 141 (1936). A. Laub and K. Meyer, Canonical forms for symplectic and Hamiltonian matrices, Celestial Mechanics 9, 213 (1974). A. Parra-Rodriguez and I. L. Egusquiza, Quantum fluctuations in electrical multiport linear systems, Physical Review B 106, D. Esteve, M. H. Devoret, and J. M. Martinis, Effect of an arbitrary dissipative circuit on the quantum energy levels and tunneling of a josephson junction, Physical Review B 34, 158 E. A. Sete, J. M. Martinis, and A. N. Korotkov, Quantum theory of a bandpass purcell filter for qubit readout, Physical Review E. Jeffrey, D. Sank, J. Y. Mutus, T. C. White, J. Kelly, R. Barends, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, B. Chiaro, A. Dunsworth, A. Megrant, P. J. J. OвҖҷMalley, C. Neill, P. Roushan, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner, A. N. Cleland, and J. M. Martinis, Fast accurate state measurement with superconducting qubits, Physical Review Letter 112, 190504 (2014). M. Boissonneault, J. M. Gambetta, and A. Blais, Dispersive regime of circuit qed: Photon-dependent qubit dephasing and relaxation rates, Physical Review A 79, 013819 (2009). F. Yan, P. Krantz, Y. Sung, M. Kjaergaard, D. L. Camp- bell, T. P. Orlando, S. Gustavsson, and W. D. Oliver, Tunable Coupling Scheme for Implementing High-Fidelity Two-Qubit Gates, Physical Review Applied 10, 054062 (2018). D. M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering, 4th ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New York, 2009). O. Busel, S. Laine, O. Mansikkam МҲaki, and M. Silveri, Dissipa- tion and dephasing of interacting photons in transmon arrays, Physical Review Research 5, 023121 (2023).