This paper has been accepted for publication at the AAAI 2024 Workshop on AI to Accelerate Science and Engineering Position Paper on Materials Design – A Modern Approach Willi Großmann1, Sebastian Eilermann1, Tim Rensmeyer1, Artur Liebert1, Michael Hohmann1, Christian Wittke1, Oliver Niggemann1 1Institute of Automation Technology Helmut-Schmidt-Universit ̈at / Universit ̈at der Bundeswehr Hamburg, Holstenhofweg 85, 22043 Hamburg, Germany Abstract Traditional design cycles for new materials and assemblies have two fundamental drawbacks. The underlying physical relationships are often too complex to be precisely calculated and described. Aside from that, many unknown uncertainties, such as exact manufacturing parameters or materials compo- sition, dominate the real assembly behavior. Machine learn- ing (ML) methods overcome these fundamental limitations through data-driven learning. In addition, modern approaches can specifically increase system knowledge. Representation Learning allows the physical, and if necessary, even sym- bolic interpretation of the learned solution. In this way, the most complex physical relationships can be considered and quickly described. Furthermore, generative ML approaches can synthesize possible morphologies of the materials based on defined conditions to visualize the effects of uncertainties. This modern approach accelerates the design process for new materials and enables the prediction and interpretation of re- alistic materials behavior. Introduction The traditional design of new materials and their production are based on exploratory research and heuristic methodol- ogy (Morgan and Jacobs 2020; Butler et al. 2018; Schmidt et al. 2019). Newer approaches use computer-aided model- ing of materials properties and integrate them into the mate- rials design process. This enables a more efficient screening process for possible theoretical solutions (Ramprasad et al. 2017; Sousa, Baptista, and Marques 2021). But materials properties are still described spatially using physical mod- els. These models are always based on an idealized theoret- ical morphology. This is where state-of-the-art laboratory-based computed tomography (CT) can create CTs of the real morphology. It is an accurate and fast way to digitize materials and as- semblies morphologies over statistically relevant volumes and with appropriate resolution (Furat et al. 2019; Michael et al. 2021; Ditscherlein et al. 2020). Once a digital image of the morphology is available, superimposed numerical so- lutions of the partial differential equations can approximate the effective materials properties (Lu et al. 2020; Neumann et al. 2020). However, numerical solving is associated with an enormous computational effort. In addition, uncertainties in the theoretical description with physical models, for ex- ample due to the system complexity or the non-ideal behav- ior of some components, remain undescribed. Data-driven methods close the gap between empirical ob- servation and physical modelling. Neural networks have be- come the dominant approach for data-based modeling in many complex areas (Redmon et al. 2016; Ronneberger, Fis- cher, and Brox 2015; Silver et al. 2018). Their success is largely due to their ability as universal function approxi- mators and the existence of highly efficient optimization al- gorithms (Kingma and Ba 2015). However, in many neural network architectures, the purely data-based approach limits their ability to extrapolate to data that is very different from the training data (Szegedy et al. 2014). Nevertheless, neural networks are successfully used to create models for mate- rial properties (Baiocco, Tagliaferri, and Ucciardello 2017; Duan and Li 2021; Guo et al. 2021; Schmidt et al. 2019). Unfortunately, the black-box nature of neural networks means that the learned function is usually uninterpretable by a human. This makes it difficult to use the trained model to gain deeper insights into the physical principles that lead to the observed properties of the materials, or even to as- sess the reliability of the model prediction. As a response to the aforementioned shortcomings of standard neural net- works, several alternative approaches have been developed that improve these models by learning physical concepts of varying degrees of interpretability. (Zhao et al. 2023; Furat et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2022) One promising method in this domain is representation learning (RepL). The aim of this field is to create mod- els which are capable of mapping observations of a system into representations that are useful for making downstream predictions for the system (Bengio, Courville, and Vincent 2013). These representations usually offer an improved de- gree of interpretability and are often explicitly designed for that purpose (Kingma and Welling 2014; Higgins et al. 2017; Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Udrescu and Tegmark 2020). A number of research hypotheses (RH) arise from this context. The proposed solution takes these into account and enables a faster and more efficient material design process. RH 1: The solution is based on a formalization of ma- terials designs that capture the relevant materials properties and serve as input to a surrogate model. Such a model must be developed based on requirements and uncertainties from manufacturing processes. arXiv:2312.10996v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 18 Dec 2023 RH 2: The network typologies (Bayesian Generative Au- toencoders) and the corresponding algorithms (active learn- ing, RepL) must be developed for this domain. Neural net- works for time series – which would be suitable – are an on-going research field in ML (Hewamalage, Bergmeir, and Bandara 2021; Koprinska, Wu, and Wang 2018). Here too, a training strategy must be developed. RH 3: To extract an explicit, formula-based material model from the neural network, several research directions exist: From symbol-regression based-approaches (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz 2016), via questions-based algorithms (Iten et al. 2020) to approaches which define priors on la- tent variables (Kingma and Welling 2014). Here a suitable algorithm and neural network type must be identified and verified. RH 4: Materials morphologies need to be encoded into a set of feature vectors that are automatically extracted from CT data. Some of these features are straight-forward (e.g., density), while others will require novel image-processing strategies. In related applications, convolutional neural net- works have proven to be particularly suitable for this. RH 5: CT data can be used to quantify the effects of manu- facturing processes. This knowledge enables high-resolution conditional generative neural networks (generative adversar- ial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014) or denois- ing diffusion probabilistic models (DDPM) (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020)) to synthesize CTs based on material and man- ufacturing parameters. For this purpose, a suitable experi- mental design must be created. In addition, the algorithms must consider highly modal and diverse conditions. State of the Art The author group traditionally works on the edge between computer science and automation technology. Focus are ML and artificial intelligence methods for cyber-physical systems including RepL (Diedrich, Maier, and Niggemann 2019; Niggemann et al. 2021). Considering a-priori knowl- edge to improve ML is one big research topic. Therefore, technical systems are characterized by the abundance of a-priori knowledge such as system structures and physical laws. As a result, methods of machine learning require less data and become extrapolable. Furthermore, causal relation- ships are used to calculate optimizations (Ehrhardt, Heesch, and Niggemann 2023; Otto, Vogel-Heuser, and Niggemann 2018; von Birgelen et al. 2018). These partly subsymbolic representations are used to abstract logical symbols from the physical systems (Bunte, Li, and Niggemann 2020). to gen- erate surrogate models (Diedrich and Niggemann 2022). For several years now we have been abstracting these skills into the sub-area of computational materials design or – from an algorithmic perspective – spatial neural net- works. Often neural networks are used to analyze materials, e.g. to identify characteristics (Grednev et al. 2023; Groß- mann, Horn, and Niggemann 2022). This also includes the use of surrogate models to replace slow solver-based simulations when designing new materi- als (Rensmeyer et al. 2023) with generative and probabilistic neural networks (Niggemann et al. 2023). Physics Based Machine Learning The ideal physical behavior of materials can often be ap- proximated using well-known partial differential equations (PDEs). However, the numerical solution of these equations is computationally intensive for high temporal and spatial resolutions. In addition, classic deep learning approaches fail due to a lack of labeled data. Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) solve this contradiction (Cai et al. 2021; Yang, Meng, and Karniadakis 2021; Mao, Jagtap, and Kar- niadakis 2020). These models learn the unknown parameters in an oth- erwise known (partial) differential equation. To do this, the neural network is trained to interpolate between the known data points in a way that corresponds to the known form of the equation. The unknown parameters of the equation are treated as neural network parameters and optimized by gra- dient descent alongside the actual neural network parameters (Raissi, Perdikaris, and Karniadakis 2019). An alternative to PINNs for settings where the govern- ing equations are not already partially known is offered by an uncertainty-based active learning strategy. They have es- tablished themselves as an extremely valuable approach in areas where labeling data requires significant effort (Ren et al. 2021). These methods have proven capable of sub- stantially reducing the amount of required data to train a neural network model, by only labeling data on which the model still has a high degree of uncertainty (Tharwat and Schenck 2023). Additionally, this approach makes the re- sulting model more robust to outliers, as exploiting uncer- tainty in the labeling process can be used to bias the dataset toward outlier configurations (Lin et al. 2021). Generative Systems Modelling An alternative for the spatial system description, taking complex (boundary) conditions into account, are generative AI approaches such as GANs or DDPMs. CTs help here as training data to create realistic morphologies. For example, GANs are used to generate a large number of CT images that have similar properties to the training im- ages (Su et al. 2022). In other approaches, the correspond- ing three-dimensional (3D) structure is derived from two- dimensional (2D) images (Feng et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2021). Henkes and Wessels (2022) proposes an extended method that uses a Wasserstein loss (Arjovsky, Chintala, and Bottou 2017) to generate 3D microstructures with the same properties as the original data. However, to create morphologies with defined and chang- ing properties, conditions-based approaches must be con- sidered. Although there are already some approaches from the field of medical technology (Jiang et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2023; Habijan and Gali ́c 2022) and materials de- sign (D ̈ureth et al. 2023; Janssens, Huysmans, and Swen- nen 2020), the underlying conditions are not multimodal or high-dimensional. Feature engineering methods help with subsequent auto- mated CT segmentation or classification, as well as design evaluation (Damewood et al. 2023). Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are used successfully here (Gobert et al. T = E ⌦ B validation: σ training: p(r) Training Data Demand for new Data f(x) = xsin... . . . Surrogate Model σ. Direct physical modeling merges experimental data E with bulk data B from databases to generate large scale feature-property data T . This is then used to learn a surrogate model in form of a Bayesian generative neural network autoencoder. This autoencoder can both in an active learning sense request new data points. But it can also be a basis for the generation of a symbol model, e.g. using algorithms from the field of explainable AI. 2020; Ziabari et al. 2023). However, a disadvantage of this approach is the poor interpretability of the learned features. The aim of these intermediate steps is a closed ML frame- work that covers the entire materials design process (Ka- lidindi et al. 2022; Pei et al. 2021). The list of the previous approaches shows the possibility for abstract and idealized descriptions of materials behavior. However, since only the idealized materials behavior is described there, uncertainties regarding production and composition are not taken into ac- count. Furthermore, explicit, interpretable, or formula-based substitution models are missing. Systems Representation RepL is the process of automatically discovering and ex- tracting meaningful patterns and features from raw data, en- abling more effective and efficient machine learning mod- els. Autoencoders and variational autoencoders (Kingma and Welling 2014) have become highly utilized methods for the extraction of physically meaningful representations of a systems observations. Nautrup et al. and Iten et al. (Iten et al. 2020; Nautrup et al. 2022) use these methods to identify the relevant variables of a physical system that are necessary for downstream computations and representation in a simple and interpretable way. Variational autoencoders have also been used to improve the interpretability of latent variables by producing discrete encodings of observations (Dupont 2018; Fortuin et al. 2019; van den Oord, Vinyals, and kavukcuoglu 2017). The learning of discrete represen- tations has been one of the main focuses of RepL and could potentially be used to identify different modes of behavior of materials properties. Champion et al. (Champion et al. 2019) use an autoen- coder to map the observation of the physical system to a suit- able representation. A symbolic regression of the extracted features is then performed. The symbolic form describes the desired properties of a physical system and have varying de- grees of complexity depending on the chosen basis. In do- ing so, they describe the transition into the field of system identification. The algorithmic formulas are derived from observed data to model the behavior of dynamic systems. Solution ML, CT, and experiments are combined here, to automat- ically construct transferable and interpretable constitutive materials laws, which are currently missing for the design of many complex material composites. As a result, a new method is developed to learn surrogate models for materials and assemblies. Surrogate Design Model A bottleneck in traditional materials design is the time con- suming design-test-cycle: Each new material has to be de- signed, produced and then experimentally tested. Direct sim- ulation is only a partial solution, as both modeling and sim- ulation tasks are time-consuming, require a high level of expertise and significant computational resources to solve even small domains. A solution for the problem is a machine learning surrogate model which is a simplified and compu- tationally less expensive model that serves as a substitute for time-consuming simulations or expensive computations. Based on bulk materials data, a model generation func- tion can be learned that maps new materials designs onto materials models. Such predictions can be used to try other, new materials designs. Maybe better: Even if this neural network-based approach yields less quantitative precision for a single material. Unbiased learning of a predictive model can still be expected to be qualitatively more predic- tive than traditional ad hoc heuristics. Such an approach is sketched in Figure 1: The strategy is three-fold. A targeted experimental program generates a range of materials from which CTs are synthesized to create a data set of typical morphologies. The synthesised materi- als are then tested for their properties to generate a valida- tion dataset E, while the CTs are feed into the second layer of physical modelling. The main purpose of this layer is to efficiently expand the training set by overlaying the mor- phologies with available bulk properties to simulate the be- havior of a much larger set of materials. This wouldn’t be possible experimentally. The layer thoroughly maps the re- lationship between bulk properties and morphologies. These are expressed by feature vectors build from materials prop- erties (e.g., porosity εp, tortuosity τ, strut lengths l etc.) It also implements a map p(r) → {εp, τ, ...} through image- Material Composition Process ... Manufacturing Configuration A B AB Functional Space Generative Neural Network Synthetic Tomography Surrogate Model Evaluation graphies (CTs) of material composites or assemblies based on predefined manufacturing configurations. The morphological representation enables the visualization of various manufacturing influences. A surrogate model is based on the spatial repre- sentation and describes the physical properties. This finally enables an evaluation of the materials design processing techniques, which encodes CTs into feature vec- tors. This large-scale dataset underpins the training phase. Based on this data – augmented with and validated against real experiments – a neural network is trained. Later during the operation phase, new materials designs – expressed by the feature vectors and materials properties – become input to this network which then predicts the probable correspond- ing materials model. Algorithmic Representation Because these materials models come in form of a neural network, explainability and traceability become challenges. For this reason, explicit, formula-based models are extracted from the neural network. Such models resemble closely cur- rent manual materials models but can qualitatively differ as a function of provided feature vectors. However, to prevent neural networks from remaining black boxes, changes to the network topology and learning process are required. For this (see also Figure 1) a surrogate model in form of a neural net- work is learned. This model replaces the previous physical simulations but has the advantage of predicting the mate- rials behavior very quickly. Using such a surrogate model has several advantages: (i) Its topology can be optimized towards the symbolic formula extraction, e.g. by disentan- glement of latent variables (RepL). (ii) By using Bayesian principles of uncertainty estimation, the surrogate model can actively ask for more data points when needed. (iii) The sur- rogate model can be created in a way which supports inter- and extrapolation – mainly by adding physical information to the network topology and the priors on latent variables. Finally, symbolic formula extraction algorithms and algo- rithms from the field of explainable AI are used to extract symbolic formulas. These learned formulas guide the design process, e.g. by helping to identify optimal materials designs for specific tasks or identifying promising candidates for tar- geted experiments. Morphological Representation Due to a symbolic description, the physical materials behav- ior can be theoretically interpreted. However, the generated equations are often difficult to interpret in practice due to their complexity. Another way to better understand system relationships is to synthesize materials structures in the form of tomography. This approach is visualized in Figure 2. The generative part uses CTs as training data. These are labeled with manufacturing configurations such as mate- rial compositions and process parameters. Under these high- dimensional conditions, a GAN or DDPM is trained to syn- thesize high-resolution 3D tomography data. In the opera- tion phase, the respective influence on the morphological structure is analyzed by varying the conditions. Analogous to the unsupervised approach mentioned above, a surrogate model is then used to learn and represent the materials be- havior. Finally, the design draft is evaluated. Conclusion A comprehensive approach that integrates ML, CTs and ex- periments is presented. This solves the lack of transferable and interpretable materials laws for complex composite ma- terials and assemblies. The surrogate design model provides an efficient way to overcome the traditional bottleneck in the design-test cycle. The algorithmic representation ensures the interpretabil- ity of the neural network-based models. The extraction of explicit, formula-based models enhances understanding and facilitates meaningful contributions to materials design. In addition, the morphological representation provides a visual understanding of the materials system through syn- thesis of 3D tomography data. This enables the analysis of manufacturing influences on morphological structures and provides valuable insights into the material design process. The proposed framework not only streamlines the mate- rials design process but also empowers researchers with a powerful tool to explore and predict the behavior of com- plex material composites. By combining CTs synthesis and explainable AI, this modern approach opens opportunities for the rapid and informed design of materials with tailored properties. Acknowledgment This work was supported by the project ”KIBIDZ – Intelligente Brandgefahrenanalyse f ̈ur Geb ̈aude und Schutz der Rettungskrafte durch K ̈unstliche Intelligenz und Digitale Brandgeb ̈audezwillinge” by the Zentrum f ̈ur Digitalisierungs- und Technologieforschung der Bun- deswehr (dtec.bw®).