1 Automatic Calculation of the Transition Temperatures for two-dimensional Heisenberg type Magnets Haichang Lu1,2,3*, Tai Yang1, Zhimei Sun4, John Robertson3* and Weisheng Zhao1,2* 1Fert Beijing Institute, MIIT Key Laboratory of Spintronics, School of Integrated Circuit Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China2 2National Key Lab of Spintronics, Institute of International Innovation, Beihang University, Yuhang District, Hanzhou, 311115, China 3Engineering Department, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK 4School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China Email: HaichangLu@buaa.edu.cn jr214@cam.ac.uk weisheng.zhao@buaa.edu.cn Theoretical prediction of the 2nd-order magnetic transition temperature (TM) used to be arduous. Here, we develop a first principle-based, fully automatic structure-to-TM method for two-dimensional (2D) magnets whose effective Hamiltonians follow the Heisenberg model. The Heisenberg exchanges, which can be calculated to an arbitrary shell, are transferred into the Monte Carlo calculation. Using Cr-based magnets as the showcases, we show that our method is a powerful tool to study the 2D magnets in two aspects. First, considering long-range exchanges enables us to identify the spin frustration in the suspended CrTe2 monolayer, whereas the heterostructure calculations reveal that the ferromagnetism can be recovered if the monolayer CrTe2 is grown onto various 2D substrates. Second, we realize a high-throughput screening of novel magnets discovered by random structure searches. Six 2D Cr chalcogenides are selected to have high TM. Our work provides a new insight for the study of 2D magnets and helps accelerate the pace of magnetic materials data-mining. I. INTRODUCTION Magnetic materials have wide applications in data storage and spintronic devices, presenting a promising platform for future low-energy consumption technology . Among all the important features of magnets, high transition temperature (TM) is the prerequisite to ensure the non-volatile feature of the devices at the working temperature. Understanding the origin of magnetism is essential for material selection, especially for the emergent two-dimensional (2D) magnets which spark huge attention as promising candidates for next-generation magnetic memory. As most of the materials discovered cannot sustain magnetic orders above room temperature , many materials remain to be explored. Among the earliest discoveries of intrinsic magnetism in 2D van der Waals materials, many of them are Ising-type or Heisenberg-type Cr and Mn-based magnets, which are either semiconductive or 2 metallic, such as CrI3 , CrGeTe3 , CrTe2 , MnSe2 , MnPS3 . Theoretical prediction of TM involves calculating the magnetic properties like the exchange interactions, and magnetic anisotropy, which are essential to understand the origin of the magnetism and design novel materials. The bilinear Heisenberg exchanges (HEs) are often the most important energy term in the Hamiltonian to determine TM. Extraction of the HEs is a challenging task, which has been done by various methods . For itinerant magnets, the magnetic force method based on linear response theory is widely adopted . Whereas for magnets with localized electrons, HEs can be obtained from indirect calculation known as energy mapping analysis , where the effective spin Hamiltonian is under the framework of the Heisenberg model . It can be further extended to itinerant magnets by mapping into the Heisenberg model with Ruderman-Kittel exchange , especially in the presence of anisotropic exchange interactions . The energy mapping method based on density functional theory (DFT) is prevalent because it is a straightforward technique, only requiring the calculation of total energies for different spin configurations. To date, many works of predicting TM are done involving self-explore analysis of certain materials, considering only a few nearest neighbor HEs, which are short-range . Here, we aim to improve the calculation procedure in two aspects. First, long-range HEs can be non-negligible, we design a method to obtain a series of the HEs to an arbitrary order of shell for either ferromagnets or antiferromagnets which possess Heisenberg-type spin Hamiltonian and various stable spin configurations. Second, all processes for HEs calculation can be done automatically by computer. Previously, high-throughput Curie temperature (TC) calculation for 2D ferromagnets has been reported , considering HEs to the 4th shell. In this work, we present the HEs of various magnets to the 4th ~16th shell. We develop an end-to-end code called Automated Structure to Temperature-Dependent Magnetism (ASTDM), which realizes high-throughput prediction of TM for any kind of spin-lattice. We adopt the energy mapping method to obtain the HEs. There are many kinds of energy mapping methods. For example, the four-state method treats the i, j sites like defects and requires manually freezing the spin directions . It has the advantage of extracting anisotropic exchange by delicate spin manipulations. However, it inevitably introduces mirror image errors. A large supercell is needed to reduce the error, especially for long-range HEs. One can also do a spin rotation to fit the energy with the rotation angle, it can be hard to maintain the spin-frozen configuration using DFT. Here, we propose a method to extract HEs by enumerating plausible antiferromagnetic (AFM) states and solving the spin- dependent Heisenberg matrix. We find that various AFM states are often easy to maintain in Cr and Mn-based magnets. Similarly, a high-throughput workflow for calculating the ground state of any magnets was proposed recently by listing metastable states . Our method is not only free of the mirror image error but also computationally efficient by the one-off output of a series of HEs. For n number of HEs, only n+1 total energy calculations are needed. Aside from HEs, we also consider the onsite single-ion magnetic anisotropy energy (MAE) which is important in sustaining the magnetic 3 order in 2D magnets. We then forward them to the recently introduced semiclassical Metropolis Monte Carlo (SMC) simulation to obtain magnetic properties helping identify TM such as magnetic moment, heat capacity, and magnetic susceptibility. Our method is user-friendly for high-throughput calculation, requiring no more than an input structure with a few calculation parameters (see details in the supplementary material (SM) III). We first test the code with various experimental known magnets. Then we focus on the 1T chromium ditelluride (CrTe2), one of the experimental known ferromagnets to have TC approaching room temperature. Down to the monolayer limit, spin frustration exists due to large long-range HEs and small short-range HEs. The Ferromagnetic (FM) order of the ML CrTe2 can be recovered by van der Waals contact with various 2D substrates. Finally, we perform a random structure search of Cr binary compounds to screen 2D magnets with high transition temperatures. We identified six magnets. The 1T’ CrS2, 1T1T Cr2S3, 1T2H Cr2Te3 bulk and the 1T2H of Cr3Te4 are FM. The 1T2H Cr2X3 (X=S, Se, Te (ML)) are AFM. Their TM are calculated to be above room temperature. II. ASTDM WORKFLOW The Heisenberg Hamiltonian can be written as Hmag = E0 + ∑ Jijs⃑i ∙ s⃑j <ij> + ∑ Au⃑⃑⃑(s⃑i ∙ u⃑⃑)2 i where E0 is the non-magnetic energy, Jij is the Heisenberg exchange, s⃑i/s⃑j is the spin vector on the i/j spin site. The second term is the single ion magnetic anisotropy energy, which originates from the structure anisotropy and the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) effect, u⃑⃑ is the unit vector pointing to the anisotropic axis. To predict the transition temperature, both the HEs and the MAE should be calculated. 4 in grey and I atoms are marked in brown. [Spin-lattice analysis]: for a spin site Cr, HEs with three neighbors are marked in green circles, and HEs with six neighbors are marked in red circles. [Collinear magnetic configuration generator]: black points are set spin-up, and white points are set spin-down. [Monte Carlo]: dots are magnetic moments M, hollow dots are heat capacity CV, which helps identify the transition temperature. Red is for CMC and blue is for SMC. The first step is to analyze the structure and determine the number of HEs that need to be calculated. Fig. 1 demonstrates the workflow using the monolayer (ML) chromium triiodide (CrI3). The input structure should be geometry-optimized and the size of the spin moment in each ion is also written, see more details in supplementary information (SI) III. First, magnetic ions are identified to construct the spin-lattice and classified by their species and spin sizes. Then HEs are categorized by the two connecting magnetic ions i and j and the distance rij. Long-range HEs are often less important since HEs are related to distance. Therefore, only the Jij satisfying rij = |r⃑i − r⃑j| < rc (cutoff distance) are counted. Test of rc is performed for each material investigated to make sure no important HEs are neglected. Fig. 1 [Spin-lattice Analysis] shows the spin-lattice and the naming of HEs for the ML CrI3. CrI3 is a two-dimensional semiconductor with a hexagonal lattice and FM ground state. The rc is set to be 15Å, so that HEs are considered to the 7th shell. ASTDM will generate seven meta-stable AFM configurations plus the FM configuration. We sort the HEs (J1, J2, J3 ... ) by r = |ri − rj|. The total energy of each configuration can be written as: 5 Econf m = E0 + ∑ amnJn j where m = 1 is for FM, and m = 2~8 are for AFM1~AFM7, shown in Fig. 1 [Collinear Magnetic Configuration Generator]. The matrix element amn is calculated by summing up the pairwise exchange energies related to Jn for the mth spin configuration. The spin dimer energy for site i and j with the exchange interaction Jn can be written as Jnsisj for if the spins are parallel, −Jnsisj for if the spins are antiparallel. The energy of each configuration will be calculated by density functional theory (DFT). By solving the 8 × 8 matrix equation, (J1, J2, J3 ... J7) and E0 can be deduced. Noted the matrix should be non-singular, so a⃑i = (ai1,ai2,... , ai7,1) should be linearly independent of any other a⃑j . The recursive function is used to iterate through every possible AFM configuration from the original input cell to expanded supercells, prioritized by the surface area to minimize the computational cost. Any current generated configuration not orthogonal to the previously accepted configurations is discarded. Supercells are expanded doubly each time in each direction. Once eight orthogonal configurations are found, the process is terminated. The size of the supercell is set to be the minimum size to interpret every configuration. Next, input files for the first-principle total energy calculations are generated by the input parameters listed in SM III. Details of the calculation parameters in this work are illustrated in SM I. After the calculations are finished, ASTDM picks up the total energies from the result file. Apart from energy collection, it will also examine whether the output magnetic configurations are consistent with the initial setups. If all configurations pass the check, the HEs are obtained via Gaussian elimination of the matrix. Fig. 1 [Heisenberg Exchanges] shows (J1, J2, J3 ... J7) of ML CrI3. In this case, J1, J2 are important to determine TC, so rc = 9Å is enough. Nevertheless, it is good to know how HE decade from the 1st shell to the 8th shell. Apart from the HEs, the onsite MAE is also calculated by Au⃑⃑⃑ = Eaxis − Eplane s2 where Eaxis and Eplane are the total energy per Cr of the FM configurations with all spins parallel and perpendicular to u⃑⃑, respectively. For CrI3, we find an easy axis along the z-direction, revealing perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA). The MAE is -0.025meV/Cr. Finally, the code moves on to the Monte Carlo calculation to calculate the temperature-dependent thermal properties such as the average magnetic moment M, the heat capacity CV, the magnetic susceptibility χ, and the normalized entropy S (see SM II and Fig. S2 for more details). ASTDM is capable of doing either classical Monte Carlo (CMC) or semiclassical Monte Carlo (SMC). The magnetization and the heat capacity are shown in Fig. 1 [Monte Carlo]. SMC partially captures the nature of quantum spins by recently introduced local quantization30. Note that all HEs should be scaled to quantum Heisenberg exchange by JQ = JCl S S+1. The MC calculation is proceeded to finite size test 6 (Fig. S3) and the loop test (Fig. S4) for each magnet investigated in this work. Finally, we can visualize the spin textures at a given temperature to help identify the magnetic state. III. RESULTS A. Material investigations We test the transition temperatures of several experimental known 2D magnets (both the monolayer and the bulk forms shown in Table S1, Fig. S6~S14) and conventional 3D magnets (Table S2, Fig. S15~S21). We perform rc and kc (see the definition of kc in SM III) test for each material, examples are shown in Fig. S1. The trend of HEs is studied. Fig. S6~S21 show the crystal structure, dissipation theorem. It is worthwhile noticing that the 2D spin lattice with in-plane anisotropy has no long-range order, which is like the XY model with BKT (Berezinskii, Kosterlitz, and Thouless) phase transition. We add an external in-plane magnetic field to create an effective easy axis anisotropy in the plane, which recovers magnetic order, shown in Fig. S5. By looking at the CV, we find that a field up to 1T contributes little change to the TM. Semiconductive magnets are well described by the Heisenberg model, as they possess localized moments. The 2D magnets we inspect here have been tested that the bilinear Heisenberg exchanges are the major coefficients determining TM by confirming that the spin energy vs. spin rotation angle roughly follows E(θ) ∝ cosθ . We only consider the Heisenberg exchange as other exchanges are often an order smaller and usually contribute less to the TM. We find the intralayer HEs are similar in both ML and bulk form, so they are not thickness-dependent. As interlayer HEs are involved, TM in bulk form is often larger than that in ML form. The Heisenberg model is not primarily designed for itinerant magnets. However, if the unpaired electrons are localized and the interactions between the localized spins are via conduction electrons, the itinerant system can be interpreted by the extended Heisenberg model with the trend of HEs following Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) dispersion . Here we study Cr chalcogenides. Though being itinerant magnets, they possess various AFM metastable states without spin quench, in contrast to many other bulk itinerant magnets such as Fe, Co, and Ni where AFM states are not stable, and Cr where FM state cannot be obtained. We also calculate the spin-resolved partial density of states (PDOS) in Fig. S1(a)(d). The spin-up Cr d bands are localized 1eV beneath the Fermi level (EF), meaning that the HEs are more distance-dependent rather than insulators whose HEs also depend on spin-lattice. The J(r) roughly follows the RKKY curve, whose 2D form is : J(r) ~ − cos(2kFr) (2kFr)2 7 and 3D form is : J(r) ~ − sin(2kFr) − (2kFr)cos(2kFr) (kFr)4 kF is the Fermi vector. We study CrTe2, the HEs, and MC results are shown in Fig. S14 and Fig. 2. We fit the J(r) of ML and bulk to the 2D and 3D RKKY, respectively. kF of ML is larger than that of bulk, as the quantum confinement effect is stronger as the dimension shrinks and d electrons become more delocalized, as shown in Fig. S1(d). PDOS at the Fermi level D(EF) is significantly enhanced from bulk. One would naively conclude dominant HEs determining the magnetism should be short-range HEs whereas long-range HEs should be negligible because the exchange is related to the spatial distance between the exchange sites. This is true for insulators. However, electrons are delocalized in itinerant magnets, so the wavefunction overlap is important. Therefore, a larger rc is required. We find J1 is overridden J2 and J4 > 0, which causes spin frustration. We examine the spin texture in the presence of the in-plane field of 1T to exclude the effect of planar anisotropy and find spin frustration is responsible for the disappearance of magnetization. For ML, TM=255K. The spin frustration vanishes for more than 2ML. As Jz0 > 0, the ground state is A-type AFM, with TN close to 300K. Approaching bulk, we obtain a TC of 395K. We also test with Hubbard U correction in Fig. S1, both D(EF) and kF are reduced due to stronger electron Coulomb repulsion. 8 sorted separately by distance. (b) RKKY fitting of ML and bulk CrTe2. (c) M and CV for ML CrTe2, zero-field, and 1T in-plane field. (d) Spin frustration with the presence of an in-plane field. B. Interfacial effect ASTDM is also capable of extracting the HEs in monolayer magnets contacting with substrates. The interfacial engineering is an interesting subject which aims to alter the electronic structure near the interface. It is particularly popular for 2D heterostructures. Down to ultra-thin layers, the interfacial effect is not negligible and often overcomes the bulk effect. Therefore, we investigate the interfacial effect on the HEs. Recently, we also demonstrated how the substrate can dramatically change the HEs to revise the Curie temperature . The dangling bonds at the interface of the 3D substrate contribute to the d-band shifting of the magnets. In this work, we focus on the van der Waals contact without dangling bond. Note that the categorizing of HEs is done by identifying the spin pairs and the distance. Therefore, it is important to make sure the substrate does not deform the magnet, which is true in our cases as the 2D magnets are physisorbed onto substrates. The substrate also breaks the symmetry in the z direction, but we only consider one layer of the magnet and one layer of the substrate. We consider the SOC effect for the substrates with heavy transition metal. We study the heterostructure consisting of metallic ML CrTe2. We select several 2D substrates to construct the van der Waals heterostructures, in which the lattice mismatches are less than 3%. Table 1 shows how the heterostructures are constructed. Observing Fig. 3 (b), we find that how HEs are reshaped is mainly affected by the type of the lattice match. For example, CrTe2 is 1:1 matched to PtSe2, so HEs do not change much. It is 2:3 matched to graphene and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), reshaping HEs in the same way. This is also true for transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) MoSe2 and WSe2. For Bi2Te3, HEs are greatly reversed. Apart from PtSe2, spin frustration is eliminated. SOC effect is stronger in Bi2Te3 than in PtSe2 and WSe2, which is also seen in magnetic insulator CrI3 (Fig. S22). The effect in the van der Waals interface should be an order less than interfaces with dangling bonds, so no dramatic change of the Curie temperature is expected, but it reshapes HEs in a way of symmetry breaking, so the contact configuration is important. Our calculation provides insights into why single-layer ferromagnetism is observed in experiments . 9 temperature, and MAE. Substrate SOC Lattice match Mismatch (%) TC (K) MAE (μeV/Cr) Suspended × / / 255 Graphene × 2: 3 2.88 195 h-BN × 2: 3 1.14 190 MoSe2 × √3: 2 185 WSe2 × √3: 2 190 √ 185 PtSe2 × 1: 1 1.59 295 √ 210 Bi2Te3 × 2: √3 145 √ 165 SOC: × for no SOC effect is considered, √ for considering SOC effect. Lattice match: CrTe2 supercell to the substrate supercell. 10 C. Structure search Finally, we use ASTDM to predict the TM of materials that have not been experimentally realized. To find 2D magnets with potential high TM, one would require the metalloid with weak electronegativity. Apart from the metalloid, spin-lattice with denser sites is preferred to have more HEs. Therefore, one would seek materials where the magnetic ion ratio is high. However, materials satisfying these might not exist, or the formation energies are too low to be fabricated experimentally. In light of this, we combine random structure searches and ASTDM to seek energetically favored structures with high TM. type. Transition temperatures are written by ML/bulk, in red for FM magnets, and blue for AFM magnets. (d) Selected structures with TM approaching or higher than room temperature. We focus on Cr-based binary magnets. The metalloid is chosen to be S, Se, Te. We implement the ab initio random structure search (AIRSS) code which is integrated with ab initio code CASTEP . Fig. 4 shows the convex hull of the Cr-S, Cr-Se, and Cr-Te binary compounds. All structures with negative formation energies are plotted and classified by 2D/3D magnets/non-magnets. All 2D materials are screened using the rank determination algorithm (RDA) method . Then we pick six 11 2D magnets whose ‘energies above the hull’ are reasonably low to calculate their TM, shown in Fig. 4(d). We find all of them are metallic. We further investigate the selected magnets, shown in Fig. 5. Except for CrS2 1T’, all of them contain 3D-like networks that not only increase the number of the HEs but also eliminate the dimensional effect as their spin lattices are not strictly 2D. J(r) of the ML forms and the bulk forms are similar. We find Cr2S3 1T1T, CrS2 1T’ and Cr3Te4 1T2H structures have FM ground states, while Cr2X3 1T2H (X=S, Se, Te) structures have AFM ground states except for Cr2Te3 bulk which is FM. For the 1T2H structures, an interesting fact is that J1 corresponding to the vertical HE connecting the sublayers, is positive, which can cause an inter-sublayer AFM ground state. J2 whose r⃑2 is parallel to the plane and is negative, so inside the sublayer it is FM. Unlike the AA stack of the sublayers in the 1T2H structures, the 1T1T structure has sublayers AB stacked so FM is stabilized. Then we study ML CrS2. The 1T structure is AFM. Under the Peierls distortion, a new structure called 1T’ is obtained with a bit higher formation energy, shown in Fig. 5(d). The 1T’ structure is experimentally observed by chemical vapor deposition and predicted to be a half-metal with TC ~ 1000K . Rather than comparing the energy difference and using the mean-field approximation, we use ASTDM. Dimerization of Cr induces a symmetry breaking of the spin-lattice. J1 splits into three HEs called J11, J12, J13, sorted by the distance. J2 splits into three HEs and J3 splits into two. The most important EI is the intradimer J11 which is ~ 60meV, resulting in TC approaching 620K. We find that the magnetism disappears in the bulk form of 1T’ as we have searched the non-magnetic bulk structure. Lastly, we find the 1T2H Cr3Te4, which has also been proposed previously . As it has three sublayers, there are two kinds of Cr with slightly different spins, Cr in the middle (b-Cr) and Cr by the sides (a-Cr). Each ML is 1.24nm, with a 3D-like network providing abundant HEs, as shown in Fig. 5(e). We identify nine intralayer HEs and two interlayer HEs below 0.8nm. J1 > 0, corresponding to the on-top inter-sublayer EI of the 1T2H structure. J3 < 0, helping to stabilize the inter-sublayer FM. J2a and J2b are negative, stabilizing the intra-sublayer FM. J2a < J2b , J5a < J5b , indicating direct exchange is higher in a-Cr, as electrons are more localized. For bulk, the negative large Jz0 ensure the interlayer FM order. TC is calculated to be 590K for the ML and 535K for the bulk. The high Curie temperatures stem from a large number of HEs inside the ML. For the same kind of spin-lattice, increasing the ratio of magnetic ions indeed helps enhance TC, which is also reported in iron-based compounds FexGeTe2 . 12 1T’, (e) Cr3Te4 1T2H. The intralayer HEs are marked in red, the interlayer HEs are marked in blue. D. Discussion There are many interesting works to do with ASTDM in the future. First, a DFT+U test of various magnets can be done. The Hubbard U method is a widely used way to compensate for the underestimation of the Coulomb repulsion induced by electron correlation. For metals like CrSe2 and CrTe2, adding U reduces the overlap of the wavefunction and thereby reduce the overall exchanges, shown in Fig. S1. For semiconductors such as CrCl3, CrBr3, CrI3, adding U increases the overall exchanges . We are also aware that adding U can change MAE. For example, CrGeTe3 is experimentally found 2D semiconductor with an out-of-plane anisotropy, while it is calculated to possess in-plane anisotropy (IMA) . Adding U (0.2eV<U<1.7eV) to the 3d orbital of Cr changes from IMA to PMA, but adding U>1.7eV, it becomes interlayer AFM. CrTe2 ML is calculated to be IMA, but adding U>4eV it is PMA . For other exchanges than HEs, noncollinear magnetic configurations are usually needed for energy mapping method. How these configurations are automatically generated is an interesting topic in the future. If the spins are more than 1/2, higher order exchanges such as biquadratic exchanges should be taken into consideration. For example, biquadratic exchanges help stabilize the FM order in NiCl2 monolayer . If we only focus on transition temperature, short-range HEs are usually the largest terms to look for. 13 IV. COCLUSION The advantage of ASTDM is to straightforwardly investigate the Heisenberg exchange with complex spin-lattice and multiple Fermi surfaces. The energy mapping method has the advantage of efficient, one-off render of HEs for magnets with metastable states. The fine structure of HEs can be fundamental, especially considering the long-range HEs which enables us to observe the spin frustration in monolayer CrSe2 and CrTe2. Therefore, our work can be important for future magnetic structure investigations. ASTDM can also be interfaced with other high-throughput code to realize a quick check of large numbers of magnets, which can accelerate the pace of the magnet’s data-mining and applications in the next-generation spintronic devices. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS H. L. thanks for the fruitful discussion with Prof. Stefan Blügel at Peter Grünberg Institute for magnetic exchange interaction calculations. This work is supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 2232055), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 12204027), and the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2022YFB3807200). H. L. wrote ASTDM and conducted the main calculation, T. Y. performed random structure searches. H. L., J. R., and W. Z. supervised the project. H. L. wrote the paper and all authors contributed and commented on it. REFERENCES 1. I. Zutic, J. Fabian and S. Das Sarma, Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 323 (2004). 2. S. Wolf, D. Awschalom, R. Buhrman, J. Daughton, V. Von Molnar, M. Roukes, A. Chtchelkanova and D. Treger, Science 294, 1488 (2001). 3. M. Gibertini, M. Koperski, A. Morpurgo and K. Novoselov, Nat. Nanotech. 14, 408-419 (2019). 4. C. Gong and X. Zhang, Science 363, 706 (2019). 5. B. Huang, G. Clark, E. Navarro-Moratalla, D. Klein, R. Cheng, K. Seyler, D. Zhong, E. Schmidgall, M. McGuire, D. Cobden, W. Yao, D. Xiao, P. Jarillo-Herrero and X. Xu, Nature 546, 270 (2017). 6. C. Gong, L. Li, Z. Li, H. Ji, A. Stern, Y. Xia, T. Cao, W. Bao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Qiu, R. Cava, S. Louie, J. Xia and X. Zhang, Nature 546, 265 (2017). 7. X. Zhang, Q. Lu, W. Liu, W. Niu, J. Sun, J. Cook, M. Vaninger, P. Miceli, D. Singh, S. Lian, T. Chang, X. He, J. Du, L. He, R. Zhang, G. Bian and Y. Xu, Nat. Comm. 12, 2492 (2021). 8. L. Meng, Z. Zhang, M. Xu, S. Yang, K. Si, L. Liu, X. Wang, H. Jiang, B. Li, P. Qin, P. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Tang, Y. Ye, W. Zhou, L. Bao, H. Gao and Y. Gong, Nat. Comm. 12, 809 (2021). 9. D. J. O’Hara, T. Zhu, A. H. Trout, A. S. Ahmed, Y. Luo, C. Lee, M. R. Brenner, S. Rajan, J. A. Gupta, D. W. McComb and R. K. Kawakami, Nano Lett. 18, 3125 (2018). 14 10. Y. Sun, Q. Tan, X. Liu, Y. Gao and J. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10, 3087-3093 (2019). 11. A. Szilva, Y. Kvashnin, E. A. Stepanov, L. Nordstrom, O. Eriksson, A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 95, 035004 (2023). 12. A. I. Liechtenstein, M. I. Katsnelson, V. P. Antropov and V. A. Gubanov, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 67, 65-74 13. M. Pajda, J. Kudrnovsky, I. Turek, V. Drchal and P. Bruno, Phys. Rev. B 64, 174402 (2001). 14. P. Bruno, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 087205 (2003). 15. X. Wan, Q. Yin and S. Y. Savrasov, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 266403 (2006). 16. H. Xiang, C. Lee, H. Koo, X. Gong and M. Whangbo, Dalton Trans. 42, 823 (2013). 17. W. Heisenberg, Z. Phys. 49, 619–636 (1928). 18. R. E. Prange and V. Korenman, Phys. Rev. B 19, 4691 (1979). 19. B. Zimmermann, G. Bihlmayer, M. Böttcher, M. Bouhassoune, S. Lounis, J. Sinova, S. Heinze, S. Blügel and B. Dupé, Phys. Rev. B 99, 214426 (2019). 20. H. Yang, A. Thiaville, S. Rohart, A. Fert and M. Chshiev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 267210 (2015). 21. N. Miao, B. Xu, L. Zhu, J. Zhou and Z. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140, 2417-2420 (2018). 22. Y. Zhu, X. Kong, T. Rhone and H. Guo, Phys. Rev. Mater. 2, 081001 (2018). 23. D. Torelli, K. Thygesen and T. Olsen, 2D Mater. 6, 045018 (2019). 24. D. Torelli, H. Moustafa, K. W. Jacobsen and T. Olsen, npj Comput. Mater. 6, 158 (2020). 25. S. Tiwari, J. Vanherck, M. Van de Put, W. Vandenberghe and B. Soree, Phys. Rev. Research. 3, 043024 26. A. Kabiraj, M. Kumar and S. Mahapatra, npj Comput. Mater. 6, 35 (2020). 27. M. Horton, J. Montoya, M. Liu and K. Persson, npj Comput. Mater. 5, 64 (2019). 28. F. Walsh, M. Asta and L. Wang, npj Comput. Mater. 8, 186 (2022). 29. A. Kartsev, M. Augustin, R. Evans, K. Novoselov and E. Santos, npj Comput. Mater. 4, 57 (2018). 30. M. T. Beal-Monod, Phys. Rev. B 36, 8835 (1987). 31. Y. Zhu, Y. Pan, L, Ge, J. Fan, D. Shi, C. Ma, J. Hu and R. Wu, Phys. Rev. B 108, L041401 (2023). 32. M. A. Ruderman and C. Kittel, Phys. Rev. 96, 99 (1954). 33. H. Wang, H. Lu, Z. Guo, A. Li, P. Wu, J. Li, W. Xie, Z. Sun, P. Li, H. Damas, A. M. Friedel, S. Migot, J. Ghanbaja, L. Moreau, Y. Fagot-Revurat, S. Petit-Watelot, T. Hauet, J. Robertson, S. Mangin, W. Zhao and T. Nie, Nat. Comm. 14, 2483 (2023). 34. B. Li, Z. Wan, C. Wang, P. Chen, B. Huang, X. Cheng, Q. Qian, J. Li, Z. Zhang, G. Sun, B. Zhao, H. Ma, R. Wu, Z. Wei, Y. Liu, L. Liao, Y. Yu, Y. Huang, X. Xu, X. Duan, W. Ji and X. Duan, Nat. Mater. 20, 818- 35. C.J. Pickard and R. Needs, J. Phys.: Condens. Mater. 23, 053201 (2011). 36. M. Segall, C. Pickard, P. Hasnip, M. Probert, K. Refson and M. Payne, Z. Kristallogr. Cryst. Mater. 220, 37. P. Larsen, M. Pandey, M. Strange and K. Jacobson, Phys. Rev. Mater. 3, 034003 (2019). 15 38. M. Habib, S. Wang, W. Wang, H. Xiao, S. Obaidulla, A. Gayen, Y. Khan, H. Chen and M. Xu, Nanoscale 39. K. Chen, J. Deng, Y. Yan, Q. Shi, T. Chang, X. Ding, J. Sun, S. Yang and J. Z. Liu, npj Comput. Mater. 7, 40. J. Seo, D. Kim, E. An, K. Kim, G. Kim, S. Hwang, D. Kim, B. Jang, H. Kim, G. Eom, S. Seo, R. Stania, M. Muntwiler, J. Lee, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Y. Jo, J. Lee, B. Min, M. Jo, H. Yeom, S. Choi, J. Shim and J. Kim, Sci. Adv. 6, eaay8912 (2020). 41. J. Ni, X. Li, D. Amoroso, X. He, J. Feng, E. Kan, S. Picozzi and H. Xiang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 247204 16 Supplementary Materials: Automatic Calculation of the Transition Temperatures for two- dimensional Heisenberg type Magnets Haichang Lu1,2,3*, Tai Yang1, Zhimei Sun4, John Robertson3* and Weisheng Zhao1,2* 1Fert Beijing Institute, MIIT Key Laboratory of Spintronics, School of Integrated Circuit Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, 100191, China2 2National Key Lab of Spintronics, Institute of International Innovation, Beihang University, Yuhang District, Hanzhou, 311115, China 3Engineering Department, Cambridge University, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK 4School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China This PDF file includes: Sections I to IV Figs. S1 to S22