1 3D observations discover a new paradigm in rubber elasticity Z. Wang, S. Das*, A. Joshi*, A.J.D. Shaikeea§ and V.S. Deshpande§ Author Affiliations: Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PZ, UK * Authors contributed equally § Corresponding authors: A.J.D. Shaikeea: ajds3@cam.ac.uk V.S. Deshpande: vsd@eng.cam.ac.uk 2 Summary paragraph The mechanical response of rubbers has been ubiquitously assumed to be only a function of the imposed strain. Using innovative X-ray measurements capturing the three-dimensional spatial volumetric strain fields, we demonstrate that rubbers and indeed many common engineering polymers, undergo significant local volume changes. But remarkably the overall specimen volume remains constant regardless of the imposed loading. This strange behaviour which also leads to apparent negative local bulk moduli is due to the presence of a mobile phase within these materials. Combining X-ray tomographic observations with high-speed radiography to track the motion of the mobile phase we have revised classical thermodynamic frameworks of rubber elasticity. The work opens new avenues to understand not only the mechanical behaviour of rubbers but a large class of widely used engineering polymers. Rubber elasticity is the generic term describing the behaviour of polymeric solids made up of flexible chains which are joined together to form a three-dimensional network. These solids have the capacity to sustain very large deformations followed by complete recovery. It is one of the most established branches of the mechanics of solids with detailed molecular theories supporting macroscopic measurements of the deformation behaviour and more recent multiscale insights improving properties such fatigue resistance. The ubiquitous feature of all elastomeric models for rubbers is that the Helmholtz free-energy is written purely as a function of temperature and deformation, and no other state variable. In fact, this is the widely accepted definition of a rubber or elastomer. Here using detailed three-dimensional (3D) X-ray computed tomography (XCT) strain measurements and high-speed radiography, supported by laser measurements and two-dimensional digital image correlation (DIC), we demonstrate that the understanding of rubber elasticity needs revision. Our findings show that rubbers/elastomers, and synthetic polymers, including thermoplastics require new state variables to describe their deformation behaviour. This has wide-ranging and significant implications for understanding the mechanical responses of polymer composites. We have developed a laboratory-based XCT method, dubbed “Flux Enhanced Tomography for Correlation (FETC)”, to non-intrusively measure full field 3D strains in nominally homogeneous solids ranging from polymers to metals. FETC (Extended Data Fig. 1 and Supplementary S1) captures subtle variations in density or heterogeneities such as differences in crosslinking densities in polymers by separating out the grayscale distinctions in the X-ray attenuation spectra (Fig. 1a). This provides a natural speckle pattern in the material, which we leverage to perform digital volume correlation (DVC) and an in-situ multi-stage loading protocol (Fig. 1a, Methods). We then derive volumetric spatial distributions of displacement fields, enabling precise measurement of all 9 components of the deformation gradient Fij. An inherent advantage of FETC is that it does not use artificial tracer particles to provide the speckle for the DVC and therefore the measurements directly reflect the innate material response. Large local volume changes but specimens remain incompressible Silicone rubber is considered an exemplar rubber and extensively characterised by combining micro-mechanical models of rubber elasticity with measurements . We first consider cylindrical Silicone rubber specimens (Methods) of height H and diameter D which are glued to platens (Fig. 1b) and tested in tension or compression by applying an axial displacement rate 3 U̇ and measuring the conjugate axial force P. The glued ends imply that the deformation field is spatially heterogenous with the specimen under tensile loading thinning at mid-section but constrained at the platens (Fig. 1c). The nominal tensile stress σ∞ ≡ 4P/(πD2) versus strain ε∞ ≡ U/H responses (Fig. 1d) for an imposed quasi-static rate ε̇∞ = 10−3 s−1 are in line with expectations of an elastomer, viz. the behaviour is reversible, shows some non-linearity at larger deformations and the stiffness increases with decreasing aspect ratio H/D. FETC provides a rich dataset on the deformation modes with the evolution of the spatial distributions of Fij with ε∞ (Extended Data Fig. 2). The first interesting observation presents itself when we examine the evolution of the spatial distribution of the volumetric strain ΔV/V0 ≡ det (Fij) − 1 within the H/D = 1 specimen (Fig. 1c and Supplementary Movie S1). Clearly, the specimen does not deform in an incompressible manner as widely assumed for many elastomers but rather undergoes local volumetric strains of ~ ± 10% (laser measurements independent of FETC further confirm these results; see Extended Data Fig. 3). That in itself may not be remarkable as compressible rubber elasticity has also been proposed although without a molecular basis but more often in the context of porous rubbers or foams . The real surprise here is that under tensile loading we observe a mixture of compressive and dilatory volumetric strains with the central core of the specimen losing volume and an outer cylindrical shell gaining volume (Fig. 1c). The puzzle becomes more perplexing when we observe that the overall specimen volume remains constant over all loading stages, i.e., 〈V/V0〉 = 〈det (Fij)〉 ≈ 1; see Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 2a (here 〈⋅〉 denotes the volume- average over the whole specimen). The overall incompressibility of the specimen is also confirmed from tomographic reconstruction of the specimen outline (Extended Data Fig. 3a). These conclusions that deformation is accompanied by local volume changes of ±10% but the specimen remains incompressible also extend to compressive loading (Extended Data Fig. 4). To further investigate whether the specimen level volume constraint is a material property and not restricted to the stress-state generated within the H/D = 1 specimen, we performed tensile tests on specimens with a wide range of aspect ratios (the stress triaxiality reduces and becomes more uniaxial with increasing H/D). These measurements (Fig. 1e) clearly illustrate that while there are large local volume (~ ± 10%) changes, the specimen volume is always conserved. However, with increasing specimen aspect ratio, the central portion of the specimen becomes increasingly spatially uniform and deforms in a nearly incompressible manner with regions of volumetric deformation restricted to the regions near the glued loading platens where gradients of the strain are present. The immediate question then arises is whether existing elastomeric models can capture these observations? We employed the finite element model updating (FEMU) method to infer elastomeric constitutive model parameters for three common elastomeric models from the spatial data of Fij. No model was able to capture this mixture of volumetric dilation and compaction observed in the FETC measurements (Supplementary S2). Deformation gradients drive the motion of a mobile phase The current hyperelastic models cannot capture the observations is likely related to the fact that the volumetric deformations occur when strain/stress gradients are large (recall effect of H/D in Fig. 1e). We confirmed that the apparent effect of strain gradients does not result in a specimen size effect (Supplementary S3). This motivated us to investigate the effect of strain gradients in a more controlled setting. Four-point bending of a beam (Fig. 2a) imposes a pure bending moment over the section of length s1 between the central rollers. The measured moment M versus curvature κ relation (Fig. 2b) for a beam with a square cross-section h × h and subjected to a loading rate κ̇h is approximately linear with negligible loading/unloading hysteresis. Further the response is independent of loading rates over 3 orders of magnitude. 4 This apparent macroscopic elastic behaviour is also confirmed by relaxation tests (Fig. 2c) where we linearly ramped up the curvature over a time period 0 ≤ t ≤ tR and then held the curvature constant (inset of Fig. 2c): the moment increases linearly during the ramp and then remains constant with no relaxation. While these are behaviours expected of a rubber our next major finding occurs while examining the distributions of the volumetric strains ΔV/V0 calculated from Fij (Fig. 2d and Supplementary Movie S2). We observe that the rubber gains volume on the compressive side of the beam and loses volume on the tensile side with the strains again on the order of ±10% (see Extended Data Fig. 3 for independent validation experiments using 3D DIC for the surface strain components). These unexpected volumetric strains occur even though the central section of the beam is under pure bending; see Fig. 2e for selected components of the Green-Lagrange strain. The as-cast Silicone rubber is isotropic and homogeneous (Supplementary S3), and it is immediately clear that no existing theory for rubbers/elastomers can capture this response as it will require a negative bulk modulus. In fact, thermodynamic consistency arguments therefore suggest that state variables in addition to deformation (and temperature) are required to formulate the Helmholtz free-energy of Silicone rubber. The observation that there are local volume changes accompanied by overall incompressibility of the specimen drives the hypothesis that there exists an incompressible mobile phase within the rubber. The transport of this phase then induces local volume changes but with global volume conservation. The micro-mechanical rationale for a mobile phase is that synthetic rubbers such as Silicone rubber are produced by a polymerisation reaction which might leave a certain fraction of the polymer un-crosslinked. The rubber is therefore comprised of a crosslinked polymer network and an un-crosslinked component that is mobile within the open structure crosslinked network (Supplementary S4). To investigate the presence of such a mobile phase, we manufactured a “composite” Silicone rubber beam where half of the beam contained 5% wt. ZnI2 dissolved into the catalyst (which serves as an X-ray tracer) and the other half is pure Silicone rubber (Fig. 3a and Methods). This composite beam was then subjected to 4-point bending with the neutral axis of bending delineating the halves of the beam with and without the tracer. Tomographic reconstructions of the beam subjected to curvatures κh = ±0.24 are included in Fig. 3b, i.e., the beam was successively bent with the tracer portion on the tensile and compressive side of the beam, respectively. The dissolved tracers spread out from the compressive side onto the tensile side but there is little transport observed when the tracers are on the tensile side (the motion of the tracers is reversible with the XCT reconstructions of the undeformed beam prior to and after loading/unloading indistinguishable; see Supplementary Movie S3). Given that adhesion between ZnI2 and Silicone rubber is excellent (Methods) these observations definitively show that there exists a mobile phase within the rubber. The dissolved ZnI2 is attached proportionally to the mobile un-crosslinked polymer and the immobile crosslinked polymer: the observed motion of the tracers is associated with the transport of the mobile phase. It is now apparent that the concentration of the mobile phase is a key additional state variable that is required to describe the mechanical behaviour of the Silicone rubber. But an additional anomalous feature of the rubber is that the material can volumetrically expand under compressive hydrostatic stress even though observations (Fig. 3b) show that material egresses out of the compressive region. Expansion in the presence of a compressive hydrostatic stress implies a negative contribution from the hydrostatic component of the mechanical work. Thus, unlike in hydrogels and theories of other materials involving a mobile phase, the driving force for the egress of un-crosslinked phase cannot be pressure. Rather we hypothesize that the un-crosslinked phase comprises non spherical molecules such as 5 dimers/trimers. The shape of these molecules implies that this phase does not induce pure volumetric straining but a combination of volumetric and deviatoric straining (Supplementary S4). Then positive deviatoric work associated with the un-crosslinked phase provides the driving force for the egress/ingress of the un-crosslinked phase. We have developed thermodynamically consistent model based on this hypothesis (Supplementary S4). Under isothermal conditions the Helmholtz free-energy is a function of not only the deformation parameterised by Fij but also the occupancy θ of the un-crosslinked phase in the crosslinked network (θ is directly related to the concentration of the mobile phase). A key feature of the free-energy is the non-isotropic straining due to the mobile un-crosslinked phase which also implies that deformation induces reversible anisotropy of the Silicone rubber. Predictions of the equilibrium (i.e., for loading at the limiting rate κ̇ → 0) moment M versus normalised curvature κh response (Fig. 2b) and the spatial variation of the volumetric strain (Fig. 3c) across the beam thickness at κh = 0.24 are in excellent agreement with measurements. The corresponding predictions of the normalised concentration θ̅ of the mobile phase across the beam thickness (Fig. 3c) also confirm that that phase egresses out of the compressive region in line with observations in Fig. 3b (θ̅ = 1 is the normalised concentration in the undeformed state so that θ̅ < 1 and θ̅ > 1 indicate a reduction and increase, respectively in the concentration of the mobile phase compared to the undeformed state). While the continuum model presented here demonstrates that a thermodynamically consistent theory can be constructed to describe the strange behaviours reported here, a deeper molecular level understanding remains to be established: qualitative understandings of molecular mechanisms are discussed in Supplementary S4. Direct observations of the motion of the mobile phase An immediate implication of our finding of a mobile phase within the rubber is that we expect the rubber to have a rate dependent response that is dictated by the mobility of the mobile phase. Such a behaviour would then, even in terms of macroscopic load versus displacement measurements, be inconsistent with hyperelastic models usually used to describe the deformation of rubbers. However, in line with behaviours of rubbers reported in the literature, our measurements too show little or no rate dependence of the response over more than 3 orders of magnitude in κ̇h (Fig. 2b) and similarly no relaxation (Fig. 2c). These measurements are seemingly incompatible with the notion of a mobile phase: a sufficiently high mobility such that the spatio-temporal distribution of the mobile phase is independent of κ̇h but only dependent on the level of loading κh could rationalise this apparent inconsistency. To visualise this spatio-temporal distribution we repeated the step loading 4-point test with the composite Silicone rubber beam (Fig. 3a) but now obtaining radiographs at an interframe times of 0.5 s to visualise the real time motion of the dissolved ZnI2 tracers (Methods). A montage of the radiographs (Fig. 3d and Supplementary Movie S4) for the κ̇h = 0.12 s−1 test loaded to κ∞h = 0.48 (κ∞ ≡ κ̇tR) shows that the tracers move from the compressive side to the tensile side of the beam as anticipated. But remarkably the transport is rapid: the position Xf of the ZnI2 front is plotted in Fig. 3e (Supplementary S3) and we observe that the front travels a distance l ≈ 2.7 mm over the duration tR = 4 s of the step loading and reaches its final steady- state concurrently at the end of the step at t = tR. Thus, the transport of the mobile phase is so rapid that even at strain rates on the order of κ̇h = 0.12 s−1 the beam remains approximately in equilibrium resulting in no observed rate dependence of the response. Given this understanding of the kinetics, we extended our model to include the mobility of the mobile phase (Supplementary S4). The fact that there is no observed rate dependence of the response even at κ̇h = 0.12 s−1 suggests an estimate for the effective diffusion co-efficient of 6 the mobile phase to be D ≈ l2κ̇/κ∞ = 1.8 × 10−6 m2s−1. This is an unrealistically high linear diffusion co-efficient (typical diffusion co-efficient for water in hydrogels are ~10−8 m2s−1 − 10−9 m2s−1 ). We rationalise the fast transport in our model by arguing that transport of the mobile phase differs somewhat from conventional Darcy flow of a Newtonian fluid through a porous network (the crosslinked network in this case). Given that the mobile phase is a polymer we hypothesize that it behaves as a shear thinning fluid where the resistance to flow (or viscosity) reduces with increasing strain rate. Consequently, a linear diffusion co-efficient cannot be defined for the mobile phase . Using shear thinning parameter values that makes the dissipation rate of the mobile phase to be nearly independent of flux (Supplementary S4) provides excellent agreement with the measurements. These predictions are included in Figs. 2b and 2c for the rate dependence of the moment curvature and relaxation responses, respectively. The model also predicts the temporal evolution of the position of the front of the tracer particles (Supplementary S4) for the case shown in Fig. 3d and two additional cases: (i) a slower rate of κ̇h = 0.012s−1 to the same final curvature κ∞h = 0.48 and (ii) the same rate of κ̇h = 0.12s−1 loaded to a lower curvature of κ∞h = 0.24. The predictions and the corresponding measurements (Fig. 3e) are in excellent agreement confirming that the transport of the mobile phase is sufficiently rapid that the tracer front position is only dependent on the current value of the imposed curvature over the loading rates investigated here. Outlook We have reported numerous counterintuitive behaviours of a Silicone rubber that are contrary to the current understanding of rubber elasticity. These include: (i) the existence of a mobile phase which results in large local volume changes (±10%) while the specimen volume remains unchanged; (ii) dilation under compressive hydrostatic pressures concurrent with the egress of the mobile phase and (iii) extremely high mobility within the rubber. Taken together it is now clear why this behaviour had to-date eluded researchers: (a) traditional techniques only measured global or specimen level volume changes and (b) the very high mobility implies that material rate dependence does not manifest itself at the usual loading rates used to investigate properties of rubbers. These findings while indeed intriguing raise the question whether they are rather niche and without broader implications. The key requirement for the strange behaviours reported here is the existence of a mobile phase which is the outcome of an incomplete polymerisation reaction. Many synthetic engineering polymers are produced by such reactions, and they include widely used thermoplastics like Nylon and high-density polyethylene (HDPE). Thus, it is conceivable that similar effects are not restricted to rubbers but also present in engineering plastics. To test this, we performed three-point bend experiments (Fig. 4a) on Silicone rubber, Nylon6 (Supplementary Movie S5) and HDPE beams of identical geometries (Methods). The measured imposed load P versus central roller displacement U response is shown in Fig. 4b illustrating the very different mechanical responses of these three materials. The rubber has a recoverable response while the Nylon6 and HDPE are not only significantly stiffer but also undergo plastic or permanent deformation upon unloading. The measured spatial distributions of the volumetric strains ΔV/V0 at U = 4 mm included in Fig. 4c clearly show large local volumetric deformations. But again, when averaged over the specimen 〈V/V0〉 = 〈det (Fij)〉 ≈ 1 for all these materials. Moreover, consistent with the 4-point bending results on the Silicone rubber we observe local dilation on the compressive side of the 3-point bend specimen for all these materials. Together these findings suggest that the phenomena we have uncovered are rather general and apply to a wide range of synthetic polymers. 7 The FETC method we have developed has broad applications to the emerging field of data- driven mechanics. To-date most studies developing Machine Learning (ML) methods for constitutive law development have employed only synthetic data. This is due to lack of measurement techniques that provide 3D data: FETC fills this gap. Moreover, measured data using FETC opens doors for new discoveries such as those reported here with wide ranging implications for mechanical constitutive models of engineering rubbers and polymers. For example, the plastic response of polymers is often thought to be incompressible but with a pressure dependence on the yield . This has motivated a range of non-associated flow plastic models for polymers which often result in thermodynamic inconsistencies. Here we suggest that there exists a mechanism that motivates revisiting mechanical models for rubbers and polymers including an understanding of the effect of strain/stress gradients within polymers when these materials are used as matrices in composite materials.