Probing photo-induced granular superconductivity in K3C60 thin films with an ultrafast on-chip voltmeter J. D. Adelinia1†, E. Wang1†, M. Chavez-Cervantes1, T. Matsuyama1, M. Fechner1, M. Buzzi1, G. Meier1, A. Cavalleri1,2 1 Max Planck Institute for the Structure and Dynamics of Matter, Hamburg, Germany 2 Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom † These authors contributed equally to this work The physics of optically-induced superconductivity remains poorly understood, with questions that range from the underlying microscopic mechanism to the macroscopic electrical response of the non-equilibrium phase. In this paper, we study optically-induced superconductivity in K3C60 thin films, which display signatures of granularity both in the equilibrium state below Tc and in the non- equilibrium photo-induced phase above Tc. Photo-conductive switches are used to measure the ultrafast voltage drop across a K3C60 film as a function of time after irradiation, both below and above Tc. These measurements reveal fast changes associated with the kinetic inductance of in-grain superconductivity, and a slower response attributed to the Josephson dynamics at the weak links. Fits to the data yield estimates of the in-grain photo-induced superfluid density after the drive and the dynamics of phase slips at the weak links. This work underscores the increasing ability to make electrical measurements at ultrafast speeds in optically-driven quantum materials, and demonstrates a striking new platform for optoelectronic device applications. Optical excitation at mid-infrared and terahertz frequencies has emerged as a powerful technique for controlling non-equilibrium functional phenomena in quantum materials1, including magnetism2,3, transient topological phases4,5, and photo-induced superconductivity6-16. In the case of optically-manipulated superconductivity, a number of experiments have focused on the alkali-doped fulleride K3C60 (Fig. 1a). Transient superconducting-like optical features have been observed for mid8-10- and far12-infrared excitation at base temperatures far above the equilibrium superconducting transition temperature Tc. In these experiments, which were performed in pressed powder pellets, a long-lived phase with vanishing electrical resistance has been reported10, further underscoring the similarities with an equilibrium superconductor. These experiments have recently been complemented by a study in K3C60 thin films11, which were integrated into an optoelectronic platform5,11,17-20 to study the transport properties at picosecond timescales. New evidence for a photo-induced superconducting- like response was obtained from these measurements, including those arising from characteristic nonlinear current-voltage behaviour that is absent in the metallic phase. A key feature of the non-equilibrium response was that the photo-induced phase had a non- linear current response with vanishing critical current, an effect that is also observed in equilibrium for temperatures in the range 0.6Tc < T < Tc, and associated with a granular response. The response in these films was found to be smaller and to survive up to lower temperature than previously reported for powder samples8-10,12. Here, we report measurements of the voltage dynamics after photo-excitation in the presence of a quasi-DC current bias, enabling a systematic study of non-equilibrium granular superconductivity. An optoelectronic device incorporating a K3C60 thin film was used to detect ultrafast voltage changes after photo-excitation. These measurements were performed both for base temperatures T < Tc, for which the equilibrium superconductor is disrupted or strongly weakened by mid-infrared excitation, and for base temperatures T > Tc, for which a photo-induced superconducting-like response is observed. Thin films of K3C60 were grown on sapphire substrates via molecular-beam epitaxy. An atomic force micrograph of the sample surface is shown in Fig. 1b. The resistance of the K3C60 thin film vs temperature was measured in DC in a two-contact configuration (Fig. 1c), and exhibits a broad superconducting transition with Tc = 19 K, which reflects a granular response in the temperature range 12 K < T < 19 K. The current-dependence of the resistance, as measured under a quasi-DC bias [see supplementary], is shown in Fig. 1d. Nonlinear current-voltage characteristics, typical for superconductivity, were seen at temperatures below Tc. cell of K3C60. C60 molecules are represented in blue, and are situated at the lattice points of a face- centred cubic lattice. Potassium atoms are represented in orange. b, Atomic force microscopy image of the MBE-grown C60 thin film before doping with Potassium. Grains of approximately 100-nm size are visible. c, Two-contact DC measurement of resistance vs temperature of the K3C60 thin film. d, Two-contact quasi-DC measurement of resistance vs current, for the temperatures 8 K, 10 K, 12 K, 15 K, and 25 K. The device architecture for the ultrafast transport measurements is illustrated in Fig. 2a. The K3C60 samples were connected to the signal line of a coplanar waveguide, which allowed for voltage transients to propagate at frequencies of up to 1 THz.11,17,19 The coplanar waveguide was contacted to photo-conductive switches21 on both sides of the sample, which were used to detect the transient voltages. The switches consisted of patches of amorphous silicon, which becomes conductive when excited with an ultrafast laser pulse in the visible spectrum5,21. When photo-excited under a voltage bias, the switches launched current pulses with duration determined by the lifetime of the photo- excited carriers (< 1 ps) and a total charge proportional to the voltage bias, thus enabling sampling of transient voltages. By varying the time delay between the K3C60 excitation pulse (pump) and the switch trigger pulse (probe), a quantitative voltage measurement was obtained with sub-picosecond time resolution. incorporated into a coplanar waveguide, and biased with a quasi-DC current. The K3C60 was then excited with a 300-fs duration, 7-μm wavelength laser pulse at a fluence of 5 mJ/cm2 (indicated in red). The resulting perturbation to the voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film generated two electrical pulses which propagated left and right along the coplanar waveguide. The electrical pulses were detected on the left and right using silicon photo-conductive switches, which were operated with 250-fs gating pulses at 515-nm wavelength (indicated in cyan). b, Sketch of the voltage across the device. The blue (red) line represents the voltage profile in the superconducting (normal) state of K3C60. The arrows represent the voltage changes at the positions of the photo- conductive switches during an ultrafast phase transition. The K3C60 thin film was biased with a voltage pulse of 500-ns duration, long enough for the local current to stabilise (see supplementary Fig. S6). After a constant current flow was established, the K3C60 was excited with a laser pulse of 300-fs duration, 7-μm wavelength, and 5-mJ/cm2 excitation fluence. In-current photo-excitation of the K3C60 caused changes in the voltage drop across the sample (Fig. 2b). On the ultrafast timescales probed in the measurement, the voltage in the device was effectively floating, so changes in voltage across the K3C60 thin film resulted in equal and opposite voltage pulses propagating in the left and right directions. The voltage pulses were then detected at the photo-conductive switches as transient variations in the voltages V1 and V2. The switches were operated with laser pulses of 250-fs duration at 515-nm wavelength. The first set of measurements was carried out at temperatures below Tc. In this regime, the photon energy of the excitation pulse was larger than the energy gap of the equilibrium superconducting state in K3C60.22 In this regime, mid-infrared excitation is expected to break Cooper pairs into unpaired electrons and disrupt superconductivity23, either partially or completely depending on the pump fluence. Hence, for this type of excitation of the equilibrium superconducting state, an increase in the voltage drop across the sample is expected24,25(Fig. 3a). The measured pump-induced changes in V1 and V2 (henceforth referred to as ΔV1 and ΔV2) are plotted in Fig. 3b as a function of pump-probe delay. All voltages are normalised by a factor V0, which, for the measurements below Tc, is defined as the applied current multiplied by the sample resistance at 20 K. ΔV1 exhibited a step-like increase with a rise time of approximately 1 ps. ΔV2 displayed equal and opposite behaviour to ΔV1. For the given direction of applied current, this indicates an increase in the total voltage drop across the sample, consistent with disruption of superconductivity. The total pump- induced change in voltage drop can be calculated as ΔV1 – ΔV2. Fig. 3c displays the pump- induced change in voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film as a function of pump-probe delay for different temperatures below Tc. Fig. 3d displays the same normalised change in voltage drop as a function of applied current. Each data point in the current dependence is the mean value of the time-trace within a 6-ps window centred at 6-ps delay. At 8 K, the pump-probe signal was constant with the applied current up until 2 mA, above which the signal exhibited a step-like decrease. The step was consistent with the critical current of the device. The voltage profile changes from the equilibrium superconducting state (black) to the disrupted state (red) upon photo-excitation. b, Pump-induced change in voltage on left and right of sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 8 K. c, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 8 K, 10 K, 12 K, and 15 K, with an applied current of 0.3 mA. d, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across sample vs applied current, measured at the same temperatures as in (c). Each data point is the mean value of the time-trace within a 6-ps window centred at 6-ps delay. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean change in voltage drop. All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements below Tc as the applied current multiplied by the sample resistance at 20 K. the equilibrium superconducting state (Fig. 1d). Upon increasing temperature, the pump- probe signal began to decrease at lower currents and the step broadened. The reduction in pump-probe signal with increasing temperature and current are consistent with the onset of resistivity in the equilibrium superconducting state before excitation. This is well-understood quantitatively when comparing these results to a circuit model to simulate the voltage dynamics. Two factors govern the physics of this model. First, disruption of superconductivity involves a transformation of charge carriers from Cooper pairs to resistive quasiparticles23. Thus, the carrier dynamics should be well- captured by using a two-fluid model consisting of a resistive channel in parallel with a purely inductive channel. Second, the granular constitution of the K3C60 thin film impedes dissipationless superconducting transport at temperatures just below the bulk Tc, as evidenced in equilibrium by the broadened superconducting transition (Fig. 1d). This is understood to result from thermally-activated phase slips between grain boundaries, and can be modelled using a resistively- and capacitively-shunted Josephson junction (RCSJ) model26. We therefore incorporate the RCSJ model into the superconducting channel of a two-fluid model, forming a granular two-fluid model, in order to simulate the voltage dynamics in a granular superconductor (Fig. 4b). The voltage dynamics for the disruption of superconductivity under a DC current bias were simulated by numerically solving the circuit equations for the granular two-fluid model under a changing superfluid density (more details in supplementary material). The effect of temperature was modelled by considering thermal fluctuations in the phases of the order parameters of the superconducting grains, which result in thermally-activated phase slips and the onset of resistivity at temperatures close to Tc. We have assumed that, before time-zero, the superfluid density ns depends on temperature T following the relation27 ns ∝ 1 − (T Tc ⁄ )4. (1) At time-zero, the superfluid density was assumed to reduce from ns(T) to zero, as shown in Fig. 4c. The calculated voltage transients are displayed in Fig. 4d and Fig. 4e as functions granular material with Cooper pairs and quasiparticles. Cooper pairs tunnel across grain boundaries, whilst thermal phase fluctuations disrupt phase coupling between the different superconducting grains. b, Circuit diagram of the granular two-fluid model used to represent the K3C60 sample. The superfluid channel (highlighted in purple) consists of a typical RCSJ model extended to include the kinetic inductance of the superconducting grains. The resistive quasiparticle channel is highlighted in orange. c, Time-dependent superfluid density used in the disruption simulation at 8 K. The superfluid fraction is assumed to reduce to zero at 0-ps delay. d, Simulated change in voltage drop across sample vs delay, for base temperatures of 8 K, 10 K, 12 K, and 15 K, with an applied current of 0.3 mA. e, Simulated change in voltage drop across sample vs applied current, for the same base temperatures as in (d). All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements below Tc as the applied current multiplied by the sample resistance at 20 K. of delay and current, respectively. The results from the granular two-fluid model exhibit strong agreement with the experimental results in Fig. 3. In a second set of measurements, we examined the photo-induced non-equilibrium state at temperatures above Tc. The experimental setup was identical to the previous measurements below Tc. Before photo-excitation, a voltage drop was present across the metallic K3C60 thin film corresponding to its equilibrium state resistance and the applied bias current. In this case, for the conditions in which non-equilibrium superconductivity is induced, a decrease in voltage drop upon photo-excitation is expected (Fig. 5a). The measured ΔV1 and ΔV2 for photo-excitation at 25 K are plotted in Fig. 5b as a function of pump-probe delay. All voltages are normalised by a factor V0, which, for the measurements above Tc, is defined as the applied bias multiplied by the sample resistance at the measurement temperature. The signs of ΔV1 and ΔV2 were reversed compared to the measurements below Tc, indicating a reduction in voltage drop upon photo-excitation and an increase in the conductivity of the sample. ΔV1 became negative after photo- excitation, with dynamics present on two timescales; a fast, negative spike was present immediately after time-zero, which was followed by a slow decrease of ~10-ps duration. ΔV2 displayed equal and opposite behaviour to ΔV1. Fig. 5c displays the pump-induced change in voltage drop across the K3C60 thin film as a function of pump-probe delay for different temperatures above Tc. The magnitude of the voltage change decreased with increasing temperature, until the sign of the response was reversed at 80 K. The positive response at high temperatures was also qualitatively different; only a single rise and decay was observed. Fig. 5d displays the voltage change as a function of the applied current. Each data point in the current dependence is the mean value of the time-trace within a 5-ps window centred at 11-ps delay. At 25 K, linear behaviour in current was observed for small currents. Above 2 mA, the signal became nonlinear with the applied current. Upon increasing the temperature, the onset of the nonlinear behaviour was shifted to lower currents. The nonlinear effect was also reduced alongside the signal magnitude at higher temperatures; the device. The voltage profile changes when the sample is photo-excited from the equilibrium metallic state (black) into the nonequilibrium superconducting-like state (blue). The dotted blue line represents a superconducting-like state that has finite resistivity due to the effects of granularity. b, Pump-induced change in voltage on left and right of sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 25 K. c, Pump-induced change in voltage drop across sample vs pump-gate delay, measured at 25 K, 35 K, 50 K, 60 K, 80 K, and 100 K, with an applied current of 1 mA. d, Pump- induced change in voltage drop across sample vs applied current, measured at the same temperatures as in (c). Nonlinear I-V behaviour is observable, which is also suppressed with increasing temperature. Each data point is the mean value of the respective time-trace within a 5-ps window centred at 11-ps delay. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean. All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements above Tc as the applied current multiplied by the equilibrium sample resistance at the measurement temperature. the positive voltage change at 100 K was linear in current across the whole measurement range. To interpret the experimental data above Tc, we consider the two-fluid dynamics of the charge carriers upon photo-excitation, in addition to the previously-discussed role of granularity in the photo-induced state.11 We attribute the fast response in the data to a change in the kinetic inductance of the K3C60 thin film. The kinetic inductance LK of a superconductor is given by25 LK = α ns , (2) where α is a constant that depends on the material geometry and the effective mass of the charge carriers. A change in the superfluid density will therefore change the kinetic inductance. When this occurs in an applied current I, this generates an additional voltage VK = I dLK dt ∝ − I ns2 dns dt . (3) For an increase in superfluid density, this voltage is negative, which is consistent with the measurement. We speculate that the subsequent slow dynamics result from the stabilisation of thermal phase fluctuations. In the case that the phase is highly disordered upon photo-excitation, the initial resistivity of the photo-excited state at early delays would be left unchanged from that of the metallic state. As the phase thermalizes, the rate of thermally-induced phase slips decreases, and the resistivity drops on a timescale of several picoseconds. Nevertheless, the phase slip rate at longer delays would be significant due to lattice heating, resulting in finite resistivity in the long-lived state after photo-excitation. In order to model the dynamical system, we extend our treatment of the photo-induced state to the previously-discussed granular two-fluid model. The superfluid fraction (Fig. 6a, solid line) was assumed to increase from zero to a finite value at time-zero, with a rise time of 300 fs, and to subsequently decay exponentially in time with a time constant of 150 ps (see supplementary, fitting from lifetime data of ). The Josephson phase was assumed to start highly disordered and strongly fluctuating after photo-excitation. Then, the thermal phase fluctuations reduce within the first few picoseconds as the electrons thermalize with the lattice28,29. The electron and lattice temperatures after photo- excitation were determined by the mid-infrared pump pulse energy absorbed by the K3C60 sample30-32 (see supplementary for details). The rate of thermally-induced phase slips is estimated in Fig. 6a (dashed line) by considering thermal hopping over a washboard of superfluid fraction for the simulation of the photo-excited state. The superfluid fraction (purple) is assumed to increase from zero to a finite value at 0-ps delay, and then to decay exponentially with a time constant of 150 ps. The thermally induced phase slip rate (dashed grey line) relates to the thermal energy imparted by the pump pulse. It is large at 0-ps delay and decays to match the lattice temperature at longer delays. b, Simulated change in voltage drop across sample vs delay, using peak superfluid fraction as the fitting parameter, for base temperatures of 25 K, 35 K, 50 K, and 60 K, with an applied current of 1 mA. All voltages are normalized by a factor V0, which is defined for the measurements above Tc as the applied current multiplied by the equilibrium sample resistance at the measurement temperature. c, Light-induced ‘superfluid fraction’ vs temperature as obtained from the fitting procedure described in the text. The blue symbols indicate granular two-fluid model fits to the voltage data on the granular thin films. The purple shaded region indicates temperatures below the equilibrium Tc. potential. The circuit simulation at each temperature was used to fit the slow response in the data at 10-ps delay, using the peak superfluid fraction at time-zero as a fitting parameter. Other parameters, such as the rise and decay times for the superfluid fraction, were left unchanged between temperatures. The fits are displayed in Fig. 6b. The two-timescale dynamics seen in the measurement are also present in the circuit calculations, with a fast, negative voltage spike appearing at time-zero, followed by a slower dip in voltage. The superfluid fraction fitting parameter is plotted in Fig. 6c as a function of temperature, and decreases with increasing temperature. For temperatures of 80 K and above, the experimental data no longer display a reduction in resistivity and are represented with a superfluid fraction of zero in place of a fit. One possible reason for the difference between the temperature scaling reported here and previous reflectivity measurements8-10 is the fact that lower frequencies are probed in transport, where thermally-induced phase-slip effects may be more pronounced. The nonlinear I-V characteristics in this measurement (Fig. 5d) are qualitatively different to those reported for measurements with picosecond current pulses.11 For the data reported here, the current is applied before photo-excitation. The measurement therefore does not distinguish between the effect of the current on the non-equilibrium state and suppression of the photo-susceptibility due to the current. The signal from the non- equilibrium phase at 25 K persists at larger currents than the signal from the equilibrium superconducting state. Furthermore, for photo-excitation below Tc, we observe a reversal in sign of the signal for applied bias currents above the critical current (Fig. 3d), which may indicate a revival of superconductivity under large applied currents. In summary, we report ultrafast voltage measurements on K3C60 thin films upon in- current photo-excitation, and characterized the response of the system for both the photo-induced disruption of the equilibrium low-temperature superconductor, as well as the regime in which a photo-induced superconducting state is achieved. We report a reduction in voltage drop when exciting into the non-equilibrium state above Tc. A two- fluid model based on a granular superconductor was used to interpret these findings. The data are consistent with a change in the kinetic inductance upon photo-excitation, followed by a slow reduction in resistivity which can be attributed to thermalization of phase fluctuations. The new understanding extracted from these data complements that obtained for the case of cuprates6,7, for charge transfer salts14,15, and for K3C60 powders8- 10,12, for which the responses were compatible with optically-induced bulk superconductivity. The ultrafast voltmeter platform developed here can be extended to other non-equilibrium superconductors and is crucial to understanding inhomogeneities and quenched dynamics in these systems.