Radioisotopes production using lasers: from basic science to applications. M. R. D. Rodrigues1, A. Bonasera1,2*, M. Scisciò3, J. A. Pérez-Hernández4, M. Ehret4, F. Filippi3, P. L. Andreoli3, M. Huault5, H. Larreur5,6,7, D. Singappuli6, D. Molloy7,8, D. Raffestin6, M. Alonzo3, G. G. Rapisarda2,9, D. Lattuada2,10, G. L. Guardo2, C. Verona11, Fe. Consoli2, G. Petringa2, A. McNamee8, M. La Cognata2, S. Palmerini12,13, T. Carriere6, M. Cipriani3, G. Di Giorgio3, G. Cristofari3, R. De Angelis3, G. A. P. Cirrone2, D. Margarone8,14, L. Giuffrida2,14, D. Batani6, P. Nicolai6, K. Batani15, R. Lera4, L. Volpe4,16, D. Giulietti17, S. Agarwal18, M. Krupka18,19, S. Singh18,19, Fa. Consoli3** 1 Cyclotron Institute, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX , USA 2 Laboratori Nazionali del Sud, Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (LNS-INFN), Catania, Italy 3 ENEA, Fusion and Technologies for Nuclear Safety and Security Department-C, Frascati, Italy 4 CLPU (Centro de Láseres Pulsados), Villamayor, Spain 5 Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain 6 Université de Bordeaux, CNRS, CEA, CELIA (Centre Lasers Intenses et Applications), Talence, France 7 HB11 Energy Holdings Pty, Freshwater, NSW, Australia 8 Queen’s University Belfast, School of Mathematics and Physics, Belfast, UK 9 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia “E. Majorana”, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy. 10 Facoltà di Ingegneria e Architettura, Università degli Studi di Enna “Kore”, Enna, Italy 11 Dipartimento di Ingegneria Industriale, Università di Roma “Tor Vergata”, Roma, Italy 12 Dipartimento di Fisica e Geologia, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Perugia, Italy 13 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, sezione di Perugia, Perugia, Italy 14 ELI Beamlines Facility, The Extreme Light Infrastructure ERIC, Dolni Brezany, Czech Republic 15 IPPLM Institute of Plasma Physics and Laser Microfusion, Warsaw, Poland 16 ETSIA, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Madrid, Spain 17 Dipartimento Fisica, “E. Fermi”, Università di Pisa and INFN, Pisa, Italy 18 FZU-Institute of Physics of Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic 19 Institute of Plasma Physics of Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech Republic Correspondence: * A. Bonasera abonasera@comp.tamu.edu ** Fa. Consoli fabrizio.consoli@enea.it Keywords: radioisotopes, lasers, 67Cu, 63Zn, 18F, 11C, 7Be, 18F 2 Abstract Laser technologies improved after the understanding of the Chirped Pulse Amplification (CPA) which allows energetic laser beams to be compressed to tens of femtosecond (fs) pulse durations and focused to few m. Protons of tens of MeV can be accelerated using for instance the Target Normal Sheath Acceleration (TNSA) method and focused on secondary targets. In such conditions, nuclear reactions can occur and radioisotopes relevant for medical purposes be produced. High repetition lasers can be used to produce enough isotopes for medical applications. This route is competitive to conventional methods mostly based on accelerators. In this paper we study the production of 67Cu, 63Zn, 18F and 11C currently used in positron emission tomography (PET) and other applications. At the same time, we study the reaction 10B(p,)7Be and 70Zn(p,4n)67Ga to put further constraints to the proton distributions at different angles and to the reaction 11B(p,)8Be relevant for energy production. The experiment was performed at the 1 petawatt (PW) laser facility at Vega III located in Salamanca-Spain. Angular distributions of radioisotopes in the forward (with respect to the laser direction) and backward directions were measured using a High Purity Germanium Detector (HPGE). Our results are reasonably reproduced by the numerical estimates following the approach of Kimura et al. (NIMA637(2011)167). 1 Introduction Laser accelerated proton beams have been applied to radioisotopes production for medical purposes by several groups [1–4]. Kimura et al. analyzed in ref. the feasibility of the laser production as an alternative procedure to other methods. Since then, the laser technology has largely improved and high repetition lasers in the petawatt regime are available at a cost competitive to accelerator-based systems. Those systems rely on the Chirped Pulse Amplification (CPA) method pushing laser intensities to go beyond 1018 W/cm2. At such intensities, ions from the target surface irradiated by the laser beams are accelerated to several MeV energies. This is due to the laser action which strips the less bound electrons from the target thus creating a strong (repulsive) electric field which accelerates the ions. Without going into the details of the mechanism, we will loosely refer to it as TNSA , we discuss an intuitive scenario which we put to an experimental test in this work. We assume that the stripped electrons leave a positively charged target. Ions or protons on the opposite sides of the surface of the target feel the repulsive Coulomb field, get accelerated and leave the target area thus decreasing the Coulomb repulsion. In particular, the shorter is the laser pulse, i.e., the faster the laser energy is released on the target, the quicker the positive electric field at the target increases. Thus, we may expect higher protons energies for shorter pulses and thin targets . The accelerated ions will move in the direction perpendicular to the target and in both directions (maybe with different intensities), i.e., in the forward and backward direction with respect to the laser one. With protons reaching up to 60 MeV and above isotope production becomes possible, and we will discuss experimental results on the following systems: (a) 63Cu(p,n)63Zn, Q = -4.15 MeV; (b) 70Zn(p,n)67Ga, Q = -27.68 MeV; (c) 70Zn(p,)67Cu, Q = 2.62 MeV; (d) 10B(p,)7Be, Q = 1.14 MeV; (e) 11B(p,n)11C, Q = -2.76 MeV; (f) 18O(p,n)18F, Q = -2.44 MeV. It is important to notice that the reactions above have positive and negative Q values, thus from their measurement we will test the proton distribution at different energies . For instance, reaction (b) which has a relatively high threshold energy, requires proton energies above 28 MeV to be produced, while reaction (d) with a positive Q value could occur at any proton energy in principle. We would like 3 to stress that in this work we will mainly concentrate on the reactions (a-f). Another important study of the present experiment is the reaction 11B(p,)8Be (Q = 8.7 MeV) which will be discussed in detail elsewhere . 2 Experiment and data analysis The experiment was performed at the Centro de Laseres Pulsados (CLPU)-VEGA in Salamanca- Spain in November 2022. The laser beam energy was kept near the nominal maximum value of 30 J while the pulse duration was increased from the lowest possible value of 30 fs to 200 fs. A scheme of the scattering chamber is given in the Appendix A. Longer pulses were chosen to try to increase the proton yield at energies around 1 MeV where the cross section for the fusion reaction 11B(p,)8Be is highest and to improve the shot-to-shot performance stability. The beam was focalized to 6 m on a 6 m thick Al target to produce TNSA (or other mechanisms) protons coming from impurities in the target . The facility can deliver 1 shot per second but the frequency was limited by the time to change the position on the Al target and/or other requirements from the experimental campaign . Many shots were dedicated to determining the proton and other ions energy distributions and we took advantage of this possibility to activate different targets located at different angles. While fusion reactions and proton distributions will be discussed in detail elsewhere , we were interested in nuclear activations to test the theoretical prediction of ref. . A positive comparison with ref. would actually confirm that lasers are competitive with other accelerator-based methods to produce radioisotopes for medical, veterinary, and other applications. Following refs. we write the proton distribution function as: d2Np dEdΩ = b(Ω)( N1 √πET1 e−E/T1 + N2 √πET2 e−E/T2) (1) N1 = 1.2 1013, T1 = 3.3 MeV, N2 = 2.3 1012, T2 = 13.5 MeV are parameters fitted to the experimental results of ref. . Notice that eq. (1) is a phenomenological parametrization of the data, and we are not suggesting that the acceleration is a thermal process. The parameter b() is added to reproduce the angular distributions of the reactions. When integrated over the solid angle we assume There may be a scaling due to the different pulse duration but we will take care of any correction at different angles through b() Integrating eq.(1) in energy and angle with the above assumption gives the total number of protons, say up to 40 MeV maximum energy: Np = 1.3 1013, decreasing the higher energy limit to 20 MeV gives a difference of less than 1%. Considering a pulse duration of 200 fs we get a proton current Ip ~ 107 A which is an enormous current. If a secondary target is located very close to the Al target, as will be discussed below for some cases, then a plasma may be created by the proton flow. Furthermore, if we accept our naïve picture of the “TNSA mechanism” that electrons are ejected from the Al target in times of the order of the laser pulse duration, then those electrons reach the secondary target before the protons because of the much lighter mass. In this scenario the secondary target may become negatively charged in a short time and this may accelerate the positive ions further. The nuclear cross sections and ranges for different reactions maybe modified in such an environment and this could be the subject of future detailed investigations. Following the same steps above we can multiply eq. (1) by the proton energy and integrate over angle and energy. This gives the total energy 4 provided to the protons 〈Ep〉 = 6.7(5.8)1012MeV when integrating up to 40(20) MeV maximum proton energy. This result gives a conversion efficiency from laser energy to proton energy of about 3.1% assuming that an equal number of protons with the same energy distribution is produced in the back direction. The last assumption will be experimentally tested in this work. The average energy of the protons is 〈Ep〉 Np = 0.515 MeV which would be almost optimal for the 3 fusion reaction. Of course, for reactions having a negative Q value the lower limit of integration of the proton distribution is given by -Q itself and this will cut all the low energy part of the proton distribution. We can compare our ‘benchmark’ proton distribution function with other data available in the literature. In Fig. 1, we compare to some selected cases obtained at the SULF laboratory in China using a 2 PW laser focalized to about 6 m like our case but at much higher power. The distribution function depends strongly on the detection angle with respect to the Al (or Cu) normal target decreasing of more than a factor 3 at 15 degrees. Furthermore, the proton high energy cutoff decreases when increasing the thickness from 4 to 10 m. The distribution function from eq. (1) reproduces rather well the measured one in the region of interest for our work between 5 and 20 MeV. The fitted parameter, Fig. 1, maybe due to the combination of the laser energy and the pulse duration which are different in refs. . We expect a similar angular and energy dependence in the back direction as well. A better comparison could be done when the experimental data is measured over different angles and integrated over angles since the distribution function of refs. is integrated over solid angle. To calculate the number of reactions in the target is a more complicated process since we need to consider the proton energy distribution, the reaction cross section and the range of protons in the (assumed cold) target in the limit of thick targets. We can estimate this as: dN dΩ = ρ ∫ dNp dEdΩ Emax Eth σ(E)R(E)(1 − e − d R(E))dE (2) Where  is the (secondary) target density, d its thickness, σ(E) is the reaction cross section of the process (taken from https://www.nndc.bnl.gov), R(E) is the range obtained from the SRIM (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter software) , Eth is the threshold energy for the reaction to occur (equal to zero for positive Q value reactions). The term in parenthesis inside the integral gives the probability that a proton collides with one nucleus of the target. When d<<R(E) we get: dN dΩ = ρd ∫ dNp dEdΩ Emax Eth σ(E)dE (3) In the limiting case that the proton distribution is a delta function of the energy (such as for accelerators), eq. (3) reduces to the familiar form used in nuclear physics applications to measure the cross section for instance . Following the definition of the astrophysical S-factor, we parametrize the cross sections as: S(E) E e − b √E (4). S(E) is written in terms of a Taylor expansion in energy ; for negative Q values reactions we write it as: S(E) = ∑ ai(E + Q)i i ; S(E→ − Q) = 0. (5). 5 The free parameters ai and b are fitted to available experimental data, the number of parameters is chosen to have a good data reproduction. The parameterization in eq. (4) & (5) is especially important in energy regions where there is no data. at zero degrees (with respect to the target normal) and the full (green) circles in the laser direction at 15°, the target thickness was 4m. The full (pink) diamonds were measured at zero degrees but for a thickness of 10m. Equation (1) was fitted to the 4m cases with b()= () sr-1 In Table I, we will compare the results of eq. (2) integrated over angle to different reactions and Emax = 40 MeV. These results are of guidance for the present experiment and maybe for future experiments as well. 6 # Reaction Target Thickness (mm) N (108) Q (MeV) E (keV) T1/2 1 63Cu(p,n)63Zn natCu 1. 1.4 511 38.5 m 2 63Cu(p,n)63Zn 63Cu 0.11 511 38.5 m 3 70Zn(p,n)67Ga 70Zn 93.3 3.26 d 4 70Zn(p,)67Cu 70Zn 2.62 185 2.57 d 5 10B(p,)7Be natB 2. 0.28 1.15 53.2 d 6 11B(p,n)11C natB 2. 1.4 511 20.4 m 7 11B(p,)8Be natB 2. 2.2 8.6 - 8 12C(p,X)11C CR39 1. 0.1 511 20.4 m 9 12C(p,p)3 CR39 1 0.88 - -  63Cu(,X)65Zn natCu 1 - 244. d  65Cu(,X)68Ga natCu 1 - -5.8 511 67.7 m  18O(p,n)18F natB (18O 8.7 10-5 %) 2. 3 511 ∫ b(Ω)dΩ = 1/5. The E column refers to the highest intensity −ray emitted by the isotope; T1/2 is the half-life . There are some important features to notice. i) The experimental production of 67Ga indicates that there are protons of energy higher than 28 MeV (#3 of Table I). ii) If there are enough -particles produced through the fusion reactions #5,7 in Table I, these could produce other reactions (ternary reactions) when impinging on other targets, for instance reactions #10,11 in Table I. In fact,  particles of energy larger than 10 MeV can produce 65Zn and this would indicate that their energy distribution is modified by high energy protons . Thus, to measure the distribution function of -particles is crucial and for this purpose, CR39 (Columbia Resin #39, a solid-state nuclear track detector) is mostly used since other methods are not effective due to the large number of protons 7 and other particles produced in the plasma . For this reason, we have estimated possible reactions occurring in the CR39 detector (which is rich in C ions) giving the same products coming from the main reactions such as 3  and 11C, #8. As we can see from Table I those reactions are quite competitive especially if high energy protons are produced through the “TNSA mechanism”. It is important to stress that reactions with negative Q values are often competitive with positive Q value ones. This is strictly dependent on the proton energy distribution (that can reach high values), the corresponding cross section and the range. In the following sections we will discuss in detail the main experimental findings and compare them to Table I. 2.1 63Cu(p,n)63Zn, 63Cu(,X)65Zn, 65Cu(,X)68Ga CR39 acting as a support and proton detector with pieces of Kapton® tape. Thin 63Cu targets were mounted on CR39 both for support and to measure the energy distribution of the incident protons (and other ions if possible) which go through the target, see Fig. 2. The targets were located at different angles and distance with respect to the Al target. Notice that if high energy protons collide with the CR39, 11C maybe produced, reaction #8 in Table I, and this -decays with energy 511 keV, the same as the decay of 63Zn. In such cases the half-lives can be determined (or other signature s) when it is possible to distinguish the two cases. It is also important to determine the number of reactions produced per shot since we were in multi-shot accumulation regime. Even if there may be large fluctuations from shot to shot , we can define an average over many shots Nav. The produced isotopes decay with the decay constant , thus we give a weight to each shot according to Π = e−λ(t0−tshot), and sum over all shots. t0 is the starting measurement time using the HPGE detector and tshot is the time when the shot occurred, see Fig. 3, for more details see Appendix B. In Table I, the reactions #1 and 2, it is clearly demonstrated that for thin targets the produced yield is very small (and comparable to the reaction rates obtained for CR39), thus we have repeated the analysis using a thick target of natCu at different angles, see Fig. 4 for the case at zero degrees where the largest number of produced protons occurs. We expect an increase in the yield of at least an order of magnitude, Table I, and the higher statistics allow us a more detailed analysis. 8 (EOB) as a function of shooting time starting from the first one (tshot = 0 s) to the last one when the chamber is opened and the sample decays were measured using the HPGE detector. The well-known half-life (T1/2) of 63Zn is used to produce this result. the center of the target to let the energetic ions into the spectrometer. This position defines our zero degree where the largest number of protons, indicated in the figure by the arrow, is found. A diagram of the experiment can be found in Appendix A. In Fig. 5, we show the background-subtracted -delayed  -ray spectrum using the thick natCu target located at zero degrees with respect to the Al target perpendicular direction. At this angle, see Fig. 4, we expect the proton TNSA yield to be the highest. The full-energy-peak (FEP) at 511 keV is more 9 intensely populated, a signature of 63Zn being produced, see Table I#1. Furthermore, other FEPs associated with lower intensity 63Zn decays are clearly observed. contribution for the FEP at 511 keV, magnified in the inset, comes from the 63Zn decay produced in the 63Cu(p,n)63Zn reaction. Other lower intensity  associated to the 63Zn decay are also visible. In Fig. 6, we plot the counting rate vs time for the zero-degree case where the statistics is large enough. We clearly see that the decay is in perfect agreement with the well-known half-life of 63Zn and demonstrate that there are no other competing reactions (for instance reactions with the 65Cu in the target). Standard analysis techniques were applied to derive the number of produced isotopes at the end of irradiation, see for example refs. . The final experimental uncertainties are simple propagation of the peak statistics, detector efficiencies and the fit uncertainties. The corrections due to the detector dead time, the backscattering peak and the respective summed coincidences, source self-absorption and isotopic enrichment, were also considered in the results, see Appendix B for more details. 10 associated half-life (T1/2) displayed in the figure confirms that the decaying nucleus is 63Zn. The fitted half-life T1/2 is presented in the figure. In Fig. 7, we plot the results for the Cu targets, full circles and diamonds. The natCu gives a peak at 0 degrees as expected, while the thin 63Cu displays the largest value at 230 degrees. For the latter case we would expect a maximum at 180 degrees, but we could not install a target at such angle because of impeding optics. In any case, these results clearly demonstrate that the proton yield in the back direction is as strong as in the forward direction. Since the distribution is so strongly peaked, we cannot estimate the total yield integrated over the forward direction because we measured few angles. However, as we will show in a later section, we can estimate the opening angle of the produced protons in the forward direction and obtain  = 0.590.18 sr. This gives an average number of produced ions per shot N(63Zn) ≈ dN dΩ ΔΩ = (1.1 ± 0.3)108 in fair agreement with the estimate in Table I. Shooting at 1Hz for two hours at Vega III, we may get 345±94 MBq. Alternatively, one could use a lower energy laser but with higher repetition rate. For instance, Vega II in Salamanca-Spain, delivers 6J in 30fs at 10Hz, see also . Assuming the same laser energy scaling as for Table I, this laser will produce twice as much radioisotope than the estimate above but at a much lower cost. A major problem in this approach may be connected to the time to align the “TNSA target” of choice at high frequency. From the reaction #2 in Table I, we would expect the result at 230 degrees to be one order of magnitude smaller with respect to the zero degree because of the different targets thicknesses. Since the 63Cu target was mounted on (thick) CR39, see Fig. 2, we cannot exclude the contribution from 11C decays from reaction #8-Table I, if protons with energies above 16.5 MeV are produced at such angles. Unfortunately, for this case the statistics were poor and did not allow us to do a time evolution study as in Fig. 6. Other  produced in the decay of 63Zn are comparable to the background at variance with the results of Fig. 5. Another reason could be that more protons are produced in the back direction thus giving a higher yield than predicted. A detailed angular and energy distribution of the protons is not the goal of this work and will be discussed elsewhere . The use of CR39 as a support for our thin targets will provide important constraints to the proton distribution for these angles. Furthermore, 11 the choice of using a stack of two CR39, not clearly visible in Fig. 2, will allow to measure unambiguously high energy protons (if any) which went through the first CR39 and stopped in the second one . Angles between -90 and +90 degrees are in the forward direction, from 90 to 270 degrees are in the back direction of the Al target producing protons through the “TNSA mechanism”, see the Appendix A. We may notice that we have two results at -90 degrees using the natCu target. For these two separate series of shots, a natB target was installed in front of the Al target in the catcher-pitcher configuration (CP) . Since the B target is rather thick, we expect the produced -particles to remain trapped apart from those produced at the surface and emitted in the back direction . Thus, we installed the natCu at -90 degrees to capture the -particles and activate it through (but not only) reactions #10,11 in Table I. As we see from Fig.7 and as expected, at such angles the proton distribution should be depleted thus a signal coming from the -particles maybe detectable. The reactions #5-7 in Table I may occur in such configuration. The experimental -spectra for such cases do not show any activations which can be attributed to the -particles. Even from this negative result we may learn something, i.e. we could increase the probability of -reactions locating the Cu target closer to the B target thus increasing the solid angle. A better option is to use the CP configuration but with a mixture of B and another element which can be unambiguously activated by the -particles. In such a case an experimental constraint on the -distribution may be obtained . 12 large error bars are fluctuations from shot to shot due to different experimental conditions . The data are normalized to eq. (1) (open blue squares) with 4 b(0)=1.5±0.3 sr-1 As it is shown in Fig.4, the natCu target was conveniently located in front of the Thomson Parabola (TP) spectrometer . Proton energy distributions for each shot were recorded and their average value and fluctuations from shot to shot are displayed in Fig. 8, as compared to Fig 1. The TP is not calibrated thus we have normalized the data to our adopted proton distribution in the region 5-10 MeV where most of the 63Zn yield is produced according to our calculations using eqs.(1-5). The parameter in eq.(1) 4 b(0)= 1.5±0.3 sr-1, was fixed to reproduce the yield obtained with the natCu target at zero degrees. This may serve as a preliminary calibration, but the important point is that protons close to 20 MeV are observed and we cannot exclude that even higher energy protons are also produced, but their yield is below the sensitivity of the TP , see fig.8. 2.2 70Zn(p,)67Cu, 70Zn(p,4n)67Ga Reactions #3&4 in Table I, apart from being interesting for medical applications , may give some further constraint on the proton distribution (in the back direction) because of the different Q- value. In particular, to produce 67Ga, protons with energies higher than 28 MeV are needed and we did not observe any with the TP located in the front direction, see Fig.8. However, the proton distribution in the back direction can be quite different from that in the front one . 13 Fig. 7. In Fig. 9, we show the 70Zn target used in our experiment. Like the 63Cu case, the CR39 was added for support and to measure the proton distribution , however the support was taken off when measuring the  yield using the HPGE detector. To estimate the yields for the reactions #3&4 in Table I, the cross sections are needed. The 67Cu case has been rather well studied and the cross section is well known while the data is scarce for the 67Ga case. As we discussed above, we parametrized the cross sections using eqs. (4) and (5). For the 67Ga case some data are available but at high proton energies . We used four fitting parameters to reproduce the proton energy threshold value and the data at high energies. taken from ref. , full squares. The parametrization using eqs. (3) and (4) is given by the open triangles joined by the dashed line. In Fig. 10, we compare our parametrization to the data . No data is available to our knowledge in the region near 30 MeV which gives the highest contribution to the yield reported in Table I. 14 Furthermore, the fact the yield of the two reactions is comparable (if we have proton energies higher than 30 MeV) is because the cross sections differ of more than one order of magnitude especially at high energies, see also Fig. 3 and Fig. 6 in ref. . In particular, the reaction cross section to produce 67Cu reaches at most 20 mb while for 67Ga about 300 mb were measured . energy resolutions) and at 185 keV contain the contributions from the decay of 67Cu and 67Ga produced in the 70Zn(p,)67Cu and 70Zn(p,n)67Ga reactions. This spectrum was measured with the original acquisition system (see Appendix B) and it is not background subtract. The FEPs count rate for 511 keV and 1460 keV are 0.012 and 0.0014 counts/s compatible with the background measured with the new acquisition system. We have also identified a peak corresponding to 56Mn probably coming from activation of some impurities. Another possibility is given by the reaction 70Zn(p,56Mn)15C; Q = -15.2 MeV, T1/2 = 2.6 h. The two peaks corresponding to the decay of 67Ga and 67Cu at 91-93 keV and 185 keV are clearly visible in Fig. 11, see also the inset in the figure for the region of interest. Note that the lower energy peak (91+93 keV) is more intense than the one at 185 keV. The gamma intensities per 100 decays of the -decay parent for 67Cu are I(%) = 13.2 and 48.7 for the two energies , thus we would expect the 185 keV to be more intense. On the other hand, for 67Ga I(%)=42.4 and 21.2 respectively , see Table I. Using the well-known intensities for the two nuclei, we can solve a simple set of two equations with two unknowns to obtain their respective yield. The obtained values are plotted in the Fig. 7 with star and cross symbols, they are much smaller than the 63Zn case as expected from Table I but higher than our estimates, maybe suggesting that the proton yield in the back direction is higher than in the front . This is consistent with the high yield seen for the 63Cu case at 230 degrees. 15 2.3 11B(p,n)11C In Table I, we have estimated the total yield for the reaction #6 in good agreement with ref. . In the spirit of the catcher-pitcher configuration , we located a thick natural boron target at few cm from the “TNSA” Al target. The B target was slightly tilted with respect to the normal direction to ‘focus’ some -particles produced at the surface to -90 degrees where we installed the natCu target, another TP and CR39 , see the appendix A. Many shots were performed on each target and gamma decays from the natB target were measured with the HPGE detector. The 11C yields for different measurements are reported in Fig. 12 together with pictures of the B targets after irradiation. The slightly ellipsoidal proton spots on the targets can be clearly seen, and we can measure their sizes. For instance, the spot for target 5-18 Nov gives an area of the order of 1 cm2. The distance from the Al target is well known and this gives the protons opening angle  = 0.590.18 sr which we already used above. Since all the produced protons are collected by the natB, the measured 11C rate is the total yield in the front direction. As we see from Fig. 12, the measured yield is very close to our estimate in Table I and could be probably improved a little. Notice that for the first 2 cases in Fig. 12, the yield was a factor of 2 less than our estimate because a little space was left between two natB to let protons get through and be measured with a TP and/or diamond detectors . natB targets displayed in the figure at the end of each measurement. The proton spot size is clearly visible, and its opening angle can be estimated as discussed in the text. All results are corrected for the 11B-10B concentrations. The used targets had a 99.6% concentration of natB (80% 11B, 20% 10B) with remaining contaminants, mainly N, O and H. In refs. the possibility was discussed that produced  particles may interact 16 with the N impurities and produce 18F, i.e. ternary collisions . It decays with 511 keV -rays just as 11C but different lifetime. 13N and 18F can be produced by protons colliding with target ‘impurities’ (14N or 18O) . Those elements have a very small concentration in the target (but much higher than the produced  through reactions #5,7 in Table I) and we expect a negligible contribution but in competition with ternary collisions. fixed half-lives (T1/2) are indicated in the figure. The rate can be fitted with just the 11C decay. To put an upper limit for other ions, we have forced the fit using the half-lives of 11C and 18F. The data support less than 0.032% 18F produced for targets 1 and 2 in Fig. 12. In Fig. 13, we plot the 511 keV  counting rate for the B target in the pitcher catcher configuration. A fit to the experimental curve with free fitting half-lives and assuming three components gives 100% contribution from the decay of 11C. To obtain an upper limit to the production of the two other isotopes, we fixed their half-lives and rerun the fit. This gave a zero contribution from 13N, which is not surprising since its half-life is shorter than 11C, thus its contribution is relevant at short times when 11C is dominant. 18F has a longer half-life and it could be seen from the decay rate at longer times. In Fig. 13, we show the result of the fit fixing the half-lives of 11C and 18F. This is an upper limit of 0.032% contribution of the 18F, like ref. , compatible with the low 18O concentration, thus excluding any ternary collisions as expected . This result was obtained in the situation indicated as target 1 and 2 in Fig. 12, i.e. a configuration where two B targets are slightly displaced. In this case, a certain number of protons propagated in vacuo and was detected by the TP at zero degrees. If we repeat the same analysis for 18F but with the B target completely blocking the proton flow, cases 3-5 in Fig. 12, the production of 18F increases to 0.15%. This difference may be simply understood by inspecting eq. 2 and realizing that all terms are the same for the two cases apart from the number of protons which must be decreased. 17 Bombardment (EOB) as a function of shooting time starting from the first one (tshot = 0 s) to the last one when the chamber is opened, and the sample decays were measured using the HPGE detector. The well-known half-life (T1/2) of both isotopes were used to produce this result. 2.4 10B(p,)7Be In the natB target we can also produce 7Be from reaction #5 in Table I . Its half-life is much longer than the previous case, which means that the shot contribution at different times has practically weight 1 as shown in Fig. 14 (compare to Fig.3). The  spectrum for these reactions is dominated by 11C at shorter times, while at longer times only 7Be remains. Furthermore, the  energy decay of 7Be (478 keV) is quite different from 11C (511 keV) and can be quite easily distinguished in the plot, see Fig. 15. The produced yield of 7Be is displayed in Fig. 12 and it is in fair agreement to our estimate, reaction #5 in Table I, after correcting by the concentration. Since we only had one HPGE detector available, the two first cases only were measured for a long time to allow an unambiguous determination of 7Be. 18 targets 1 and 2 exposed 14nov at four different cooling times (tcool) for a measurement time of T = 1h. The shortest cooling time is dominated by the 11C decays while 7Be becomes dominant at longer cooling times. 3 Conclusions We have investigated nuclear reaction products using the PW laser at Vega III in Salamanca-Spain. The pitcher-catcher method was adopted with protons produced by an aluminum target and impinging on several different targets, both in the forward and the back direction, with respect to the laser one. We found the production of medical radioisotopes in agreement with expectations and the predictions of ref. , thus supporting its conclusions. Laser technologies are mature enough to compete to accelerators for the production. It may be a question of costs for the construction, spaces, maintenance etc.., to attest to their competitiveness but from our experience we predict that this may be a winning technology. We have also estimated theoretically the production of different nuclei and made some assumptions for the cross sections in energy regions where they have not been measured. The “TNSA mechanism” should be studied more in detail and adjusted to the various physical scenarios that one would like to implement. In particular, the role of the electrons must be clarified and if possible, used to favor nuclear reactions in the plasma. This may be crucial if we would like to apply this method to neutronless reaction energy production. Our predictions in Table I are rather well confirmed by the data we obtained. The reaction 11B (p,)8Be will be discussed more in detail elsewhere . The values obtained here are too small to have self-sustained reactions and we may need to compress the catcher . 19 4 Author Contributions AB devised the scheme to measure radioisotopes and wrote the first draft of paper. MRDR performed the data analysis of the HPGE and ME the data analysis of the zero-degree TP. FaC was the spokesperson of the main experiment for  production. All authors contributed to the experiment proposal, preparation and on the final form of the manuscript. 5 Funding This work was supported in part by the United States Department of Energy under Grant #DEFG02- 93ER40773; the EUROfusion Consortium, funded by the European Union via the Euratom Research and Training Programme (Grant Agreement No 101052200 — EUROfusion); the COST Action CA21128- PROBONO “PROton Boron Nuclear fusion: from energy production to medical applicatiOns”, supported by COST (European Cooperation in Science and Technology - www.cost.eu). 6