Higher-order topology in Fibonacci quasicrystals Chaozhi Ouyang1,2, Qinghua He1,2, Dong-Hui Xu3,∗ and Feng Liu1,2,4† 1Institute of High Pressure Physics, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315-211, China 2School of Physical Science and Technology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315-211, China 3Deparment of Physcis & Chongqing Key Laboratory for Strongly Coupled Physics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, China and 4Department of Nanotechnology for Sustainable Energy, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin University, Gakuen 2-1, Sanda 669-1337, Japan In crystalline systems, higher-order topology, characterized by topological states of codimension greater than one, typically arises from the mismatch between Wannier centers and atomic sites, leading to filling anoma- lies. However, this phenomenon is less understood in aperiodic systems, such as quasicrystals, where Wannier centers are not well defined. In this study, we examine Fibonacci chains and squares, a quintessential type of quasicrystal, to investigate their higher-order topological properties. We discover that topological interfacial states, including corner states, can be inherited from their higher-dimensional periodic counterparts, such as the two-dimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model. This finding is validated through numerical simulations of both phononic and photonic Fibonacci quasicrystals by the finite element method, revealing the emergence of topo- logical edge and corner states at interfaces between Fibonacci quasicrystals with differing topologies inherited from their parent systems. Our results not only provide insight into the higher-order topology of quasicrystals but also open avenues for exploring novel topological phases in aperiodic structures. I. INTRODUCTION Over the past two decades, the concept of topology has become a cornerstone in classifying solid-state materials, re- vealing essential differences even for materials with seem- ingly identical energy-band structures. This paradigm shift, heralded by the topological band theory, has profoundly re- shaped our understanding of solid-state physics [1–3]. One of the most striking properties of topological band theory is the bulk-edge correspondence, connecting the bulk topologi- cal invariant in crystalline systems to the emergence of robust interfacial states in finite, topologically distinct samples [4– 8]. In this evolving landscape, the exploration of higher-order topological phases, which deviate from the conventional topo- logical insulators by exhibiting bulk-corner correspondence, has gained prominence in recent years. These higher-order topological phases allow for topological states of codimension greater than one, such as corner states, with potential applica- tions in topological lasers and quantum computing [9–19]. Significant progress has been made in understanding higher-order topological states in crystalline systems, as ev- idenced by a wealth of studies. These studies could be exem- plified through several models based on filling anomalies in- duced by the mismatches between Wannier centers and atomic sites [20–24]. Protected by various symmetries [25–28], such as point group symmetry [29–31], inversion symmetry , and chiral symmetry , higher-order topological states are observed not only in solid-state materials [35–41], but also in metamaterials, such as photonic [42–47], sonic crys- tals [48–54], and electric circuit arrays [55–57]. A less explored but equally interesting direction is the exploration of these states in systems lacking transnational symmetry, such as quasicrystals. These ideas have recently ∗ donghuixu@cqu.edu.cn † ruserzzz@gmail.com been explored in two-dimensional (2D) quasicystals [58–63], which requires a fine-tuned mass term to generate a higher- order topology. While these initial studies have shed some light on the interplay between aperiodicity and high-order topology, the fine-tuned mass may hinder the realization of higher-order topology in quasicrystals. A common approach to probing the topology in quasicrystals involves examining their higher-dimensional parent systems. For instance, the topology of a one-dimensional (1D) Fibonacci quasicrystal can be elucidated through its mapping to a 2D periodic an- cestor in the Harper model, which can be characterized by the Chern number [64–66]. Drawing inspiration from these foundational studies, our research shifts focus to a modified Fibonacci quasicrystal, whose higher-dimensional ancestor is the 2D Su-Schrieffer- Heeger (SSH) model. The 2D SSH model has several distinct topological phases characterized by the vector Zak phase or equivalently the Wannier centers, depending on the ratio be- tween intra-cell and inter-cell hopping. In the nontrivial topo- logical phase of the 2D SSH model, filling anomalies give rise to topological corner states in addition to edge states. By extending the Fibonacci chains to Fibonacci squares, it is possible to explore higher-order topological interfacial states and investigate the preservation of topological properties from high-dimensional parent systems to their lower-dimensional quasicrystal counterparts. Such preservation of topological property cross dimensions without translational symmetry can be verified using artificial structures such as the phononic and photonic quasicrystals, which may offer a hint peeping at the topology of various quasicrystals. In this work, we employ the cut-and-project method to con- struct modified Fibonacci chains and squares from the 2D SSH model. We introduce topological interfaces in these structures, derived from parent systems belonging to different topological classes, and investigate the emergence of topo- logical edge and corner states. These states are observed in phononic and photonic quasicrystals through numerical sim- ulations using the finite element method by COMSOL. Our arXiv:2401.14896v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 26 Jan 2024 2 findings suggest that lower-dimensional systems, even in the absence of translational symmetry, can exhibit topological states influenced by the distinct topological classifications of their higher-dimensional periodic ancestors. This research contributes to a deeper understanding of topology in aperi- odic systems and may offer new insights into the design and application of topological materials. The structure of the remaining parts is organized as follows. In Sec. II, we introduce the modified Fibonacci chains and the corresponding photonic and phononic quasicrystals whose parent system is the 2D SSH model using the cut-and-project method. In Sec. III, we discuss the topological interfacial states formed in photonic and phononic Fibonacci chains. In Sec. IV, we extend the modified Fibonacci chains to Fibonacci squares and explore higher-order topological phases hosting corner states in the phononic and photonic Fibonacci squares. Finally, the discussion and summary are given in Sec. V. II. CONSTRUCTION OF MODIFIED FIBONACCI CHAINS The Fibonacci chain, a 1D quasicrystal, is constructed us- ing a recursive relation, Fn = Fn−1 + Fn−2. Starting with F1 = F2 = 1, Fn−1/Fn−2 asymptotically approaches the golden ratio τ = (1 + √ 5)/2 as n becomes large. In our model, these elements F1 and F2 represent two different types of atomic sites, denoted as letters “A” and “B”. These sites dif- fer in terms of spacing distances and resulting hopping ampli- tudes, similar to the SSH model . Applying the Fibonacci sequence, we can construct a simple quasicrystal exemplified by an atomic chain such as ”ABBABABBABBA· · · ”. The tight-binding Hamiltonian of the Fibonacci chain can be written as H = � n tnc† n+1cn + H.c., (1) where tn = (t+λVn) denotes the hopping amplitude between the characteristic function with ⌊x⌋ the floor function, and λ is the hopping difference between A and B sites. It is noted that the characteristic function can be equivalently obtained by the cut-and-project method, where the higher-dimensional parent system is a simple 2D square lattice for the conventional Fi- bonacci chain . In the following, we extend the conventional Fibonacci chain to a modified one through the cut-and-project method, whose higher-dimensional parent system is the 2D SSH model, which has several distinct topological phases identified by the Wannier centers. We expect these modified Fibonacci chains to inherit topological properties including higher-order ones from their parent systems, and we verify this observa- tion through numerical simulations of phononic and photonic quasicrystals. (a) (b) (c) bonacci chain. The higher-dimensional parent system is the 2D SSH model, which has four sites in one unit cell. When the projection angle is tan θ = 1/τ, Fibonacci sequence forms with parts A and B differed by the distances, i.e., (l + d) cos θ and (l + d) sin θ. (b) Parts A and B of the modified Fibonacci chain and the corresponding phononic quasicrystal structure. The phononic modified Fibonacci chain is constructed by mapping the distance between sites to the width of coupling waveguide as D(L) = 1/L2. (c) Illustration of the modified phononic Fibonacci chain. A. cut-and-project method Construction of the Fibonacci chain using the cut-and- project method provides an intuitive approach to understand- ing its structure. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), this method starts with a parent 2D square lattice. The Fibonacci quasicrystal is then generated by projecting these lattice sites onto an axis labeled x′. The orientation of this axis is critical, defined by an angle θ such that tan θ = ω, where ω = 1/τ. The projec- tion strip used for this operation has a width equal to one unit cell of the lattice. As a result, the spacing between the pro- jected centers of the unit cells can take on two distinct values: cos θ = 1/ √ 1 + ω2 and sin θ = ω/ √ 1 + ω2. These spacing values correspond to the A and B sites of the Fibonacci chain, as previously mentioned. Incorporating the 2D SSH model into the cut-and-project 3 method, we obtain a modified Fibonacci chain. The topolog- ical phases of the 2D SSH model are distinguished by two tpes of hopping: inter-cell hopping γinter and intra-cell hop- ping γintra. As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), these hoppings are repre- sented with varying distances and line thicknesses. Crucially, the 2D SSH model exhibits four distinct topological phases, which can be characterized by the vector Zak phase, or equiv- alently, by the Wannier center coordinates (νx, νy), where νi can be either 0 or 1/2 in terms of the lattice constant along the i-direction. For the symmetric case under the point group C4 that we focus on, νx = νy = 0 for γintra > γinter, and νx = νy = 1/2 for γintra < γinter. The interplay between these hopping parameters in the 2D SSH model directly in- fluences the topological characteristics of the resulting modi- fied Fibonacci chain, providing a rich framework for explor- ing topological phenomena in quasicrystalline structures. In the 2D SSH model, each unit cell contains four sub- lattices. By projecting these sublattices onto the x′ axis, as shown by the red dots in Fig. 1(a), we derive the modified Fi- bonacci chain. This projection results in two distinct types of tiling within the chain, labeled as parts A and B, similar to the conventional Fibonacci chain. However, a key difference in the modified version is that each of these parts encompasses four sites. The positions of these four sites along the x′ axis are determined by the following euqations: x′ a = (nl + l 2) sin θ + (ml − l 2) cos θ + md cos θ + nd sin θ x′ b = (nl + l 2) sin θ + (ml + l 2) cos θ + md cos θ + nd sin θ x′ c = (nl − l 2) sin θ + (ml + l 2) cos θ + md cos θ + nd sin θ x′ d = (nl − l 2) sin θ + (ml − l 2) cos θ + md cos θ + nd sin θ, (2) where (m, n) represents the index of the unit cell in the 2D SSH model, a, b, c, d are the labels of the sublattices as indi- cated in Fig. 1(a), l is the distance between sites within a unit cell, and d is the distance between adjacent unit cells. The values of (m, n) are constrained by the relation: n − 1 m + 1 < tan θ ≤ n m. (3) It is important to note that for d > l, there is a possibility for the sites of neighboring parts A and B to overlap, a factor that must be considered in analyzing the structure of the modified Fibonacci chain. B. modified phononic and photonic Fibonacci quasicrystals We translate the theoretical framework of the cut-and- project method from the parent 2D SSH model into tangible constructs of phononic and photonic Fibonacci chains. Start- ing with the photonic quasicrystal, we follow a straightfor- ward method: artificial atoms, such as dielectric rods, are po- sitioned in accordance with the projected sites on the x′ from the 2D SSH model as indicated by Eq. (2). This arrangement is depicted in the left panel of Fig. 1(b). In our numerical sim- ulations, we set the radius of the dielectric rod at 0.2 [mm] and the dielectric constant at 100 on an air background. We employ a perfect electric conductor as the boundary condition in the simulation of photonic quasicrystals. Notably, because of the absence of a characteristic length in Maxwell’s equa- tions, the size of the photonic quasicrystal can be adjusted without affecting its fundamental properties. The parameters selected here serve illustrative purposes only. This approach effectively replicates the modified Fibonacci chain, encapsu- lating its long-range interactions, and allowing us to explore its topological properties in photonic analogues. For the phononic quasicrystal, we use square resonators connected by waveguides. The coupling between each res- onator is proportional to the width of the waveguides, and we map the distance between the sites to the width of the waveguide as D = 1/Ln with n = 2. It should be noted that for other mapping functions, the simulation results re- main qualitatively similar. For our simulations, we set the dimensions of each square resonator to 30 [mm] in length, with the waveguides also at a length of 30 [mm]. The uni- formity of waveguide length ensures consistent propagation characteristic throughout the whole phononic quasicrsytals. The boundary condition applied in the simulation of phononic quasicrystals is the hard boundary condition, which ensures that the sound pressure is zero at the boundaries, mimicking an isolated system. Figure 1(c) illustrates an example of the modified phononic Fibonacci quasicrystal, where the various shades are used to denote parts A and B. III. TOPOLOGICAL INTERFACIAL STATES In this section, we delve into the phenomenon of topologi- cal interfacial states, which arise at the junction of two topo- logical distinct systems. Our focus is on the demonstration of the emergence of these topological interfacial states in mod- ified Fibonacci chains derived from phononic and photonic quasicrystals, each with distinct topological characteristics in- herited from parent systems. This demonstration is intriguing because, in quasicrystals, the concept of a Wannier center is not well defined because of the absence of translational sym- metry, unlike the case of the SSH model. In addition to demonstration of the emergence of topo- logical interfacial states, symmetry protection of topological states in quasicrystals is also important. Like in the SSH model, chiral symmetry pins the energy of edge states at zero. The role of chiral symmetry in these quasicrystalline systems presents a rich area for exploration, potentially revealing new insights into symmetry protection in topological states. An in- depth investigation of chiral-symmetry protection in the topo- logical interfacial states of quasicrystals is reserved for future work. 4 (a) (b) (c) (d) ified phononic Fibonacci chains, whose higher-dimensional parent systems belonging two topological classes of the 2D SSH model. The coupling between two chains is denoted by tτ and controlled by the width of coupling waveguide. (b) Eigenspectra of the two types of modified phononic Fibonacci chains in (a), as displayed by left and right panels, respectively. (c) Eigenspectra of the combined structure of the two types of modified phononic Fibonacci chains. (d) Wave profile of the topological interfacial state as sound pressure in the setup of (a). A. phononic topological interfacial states We construct a topological interface by joining two phononic Fibonacci chains, each originating from the 2D SSH model but with distinct topological characteristics. This inter- face, as illustrated in Fig. 2(a), servers as a physical realiza- tion of the boundary between different topological phases of the quasicrystals. The left phononic chain is adopted from the 2D SSH model with l = 1[mm] and d = 3 [mm], effectively resulting in a scenario of γintra > γinter. On the contrary, the right phononic chain adopts the parameters l = 3 [mm] and d = 1[mm], which correspond to γintra < γinter. In Fig. 2(b), we display the eigenspectra of the two topo- logically distinct types of phononic Fibonacci chains derived from the 2D SSH model. There appear multiple gaps in the eigenspectra similar to the conventional Fibonacci chain de- fined in Eq. (1). The contrast in the eigenspectra of the modi- fied Fibonacci chain is the four subbands in the middle, which reflect the underlying structure of the four sublattices in the 2D SSH model, as displayed by the left panel of Fig. 2(b). In the 2D SSH model, it is observed that the two different topological phases can be exchanged by redefining the unit cell following a half-period shift. This shift results in a pat- tern mapping between the two topologically distinct Fibonacci chains, where part A is transformed into part B and part B be- comes BA. However, despite this transformation, parts A and B in the two chains remain nonequivalent due to the different values of l and d, which do not result in the closure of the band gap in their parent systems. As displayed in Fig. 2(c), we observe the emergence of a topological interfacial state within the shared gap of the two phononic Fibonacci chains. Up to the frequency that we solve, there is only one topological interfacial state. By adjusting the coupling strength, denoted as tτ, between the two chains, we can effectively modulate the frequency of this state within a certain range. This tunability offers a versatile tool for ma- nipulating the properties of the interfacial state for potential applications. The wave profile of the topological interfacial state, as shown in Fig. 2(d), reveals another critical feature: the state exhibits expected exponential decay along both direc- tions from the interface. This decay is a hallmark of topolog- ical interfacial states, indicating the localized nature of these states at the interface of the two distinct topological phases. The total number of sites in parts A and B of the simula- tion is 48, which corresponds to the Fibonacci sequence “AB- BABABBABBA”. For a larger number of sites, the eigenspec- tra remain qualitatively the same, and the band gaps do not close. B. photonic topological interfacial states In addition to the phononic Fibonacci chains, it is equally compelling to investigate the topological interfacial states in photonic quasicrystals. One notable aspect of the photonic case is the non-negligible impact of long-range interactions. two distinct types of photonic Fibonacci chains, represented by green dots indicating the placement of dielectric rods. Upon examination of the eigenspectra of these photonic chains, as shown in Fig. 3(b), we find a similarity to the phononic case, suggesting similar topological behaviors. The eigenspectra of these two types of photonic Fibonacci chains are displayed in Fig. 3(b), which looks similar to the phononic case. The eigenspectra of the combined structure of these photonic Fibonacci chains, as displayed in Fig. 3(c), reveal a topological interfacial state, marked by a red dot. More- over, the wave profile of this topological interfacial state, rep- resented as an electric field in photonic Fibonacci chains, is displayed in Fig. 3(d). 5 (a) Topological interface formed by the two types of mod- ified photonic Fibonacci chains, whose higher-dimensional parent systems belonging two topological classes of the 2D SSH model. The coupling between two chains is denoted by tτ and controlled by the distance between two chains. (b) Eigenspectra of the two types of modified photonic Fibonacci chains in (a), as displayed by left and right panels, respectively. (c) Eigenspectra of the combined structure of the two types of modified photonic Fibonacci chains. (d) Wave profile of the topological interfacial state as electric field in the setup of (a). IV. HIGHER-ORDER TOPOLOGICAL INTERFACIAL STATES In Sec. II(A), we introduce the cut-and-project method for constructing modified Fibonacci chains from the 2D SSH model. Building upon this method, we extend its application from constructing Fibonacci chains to Fibonacci squares by delving into the study of higher-order topological interfacial states in both phononic and photonic quasicrystals. A. Construction of modified Fibonacci squares In our quest to construct the Fibonacci square, the tradi- tional chain product method proves to be somewhat cumber- some, resulting in a complex structure with 16 sites in each of parts A and B. To streamline this process, we have adapted the cut-and-project method to project sites on both the x′ and y′ axes. This adaptation involves projecting diagonal sites of the (a) modified Fibonacci square. There are two projecting axes x′ and y′, whose projection angles are complementary angles. The diagonal sites of the 2D SSH model are projected to the x′ axis, and the off- diagonal sites are projected to the y′ axis. 2D SSH model, such as a and c on the x′ axis, while align- ing the off-diagonal sites, namely b and d on the y′ axis. The schematic of the extended cut-and-project method for modi- fied Fibonacci squares is depicted in Fig. 4, where there are two projection axes, namely x′ and y′. A key aspect of this method is the relationship between the projection angles that satisfies θx′ +θy′ = π/2. This angular arrangement is critical, as it imparts symmetry of the C4 point group to the resulting modified Fibonacci square, which simplifies the construction of corresponding phononic and photonic Fibonacci squares. B. phononic and photonic modified Fibonacci squares Upon determining the projected positions of the sites on the x′ and y′ axes, we construct the corresponding modified phononic and photonic Fibonacci squares. Figure 5(a) dis- plays the structures for the two different topological phases in the phononic case. It is seen that in modified phononic Fibonacci squares, Fibonacci sequences appear along the x− and y− directions. In the nontrivial phase that γintra < γinter, we notice a mix of sites for parts A and B similar to the modified Fibonacci chain. The length of the squares and the coupling waveguide is 5 [mm]. The mapping function be- tween the distance and the width of the coupling waveguide is D = 1/L2. phononic Fibonacci squares. There is a common band gap for the two topologically distinct modified Fibonacci squares around 104 [Hz], allowing us to explore the higher-order topo- logical states. Turning to the photonic counterpart, Fig. 5(c) illustrates 6 (a) (b) (c) (d) bonacci squares, which belongs two topologically distinct classes of the 2D SSH model, constructed by the extended cut-and-project method. (b) Eigenspectra of the two types of modified phononic Fi- bonacci squares. Left panel is for the case of γintra > γinter, and right panel is for γintra < γinter. (c) Similar to (a) for the modified photonic Fibonacci squares. (d) Similar to (b) for the modified photonic Fi- bonacci squares. the modified photonic Fibonacci squares, with the left panel representing the topologically trivial case and the right panel depicting the nontrivial case. The radius of the dielectric robs is 0.2 [mm], and the dielectric constant is 100. The remain- ing part is air. The eigenspectra of the modified photonic Fibonacci squares is displayed in Fig. 5(d). Similarly to the (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) two types of modified phononic Fibonacci squares. (b) Topologi- cal interface with a corner structure formed by two types of modi- fied photonic Fibonacci squares. (c) Eigenspectra for the combined structure in (a). (d) Eigenspectra for the combined structure in (b). (e) Wave profiles as sound pressure of the topological corner states in (c). (f) Wave profiles as electric field of the topological corner states in (d). phononic case, we observe a common band gap for both types of squares. It is important to note that in the nontrivial pho- tonic Fibonacci squares, boundary effects lead to the emer- gence of localized states within the band gap. 7 C. corner states in modified Fibonacci squares We demonstrate that topological corner states emerge when two distinct types of modified Fibonacci squares are com- bined. The setup of combined modified phononic and pho- tonic Fibonacci squares are displayed in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b), respectively. The different shades indicate their topological classifications. In each setup, a corner structure is constructed in the combined phononic and photonic Fibonacci squares. The eigenspectra of these combined structures for both phononic and photonic cases are displayed in Figs. 5(c) and 5(d). A notable observation is the appearance of corner states within the common band gaps of these configurations. Interestingly, these corner states exhibit double degeneracy, distinguishing them from the topological interfacial states ob- served in the modified Fibonacci chain. This characteristic is further elucidated in the wave profiles of the corner states for both the phononic and photonic cases, shown in Figs. 5(e) and 5(f). Here, we observe that, unlike the corner states typically seen in the 2D SSH model, which are localized at the cor- ner sites, the corner states in our modified Fibonacci square model manifest around the corner sites rather than directly at them. This unique localization pattern of the corner states in our model provides new insights into the behavior of topolog- ical states in quasicrystalline systems and contributes to our understanding of their topological characteristics. V. SUMMARY In summary, we have proposed a modified Fibonacci qua- sicrystal whose higher-dimensional parent system is the two- dimensional Su-Schrieffer-Heeger model. By constructing the corresponding phononic and photonic quasicrsytals of the modified Fibonacci chains and squares, we observe that topo- logical interfacial states including higher-order one such as corner states emerge in the finite-element simulations. Our results suggest that, in addition to the Chern-insulator states, higher-order topological states induced by filling anomalies can also be inherited from the parent systems in quasicrystals. In particular, we observe the double degeneracy of the corner states. The discussed phononic and photonic quasicrytals of modified Fibonacci quasicrystals offer a platform for further study of the higher-order topological properties in quasicrys- tals. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is supported by the NSFC (under No. 12074205, No. 12074108, and No. 12347101), NSFZP Grant No. LQ21A040004, the Natural Science Foundation of Chongqing (Grant No. CSTB2022NSCQ-MSX0568) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2023CDJXY-048). M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Colloquium : Topological insula- tors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045 (2010). X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Topological insulators and supercon- ductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1057 (2011). A. Bansil, H. Lin, and T. Das, Colloquium : Topological band theory, Rev. Mod. Phys. 88, 021004 (2016). Y. Hatsugai, Chern number and edge states in the integer quan- tum hall effect, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 3697 (1993). L. Fu and C. L. Kane, Time reversal polarization and a Z2 adi- abatic spin pump, Phys. Rev. B 74, 195312 (2006). Y. Hwang, J. Ahn, and B.-J. Yang, Fragile topology protected by inversion symmetry: Diagnosis, bulk-boundary correspon- dence, and wilson loop, Phys. Rev. B 100, 205126 (2019). A. Bouhon, A. M. Black-Schaffer, and R.-J. Slager, Wilson loop approach to fragile topology of split elementary band represen- tations and topological crystalline insulators with time-reversal symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 100, 195135 (2019). Z. Wang, L. Dong, C. Xiao, and Q. Niu, Berry curvature effects on quasiparticle dynamics in superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. G. Harari, M. A. Bandres, Y. Lumer, M. C. Rechtsman, Y. D. Chong, M. Khajavikhan, D. N. Christodoulides, and M. Segev, Topological insulator laser: Theory, Science 359 (2018). M. Ezawa, Topological Switch between Second-Order Topo- logical Insulators and Topological Crystalline Insulators, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 116801 (2018). W. A. Benalcazar, T. Li, and T. L. Hughes, Quantization of frac- tional corner charge in Cn-symmetric higher-order topological crystalline insulators, Phys. Rev. B 99, 245151 (2019). Y. Wu, H. Jiang, J. Liu, H. Liu, and X. C. Xie, Non-abelian braiding of dirac fermionic modes using topological corner states in higher-order topological insulator, Phys. Rev. Lett. H. Watanabe and H. C. Po, Fractional corner charge of sodium chloride, Phys. Rev. X 11, 041064 (2021). M. Jung, Y. Yu, and G. Shvets, Exact higher-order bulk- boundary correspondence of corner-localized states, Phys. Rev. S.-B. Zhang, W. B. Rui, A. Calzona, S.-J. Choi, A. P. Schnyder, and B. Trauzettel, Topological and holonomic quantum com- putation based on second-order topological superconductors, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 043025 (2020). S.-B. Zhang, A. Calzona, and B. Trauzettel, All-electrically tunable networks of majorana bound states, Phys. Rev. B 102, T. E. Pahomi, M. Sigrist, and A. A. Soluyanov, Braiding majo- rana corner modes in a second-order topological superconduc- 8 tor, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 032068(R) (2020). X.-H. Pan, X.-J. Luo, J.-H. Gao, and X. Liu, Detecting and braiding higher-order majorana corner states through their spin degree of freedom, Phys. Rev. B 105, 195106 (2022). S. Tang, Y. Xu, F. Ding, and F. Liu, Continuously tunable topo- logical defects and topological edge states in dielectric photonic crystals, Phys. Rev. B 107, L041403 (2023). F. Liu and K. Wakabayashi, Novel topological phase with a zero berry curvature, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118, 076803 (2017). W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, and T. L. Hughes, Quantized electric multipole insulators, Science 357, 61 (2017). W. A. Benalcazar, B. A. Bernevig, and T. L. Hughes, Electric multipole moments, topological multipole moment pumping, and chiral hinge states in crystalline insulators, Phys. Rev. B M. Ezawa, Higher-order topological insulators and semimetals on the breathing kagome and pyrochlore lattices, Phys. Rev. F. Liu, H.-Y. Deng, and K. Wakabayashi, Helical topological edge states in a quadrupole phase, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 086804 L. Trifunovic and P. W. Brouwer, Higher-Order Bulk-Boundary Correspondence for Topological Crystalline Phases, Phys. Rev. E. Khalaf, W. A. Benalcazar, T. L. Hughes, and R. Queiroz, Boundary-obstructed topological phases, Phys. Rev. Research Z. Lei, Y. Deng, and L. Li, Topological classification of Higher- order topological phases with nested band inversion surfaces, W. Jia, X.-C. Zhou, L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and X.-J. Liu, Unified characterization for higher-order topological phase transitions, Z. Song, Z. Fang, and C. Fang, (d − 2)-dimensional edge states of rotation symmetry protected topological states, Phys. Rev. J. Langbehn, Y. Peng, L. Trifunovic, F. von Oppen, and P. W. Brouwer, Reflection-symmetric second-order topological in- sulators and superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 246401 M. Geier, L. Trifunovic, M. Hoskam, and P. W. Brouwer, Second-order topological insulators and superconductors with an order-two crystalline symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 97, 205135 E. Khalaf, Higher-order topological insulators and supercon- ductors protected by inversion symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 97, R. Okugawa, S. Hayashi, and T. Nakanishi, Second-order topo- logical phases protected by chiral symmetry, Phys. Rev. B 100, W. A. Benalcazar and A. Cerjan, Chiral-symmetric higher-order topological phases of matter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 127601 F. Schindler, A. M. Cook, M. G. Vergniory, Z. Wang, S. S. P. Parkin, B. A. Bernevig, and T. Neupert, Higher-order topologi- cal insulators, Sci. Adv. 4, 0346 (2018). F. Schindler, Z. Wang, M. G. Vergniory, A. M. Cook, A. Mu- rani, S. Sengupta, A. Y. Kasumov, R. Deblock, S. Jeon, I. Droz- dov, H. Bouchiat, S. Gu ́eron, A. Yazdani, B. A. Bernevig, and T. Neupert, Higher-order topology in bismuth, Nat. Phys. 14, C. Yue, Y. Xu, Z. Song, H. Weng, Y.-M. Lu, C. Fang, and X. Dai, Symmetry-enforced chiral hinge states and surface quantum anomalous Hall effect in the magnetic axion insula- tor Bi2 − xSmxSe3, Nat. Phys. 15, 577 (2019). B. Liu, G. Zhao, Z. Liu, and Z. F. Wang, Two-dimensional quadrupole topological insulator in γ-graphyne, Nano Lett. 19, Y.-B. Choi, Y. Xie, C.-Z. Chen, J. Park, S.-B. Song, J. Yoon, B. J. Kim, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. Kim, K. C. Fong, M. N. Ali, K. T. Law, and G.-H. Lee, Evidence of higher-order topology in multilayer wte2 from josephson coupling through anisotropic hinge states, Nat. Mater. 19, 974 (2020). L. Aggarwal, P. Zhu, T. L. Hughes, and V. Madhavan, Evidence for higher order topology in Bi and Bi0.92Sb0.08, Nat. Com- mun. 12, 4420 (2021). R.-X. Zhang, W. S. Cole, X. Wu, and S. Das Sarma, Higher-order topology and nodal topological superconductiv- ity in Fe(Se,Te) heterostructures, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 167001 B.-Y. Xie, H.-F. Wang, H.-X. Wang, X.-Y. Zhu, J.-H. Jiang, M.-H. Lu, and Y.-F. Chen, Second-order photonic topological insulator with corner states, Phys. Rev. B 98, 205147 (2018). B.-Y. Xie, G.-X. Su, H.-F. Wang, H. Su, X.-P. Shen, P. Zhan, M.-H. Lu, Z.-L. Wang, and Y.-F. Chen, Visualization of higher- order topological insulating phases in two-dimensional dielec- tric photonic crystals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 233903 (2019). X.-D. Chen, W.-M. Deng, F.-L. Shi, F.-L. Zhao, M. Chen, and J.-W. Dong, Direct observation of corner states in second-order topological photonic crystal slabs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 233902 S. Mittal, V. V. Orre, G. Zhu, M. A. Gorlach, A. Poddubny, and M. Hafezi, Photonic quadrupole topological phases, Nat. Photonics 13, 692 (2019). A. Cerjan, M. J ̈urgensen, W. A. Benalcazar, S. Mukherjee, and M. C. Rechtsman, Observation of a higher-order topological bound state in the continuum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125, 213901 Y. Wang, Y. Ke, Y.-J. Chang, Y.-H. Lu, J. Gao, C. Lee, and X.- M. Jin, Constructing higher-order topological states in higher dimensions, Phys. Rev. B 104, 224303 (2021). M. Serra-Garcia, V. Peri, R. S ̈usstrunk, O. R. Bilal, T. Larsen, L. G. Villanueva, and S. D. Huber, Observation of a phononic quadrupole topological insulator, Nature 555, 342 (2018). H. Xue, Y. Yang, F. Gao, Y. Chong, and B. Zhang, Acous- tic higher-order topological insulator on a kagome lattice, Nat. Mater. 18, 108 (2019). H. Xue, Y. Yang, G. Liu, F. Gao, Y. Chong, and B. Zhang, Real- ization of an Acoustic Third-Order Topological Insulator, Phys. Rev. Lett. 122, 244301 (2019). R.-X. Zhang, W. S. Cole, and S. Das Sarma, Helical hinge ma- jorana modes in iron-based superconductors, Phys. Rev. Lett. X. Zhang, H.-X. Wang, Z.-K. Lin, Y. Tian, B. Xie, M.-H. Lu, Y.-F. Chen, and J.-H. Jiang, Second-order topology and multi- dimensional topological transitions in sonic crystals, Nat. Phys. Z.-K. Lin, H.-X. Wang, Z. Xiong, M.-H. Lu, and J.-H. Jiang, Anomalous quadrupole topological insulators in two- dimensional nonsymmorphic sonic crystals, Phys. Rev. B 102, Z.-K. Lin, S.-Q. Wu, H.-X. Wang, and J.-H. Jiang, Higher- order topological spin hall effect of sound, Chin. Phys. Lett. S. Imhof, C. Berger, F. Bayer, J. Brehm, L. W. Molenkamp, T. Kiessling, F. Schindler, C. H. Lee, M. Greiter, T. Neupert, and R. Thomale, Topolectrical-circuit realization of topological corner modes, Nat. Phys. 14, 925 (2018). 9 S. Liu, S. Ma, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, C. Yang, O. You, W. Gao, Y. Xiang, T. J. Cui, and S. Zhang, Octupole corner state in a three-dimensional topological circuit, Light Sci. Appl. 9, 145 Z. Wang, X.-T. Zeng, Y. Biao, Z. Yan, and R. Yu, Realization of a hopf insulator in circuit systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 130, 057201 R. Chen, C.-Z. Chen, J.-H. Gao, B. Zhou, and D.-H. Xu, Higher-order topological insulators in quasicrystals, Phys. Rev. D. Varjas, A. Lau, K. P ̈oyh ̈onen, A. R. Akhmerov, D. I. Pikulin, and I. C. Fulga, Topological phases without crystalline counter- parts, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123, 196401 (2019). C.-B. Hua, R. Chen, B. Zhou, and D.-H. Xu, Higher-order topo- logical insulator in a dodecagonal quasicrystal, Phys. Rev. B S. Spurrier and N. R. Cooper, Kane-mele with a twist: Qua- sicrystalline higher-order topological insulators with fractional mass kinks, Phys. Rev. Res. 2, 033071 (2020). L. Huang, W. Zhang, and X. Zhang, Moir ́e quasibound states in the continuum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 253901 (2022). C. Wang, F. Liu, and H. Huang, Effective model for fractional topological corner modes in quasicrystals, Phys. Rev. Lett. 129, Y. E. Kraus and O. Zilberberg, Topological equivalence be- tween the fibonacci quasicrystal and the harper model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 116404 (2012). A. Jagannathan, The fibonacci quasicrystal: case study of hid- den dimensions and multifractality, Rev. Mod. Phys. 93, 045001 A. Panigrahi, V. Juriˇci ́c, and B. Roy, Projected topological branes, Communications Physics 5, 230 (2022). W. P. Su, J. R. Schrieffer, and A. J. Heeger, Solitons in poly- acetylene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 1698 (1979).