Laser-induced quenching of metastability at the Mott-insulator to metal transition Theodor Luibrand,1 Lorenzo Fratino,2, 3 Farnaz Tahouni-Bonab,1 Amihai Kronman,4 Yoav Kalcheim,4, 5 Ivan K. Schuller,5 Marcelo Rozenberg,3 Reinhold Kleiner,1 Dieter Koelle,1 and Stefan Gu ́enon1, ∗ 1Physikalisches Institut, Center for Quantum Science (CQ) and LISA+, Eberhard Karls Universit ̈at T ̈ubingen, Auf der Morgenstelle 14, 72076 T ̈ubingen, Germany 2CNRS Laboratoire de Physique Th ́eorique et Mod ́elisation, CY Cergy Paris Universit ́e, 95302 Cergy-Pontoise Cedex, France 3CNRS Laboratoire de Physique des Solides, Universit ́e Paris-Saclay, 91405, Orsay, France 4Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Technion City, 32000 Haifa, Israel 5Center for Advanced Nanoscience, Department of Physics, University of California — San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA92093-0319, USA There is growing interest in strongly correlated insulator thin films because the intricate interplay of their intrinsic and extrinsic state variables causes memristive behavior that might be used for bio-mimetic devices in the emerging field of neuromorphic computing. In this study we find that laser irradiation tends to drive V2O3 from supercooled/superheated metastable states towards ther- modynamic equilibrium, most likely in a non-thermal way. We study thin films of the prototypical Mott-insulator V2O3, which show spontaneous phase separation into metal-insulator herringbone domains during the Mott transition. Here, we use low-temperature microscopy to investigate how these metal-insulator domains can be modified by scanning a focused laser beam across the thin film surface. We find that the response depends on the thermal history: When the thin film is heated from below the Mott transition temperature, the laser beam predominantly induces metallic domains. On the contrary, when the thin film is cooled from a temperature above the transition, the laser beam predominantly induces insulating domains. Very likely, the V2O3 thin film is in a superheated or supercooled state, respectively, during the first-order phase transition, and the perturbation by a laser beam drives these metastable states into stable ones. This way, the ther- mal history is locally erased. Our findings are supported by a phenomenological model with a laser-induced lowering of the energy barrier between the metastable and equilibrium states. Strongly correlated insulator thin films are the sub- ject of intensive research in the emerging field of neu- romorphic computing [1–4]. If these materials are cooled to a temperature below the transition tempera- ture, the charge carrier mobility is considerably reduced due to electron-electron correlation effects like the Mott- Hubbard interaction (e.g., V2O3 [5–9]), charge trans- fer (e.g., rare-earth nickelates ) or dimerization (e.g., VO2). This reduction in charge carrier mobil- ity results in a metal-to-insulator transition (MIT) . An equivalent insulator-to-metal transition (IMT) is ob- served during heating. The electron-electron correlation effects cause an intricate interplay of intrinsic and ex- trinsic state variables that can be leveraged for engi- neering neuromorphic devices . One way to influence strongly correlated insulator thin-film devices externally is through exposure to light. For instance, light is used to trigger resistive switching [15–18], to tune the resis- tive switching voltage thresholds or to tune the fre- quency of relaxation oscillators in VO2 devices. Fur- thermore, because strongly correlated insulator thin-film neuromorphic devices are usually operated in a critical state at the onset of the IMT/MIT, their functionality is affected by thermodynamics of phase transitions. For instance, the hysteresis in resistance R vs temperature T curves due to the first order MIT/IMT in VO2 is lever- ∗ stefan.guenon@uni-tuebingen.de aged for multistate resistive switching [21–23]. In V2O3, the MIT/IMT is accompanied by structural (corundum to monclinic) and magnetic (paramagnetic to antiferro- magnetic) phase transitions, providing a complex inter- play of many degrees of freedom [24–27]. As a founda- tion of utilizing V2O3-based neuromorphic device appli- cations that are implementing light as an external stimu- lus, one needs a better understanding of the phase tran- sitions in V2O3. We have investigated the effect of laser scanning ir- radiation on a V2O3 thin film during the IMT/MIT by acquiring photomicrographs. Here we report on laser- induced phase transitions. While at the IMT, the metal phase is induced, the insulating phase is predominantly induced at the MIT. The latter is surprising, because one might expect the main effect of the laser irradiation to be heating, which is expected to drive the system towards a more metallic state. The sample under investigation is a continuous 300- nm-thick rf-sputtered V2O3 film on an r-cut sapphire substrate with gold electrodes evaporated on top (see Ref. for details); Fig. 1(a) shows its R(T) curve for both heating and cooling. The resistance change of four orders of magnitude at the phase transition is a sign of high film quality. We used the same optical microscopy setup as in Lange et al. , where we have demonstrated that the change in reflectivity allows for imaging the separation of the insulating and metallic phases with 0.5 μm spatial res- olution. As described in Refs. , the setup is a arXiv:2401.11889v1 [cond-mat.str-el] 22 Jan 2024 2 cryogenic combined widefield and laser scanning micro- scope. A sketch of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1(b), and a detailed description is given in Ref. (Sec. I). For this study, the photomicrographs are acquired in the widefield mode with an monochromatic (532 nm) LED illumination, and the laser scanning mode is used for exposing the sample under investigation to laser light of 405 nm wavelength. The theoretical laser spot diame- ter on the thin-film surface is 322 nm. We have measured the incident laser power on the sample surface by replac- ing the sample with a photodiode. The maximum laser power is 919 μW. However, different laser powers were chosen, throughout this study. For exposure, the selected area is scanned line by line (line separation 100 nm) with the laser in the continuous wave mode as depicted in Fig. 1(b). During each line scan, the laser spot stays at a position for 13 ms then it moves to the next position at a distance of 100 nm. The procedure to investigate the effect of laser scan- ning irradiation is the following: 1. A photomicrograph (32×32 μm2) of the thin film is acquired. 2. A selected area (14×14 μm2) is exposed to laser light. 3. A second photomicrograph is acquired. 4. For the differential image, the first photomicro- graph is subtracted from the second. With this procedure, the laser-induced changes from the metallic to the insulating and from the insulating to the metallic phases are mapped. We have exposed a V2O3 thin film by laser light at dif- ferent temperatures during the IMT/MIT (Fig. 1). The R(T) curve shows a hysteresis of several Kelvins due to the first-oder nature of the IMT/MIT . During heating of the sample from 80 K to room temperature, the heating was interrupted four times during the IMT, and a pristine (unirradiated) 14×14 μm area was exposed with 0.1 mW laser power according to the procedure de- scribed above. The same procedure was chosen for cool- ing from room temperature to 80 K with 0.6 mW laser power. Note, that we chose different pristine areas on the sample for each scanning procedure. The photomicro- graphs in Fig. 1(c),(d) (in particular, D and E) show the characteristic herringbone domain pattern due to strain- induced separation of the metallic and insulating phases . A crucial result of this study is that during heat- ing, mostly metallic domains are induced (dark patches in the differential images in Fig. 1(c) and (d)), whereas dur- ing cooling, predominantly insulating domains are cre- ated by laser irradiation (bright patches in the differential images in Fig. 1(c) and (d)). Furthermore, laser scanning irradiation does not smear or destroy the herringbone do- main patterns but modifies them by changing the ratio before exposure after exposure differential image before exposure after exposure differential image metallic insulating laser-induced phase (c) (d) (a) metallic insulating 160K A B C D A F G H E 164K 166K 170K 10μm 164K 158K 157K 155K V O 2 3 laser scanning widefield imaging (b) temperature (K) resistance () A B C D E F G H 101 105 108 (a) Zoom into the phase transition region of the R(T) curve. The red and blue dashed arrows indicate the heating and cooling branch, respectively. Inset: Full R(T) curve of the V2O3 thin film sample under investigation with same units as in the main graph. The capital letters mark the set-temperatures in one thermal cycle, at which sepa- rated squares in the V2O3 thin film were irradiated using the laser scanning mode. (b) Simplified schematic of the mea- surement setup. Photomicrographs are acquired by widefield microscopy before and after laser scanning within the dashed square of pristine areas. (c) Photomicrograph series demon- strating the laser scanning irradiation effect acquired during one heating run. For the differential images, the image before laser irradiation was subtracted from the image after scan- ning. The image contrasts were optimized for every temper- ature. (d) Photomicrograph series acquired during cooling, analogous to (c). of the metallic and insulating surface areas. In an ad- ditional experiment on a patterned V2O3 thin film mi- crobridge (see Fig. S2 in Ref. ) we show, that indeed the laser-scanning-induced phase change has a significant effect on the film resistivity. Moreover, we observe that the size of the laser-induced domains is similar to the size of the domains of the temperature-driven phase transi- tion without laser exposure. This indicates, that domain walls permeate the whole film, and that the laser-induced phase transition is not only due to a surface effect. We also modified the laser irradiation procedure to determine the power thresholds for laser-induced phase changes during heating and cooling (see Sec. III in 3 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.1 0.2 0.3 152 156 160 164 168 172 176 180 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 PLaser = 460μW (c) (b) cooling filling factor of laser-induced phase insulating phase metallic phase heating (a) PLaser = 460μW filling factor of laser-induced phase insulating phase metallic phase filling factor of insulating phase temperature (K) heating, before exp. cooling, before exp. heating, after exp. cooling, after exp. Temperature dependence of metal and insulator filling factors affected by laser irradiation of 460 μW. (a) Fill- ing factors of the metallic and insulating phases induced by laser irradiation during heating. (b) Same filling factors dur- ing cooling. (c) Filling factors of the insulating phase during one thermal cycle. Ref. for details). It was found that laser irradi- ation already at relatively low power levels induces a phase change during heating (i.e., IMT), while during cooling (i.e., MIT), the required laser power is consider- ably larger. Moreover, the temperature range, in which a laser-induced phase change was observable, is larger dur- ing IMT, compared to MIT. Hence, the heating branch of the transition seems to be more sensitive to laser irra- diation than the cooling branch. For a quantitative analysis of the laser-induced phase changes, we investigated the filling factors, i.e., the ratio between the surface area of a particular phase and the total surface area of interest at a laser power of 460 μW. This laser power was chosen because it is far from the minimum and maximum threshold values for both cool- ing and heating (see Sec. III in Ref. ). As mentioned above, the metallic and insulating thin-film areas can be clearly distinguished by their brightness level in the photomicrographs (see Fig. 1 and ). However, these brightness levels change from micrograph to micrograph. Therefore, the following evaluation procedure was used for determining the filling factors. We visually inspected the (differential) micrographs in Fiji and chose an upper and lower limit for the brightness that separates the particular two phases. A third brightness level was calculated by averaging the upper and lower limit. For these three brightness values, we calculated the filling fac- tors, which correspond to the data points and the error bars in Fig. 2, using a Python routine. of the filling factors of the laser-induced metallic and in- sulating phases during heating and cooling, respectively. Except for the fact that in the heating case, predom- inantly the metallic, and in the cooling case, predom- inantly the insulating phase is created, the overall be- havior is very similar: the laser irradiation switches a considerable percentage of the thin-film area during the IMT from insulating to metallic (40% at 164 K) and dur- ing the MIT from metallic to insulating (28% at 162 K). Furthermore, in both cases, there is a temperature inter- val in which a smaller amount of the minor phase (insu- lating at the IMT and metallic at the MIT) is induced as well. ing phase before and after laser irradiation. The error bars of the before-irradiation graphs are smaller com- pared to the after-irradiation graphs because a larger area was used for determining the filling factors before irradiation. Like the R(T)-curves shown in Fig. 1(a), the before-irradiation curves are hysteretic due to the first-order character of the IMT/MIT phase transitions. Most importantly, the after-irradiation curves (dashed lines) lay between the curves before irradiation and are almost identical for temperatures at 168 K and below (solid lines). This implies that after irradiation, it is no longer possible to decide (by means of the filling factor) whether the film was in the heating or cooling branch. In this sense, laser irradiation above the power threshold erases the thermal history of the V2O3 thin film. The most intriguing result of this study is that laser irradiation predominantly induces insulating domains in large amounts during cooling. Considering the laser spot as a local heat source, it is not surprising that laser irra- diation induces metallic domains since the metallic phase is the high-temperature phase of the Mott transition. In- deed, we observe this behavior during heating of the sam- ple through the IMT. However, the predominant laser- induced creation of insulating domains during cooling is puzzling. In other words, why does the effect of laser ir- radiation depend on the thermal history? To answer this question, the thermodynamic nature of the MIT/IMT of the V2O3 thin film must be considered. The thermodynamic description of V2O3 thin films is the subject of ongoing research [35–37]. It is recog- nized that at the MIT, three phase transitions are cou- pled: first, an electronic transition due to Mott-Hubbard charge carrier localization, second, a magnetic transi- tion from a paramagnetic-to-antiferromagnetic state, and third, a structural transition from corundum to a mon- oclinic crystal structure. Furthermore, as indicated in Ref. , the characteristic herringbone domain pattern 4 resembles the solutions of the Cahn-Larch ́e equation de- scribing a phase separation due to spinodal decomposi- tion . Other studies also indicate that the IMT/MIT is associated with a spinodal instability . Despite those intricate details, the R(T)-hysteresis and the asso- ciated latent heat at the IMT and MIT clearly indicate a first-order phase transition. Consequently, it is safe to assume that during heating the V2O3 thin film is in a metastable superheated state, and during cooling it is in a metastable supercooled state. The most likely inter- pretation of our results is that the perturbation releases the V2O3 thin film from its metastable state, and when the laser spot moves to a new position, the thin film re- laxes locally into a stable state. The general details of the perturbation induced by the laser beam are elusive and additional effects might be at play, for instance, a photoinduced change of the 3d-orbital occupation could trigger the formation of metallic nanodroplets in the IMT . With respect to the MIT we measured electrical trans- port properties during minor thermal cycles to investi- gate how heating affects a V2O3 thin film in the criti- cal state. This procedure emulates a heat source that changes the temperature gradually on a large length scale. A detailed description and discussion of these ad- ditional experiments can be found in Ref. (Sec. IV). Although we found that a minor heating cycle can indeed increase the resistance, the effect is not strong enough to account for what we observed in the laser irradiation ex- periment. To elaborate on the matter of metastability, we dis- cuss a phenomenological numerical model. In a two- dimensional (2D) resistor network, each site can either be metallic or insulating, depending on the local temper- ature, which is updated at every simulation step. Solv- ing Kirchhoff’s laws, currents and voltages on each site are determined. A first-order Landau-type free energy functional provides stable and metastable states sepa- rated by a barrier. The laser irradiation is implemented in the model by decreasing the barrier height to drive transitions between insulating and metallic states. For each site, the escape from a metastable state was deter- mined by comparing random numbers to Boltzmann fac- tors with a constant number of iterations. If the escape criterion is fulfilled, the transition probability is given by a Boltzmann distribution; see Sec. V in Ref. for details. Our model reproduces the hysteresis in the R(T) curves, as shown in Fig. 3(a). evolution of the filling factor of the insulating phase at different laser intensities. With increasing laser intensity the hysteresis is diminished, and eventually it is com- pletely suppressed, similarly to the experimental results in Fig. 2(c). In Fig. 3(c) we present a simulation series of selected network maps before and after laser exposure with moderate laser intensity (Γ/kB = 600 K), and their corresponding differential images. For heating, the laser induces predominantly metallic sites (Fig. 3(c)), for cool- ing insulating sites (Fig. 3(d)). We note that during heat- ing, the majority of sites goes into a metallic state (indi- cated by black squares in the differential maps), while a few sites revert back to an insulating state (indicated by white squares in the differential maps); this reproduces very well the experimental results. Moreover, this be- havior reverses in the cooling branch (Fig. 3(d), again in agreement with experimental observations. So, accord- ing to the simulations, the laser irradiation enhances the process of relaxing the system from a metastable state. In conclusion, we can state that a V2O3 thin film in the metastable state at the IMT/MIT is highly suscep- tible to a local perturbation by a focused laser beam at the sub-micrometer scale. Whether the laser perturba- tion predominantly creates a metallic or insulating phase depends on whether the film is in the heating or cool- ing branch. Our observations tell that the laser beam brings the system from a supercooled/superheated state to the equilibrium one, provided that the laser power is sufficient to overcome corresponding energy barriers. This implies, that laser scanning irradiation can be used to effectively erase thermal history and provides a novel method to reset memristive devices locally. Our experi- ments may also be considered as a clear indication that external stimuli on a strongly correlated thin film in a critical state can result in unexpected and presumably non-thermal effects. Non-thermal effects have been in- A B C D before exposure after exposure differential image before exposure after exposure differential image (b) (a) (d) (c) metallic insulating laser-induced phase metallic insulating filling factor of insulating phase resistance () temperature (K) temperature (K) increase of  0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 168 164 1 10 3 10 5 10 107 A B C D Results of numerical simulations based on a 2D resis- tor network model. (a) R(T) curves; arrows indicate heating (red) and cooling (blue) branches. (b) Filling factors of the insulating phase vs. T, for various values of laser intensity Γ/kB = 0 (grey circles), 600 K (green squares) and 1200 K (purple triangles). (c) Selected network maps before laser ex- posure, after laser exposure with Γ/kB = 600 K, and their corresponding differential images for two temperature values in the heating branch, as indicated with capital letters in (a). (d) same as in (c) – for the cooling branch. 5 vestigated in ultra-fast pump-probe experiments on VO2 and V2O3 [41–45]. In contrast, in our experiment we have a quasi-static setting. The findings of this study may trigger additional experimental and theoretical studies to explore the thermodynamics of phase transitions and local perturbations in this class of materials. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS T.L. acknowledges support from the Cusanuswerk, Bisch ̈ofliche Studienf ̈orderung, F.T. acknowledges sup- port from the Landesgraduiertenf ̈orderung Baden- W ̈urttemberg and M.R. acknowledges support from the French ANR “MoMA” project ANR-19-CE30-0020. This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme un- der grant agreement No. 2031928 – “Highly Energy- Efficient Resistive Switching in Defect- and Strain- En- gineered Mott Insulators for Neuromorphic Computing Applications”. Views and opinions expressed are how- ever those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European union or the European research council. Work at University of California San Diego (UCSD) was supported through an Energy Fron- tier Research Center program funded by the US Depart- ment of Energy (DOE), Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, under Grant DE-SC0019273.