Revealing dark exciton signatures in polariton spectra of 2D materials Beatriz Ferreira,1, ∗ Hangyong Shan,2 Roberto Rosati,3 Jamie M. Fitzgerald,3 Lukas Lackner,2 Bo Han,2 Martin Esmann,2 Patrick Hays,4 Gilbert Liebling,5 Kenji Watanabe,6 Takashi Taniguchi,6 Falk Eilenberger,5 Sefaattin Tongay,4 Christian Schneider,2 and Ermin Malic3 1Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Physics, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden 2Institute of Physics, Carl von Ossietzky University, Oldenburg, 26129, Germany 3Department of Physics, Philipps-Universit ̈at Marburg, Renthof 7, D-35032 Marburg, Germany 4School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona 85287, USA 5Institute of Applied Physics, Abbe Center of Photonics, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, 07743 Jena, Germany; Fraunhofer-Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering IOF, 07743 Jena, Germany; Max-Planck-School of Photonics, 07743 Jena, Germany 6Research Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan Dark excitons in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMD) have been so far neglected in the context of polariton physics due to their lack of oscillator strength. However, in tungsten-based TMDs, dark excitons are known to be the energetically lowest states and could thus provide important scattering partners for polaritons. In this joint theory-experiment work, we investigate the impact of the full exciton energy landscape on polariton absorption and reflectance. By changing the cavity detuning, we vary the polariton energy relative to the unaffected dark excitons in such a way that we open or close specific phonon-driven scattering channels. We demonstrate both in theory and experiment that this controlled switching of scattering channels manifests in characteristic sharp changes in optical spectra of polaritons. These spectral features can be exploited to extract the position of dark excitons. Our work suggests new possibilities for exploiting polaritons for fingerprinting nanomaterials via their unique exciton landscape. The integration of transition metal dichalco- genides (TMDs) monolayers in optical microcavities opens the door to a variety of applications in opto- electronics [1–3]. This class of atomically thin nano- materials exhibits a large oscillator strength and ex- citon binding energies in the range of a few hundred of meV, hence governing optoelectronic properties even at room temperature [4–7]. TMD can also form heterostructures, both vertical and lateral [10– 12]. When the exciton-photon coupling strength is larger than the cavity dissipative rate and exciton non-radiative decay rate, the strong coupling regime is achieved (1(a)) . This leads to new eigen- modes of the system, the exciton-polaritons [5, 14– 17]. Here, only bright excitons couple to light to form polaritons. In contrast, momentum-dark ex- citons, where Coulomb-bound electrons and holes are localized in different valleys in momentum space, possess a large centre-of-mass momentum and thus cannot be optically excited or radiatively recombine [18–20]. While the importance of spin-dark excitons on optical properties of TMD-based exciton-polaritons ∗ beatriz.ferreira@chalmers.se has been recently considered , the impact of momentum-dark excitons has been less studied due to their negligible oscillator strength. Nonetheless, they can still have a large influence on the scatter- ing of polariton states and, consequently, drasti- cally change the optical response of polaritons. Here, we present a joint theory-experiment study reveal- ing how polariton optics allows us to map the en- tire exciton landscape of TMD materials, including bright and dark exciton states. Based on a micro- scopic many-particle theory, we predict that under certain conditions, polaritons can efficiently scatter into dark exciton states, giving rise to sharp step-like changes both in polariton absorption and reflection as well as in the polariton linewidth. The prediction is confirmed in our measurements on TMD mono- layers integrated into fully spectrally tunable open microcavities . Interestingly, we find that cavity detuning allows us to switch on and off phonon-driven scattering channels between the lower polariton branch and momentum-dark exciton states in tungsten-based TMDs. Depending on the detuning between the polariton and the exciton energy, realized by chang- ing the cavity length [24–26], we can control the strength of the scattering rate Γ and, consequently, arXiv:2401.04588v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 9 Jan 2024 (a) Schematic of an hBN-encapsulated TMD monolayer integrated within a Fabry-Perot microcavity. Light is shined on the left mirror of the cavity (I), which can be reflected (R), transmitted (T) or absorbed (A). (b) Critical coupling condition (reached when the total cavity decay rate equals Γ, or twice the port decay rate) results in a maximum polariton absorption. Sketch of the lower polariton branch (LP) in relation to dark exciton states in a MoSe2 and a WSe2 monolayer for (c) zero detuning (∆ = 0) and (d) negative detuning (∆ < 0) between the cavity mode (yellow line) and the bright exciton state (grey line). the polariton absorption intensity as well as the polariton linewidth. The strongest absorption is obtained at the critical coupling condition when Γ equals twice the cavity decay rate γ (Fig. 1(b)) . For a sufficiently large detuning, the lower polariton branch is pushed below the energetically lowest dark exciton state and becomes the new ground state, closing the scattering channel between these states (Fig. 1(d)). This strategy has recently also been applied to effectively brighten a dark material and enhance its photoluminescence . In our work, we demonstrate the appearance of charac- teristic step-like increases in the detuning-resolved polariton linewidth, which can be associated with specific scattering channels into dark exciton states. This allows us to extract the energy of the involved states and map the exciton energy landscape in TMD materials. Theoretical approach: Using a Wannier- Hopfield method , we model the opti- cal response of exciton-polaritons in TMD mono- layers integrated within a Fabry-Perot cavity (Fig. 1(a)). The excitonic landscape is obtained by solv- ing the Wannier equation [29–31], including DFT input on single-particle energies . The polari- ton dispersion is obtained directly from the diago- nalisation of the many-particle Hamiltonian in the polariton basis under the Hopfield transformation . The resulting lower (LP) and the up- per polariton (UP) energies can be controlled with the cavity length and with this, the detuning be- tween the bright exciton and the cavity resonant energy, ∆ = EX0 − Ec. Momentum-dark excitons (KK′, KΛ) remain unchanged as a function of de- tuning. Starting from the Heisenberg equations of motion for the coherent population of polaritons, including the external radiation field, we obtain an Elliot-like formula for the polariton absorption for a symmetric cavity An 4γn kΓn k (∆n k)2 + (2γn k + Γn k)2 , (1) for each polariton branch n and the in-plane mo- mentum k. Here, we have introduced ∆n k = ħω−En k with En k as the polariton energy and ħω as the energy of the incoming light. The polariton-phonon scattering rates Γn k are obtained within the second- order Born-Markov approximation . These rates are dominated by the scattering into exciton states outside the light-cone, crucially including also the momentum-dark valleys, while scattering within the light-cone is small due to the reduced density of state . In this work, we focus on spin-conserving phonon-induced processes. The expression for the polariton absorption corresponds to the exciton Elliot formula, but with renormal- ized exciton-phonon matrix elements now including the excitonic Hopfield coefficients . The total radiative decay rate of polaritons 2γn k, i.e. the sum of the photon leakage through both ports, is given by the total cavity decay rate scaled by the photonic Hopfield coefficient for state n with momentum k . Hence, both main contributions for the absorption scale with the two Hopfield coefficients. The maximum value of absorption, A = 0.5, is obtained at the critical coupling condition of 2γn k = Γn k, i.e. when the leakage out of both ports of the cavity is equal to the exciton dissipation rate , cf. Fig. 1(b). The absorption equation (1) has a Lorentzian-like shape with the full width at half maximum 2(2γn k + Γn k) corresponding to the polariton linewidth. This quantity will be used to directly compare the theoretical prediction with experimental results later in the text. Polariton Absorption: We start by studying the detuning-resolved polariton absorption spectra 2 at 77K, calculated by numerically evaluating Eq. (1), for hBN-encapsulated WSe2 and MoSe2. We consider the case of a symmetric cavity and the TMD integrated into the center of the cavity. The cavity parameters have been chosen to match the experimental cavity decay rate in the full photonic limit. Furthermore, we consider a realistic Rabi- splitting of 50 meV , and we focus on light emitted at normal incidence, corresponding to an in-plane momentum k = 0. Interestingly, we find a drastic difference in the polariton absorption of tungsten- and molybdenum-based TMDs, particularly consid- ering the lower polariton branch, cf. Fig. 2. As the cavity decay rates for WSe2 and MoSe2 are simi- lar, the predicted difference in the absorption clearly stems from the polariton-phonon scattering rate Γ. In MoSe2, we find only a negligibly small absorp- tion of the lower polariton branch, cf. Fig. 2(b). In stark contrast, WSe2 exhibits negligibly LP absorp- tion only for detuning values below ∆ = −38 meV. Above this value, the LP absorption first slowly in- creases and shows then a relatively sharp increase at ∆=-10 and 0 meV. These values of detuning cor- respond to polaritonic energies of approximately 16 and 12 meV above the dark exciton state, i.e. large enough to scatter into KK’ and KΛ excitons via emission of intervalley phonons, respectively (red and orange lines in Fig. The last increase is larger given the stronger scattering toward KΛ excitons, induced by its three-fold degeneracy. This leads to an increase in both the polariton linewidth and polariton absorption (darker blue area) as the absorption approaches the critical coupling condi- tion (Fig. 1(b)). Note that the slow increase start- ing at approximately -40 meV reflects the scattering into excitons via absorption of intervalley phonons. The upper polariton spectra are more similar for tungsten and molybdenum monolayers. We find a significant polariton absorption for all detuning val- ues for both materials. The reason is that for the up- per polariton branch, the acoustic intravalley scat- tering is always allowed, contrary to the case of the LP branch . The additional intervalley scatter- ing channels into dark exciton states in WSe2 give rise to only a slight increase in the absorption mag- nitude. Since exciton-phonon scattering is more effi- cient in MoSe2 than in WSe2 , we find a broader linewidth and height when the intravalley scatter- ing induced by optical emission opens up in MoSe2 above ∆ ≈ 10 meV (Fig. 2(b)). Temperature plays a crucial role in polariton ab- sorption as it dictates the efficiency of phonon-driven scattering processes . With this in mind, we investigate the polariton absorption as a func- and energy (in relation to the bright exciton energy X0) at zero in-plane momentum for the upper (UP) and the lower polariton (LP) for (a) WSe2 and (b) MoSe2 mono- layers at 77 K. tion of detuning and temperature, both for WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers in a cavity, cf. Figs. 3(a) and (b). We find that, interestingly, both materi- als show regions with negligible polariton absorp- tion (indicated by white areas). In WSe2, we pre- dict three regions with relatively sharp increases in the absorption magnitude that are triggered by the opening of specific scattering channels. We find in- creased polariton absorption around ∆=-10 and 0 meV, which is driven by the scattering into the dark KK′ and KΛ excitons, respectively, via emission of LA and TA phonons. The dashed vertical lines indi- cate the minimum LP energy required for scattering with LA and TA phonons into the corresponding dark exciton state. Note that these features are rel- atively weakly temperature-dependent, and they are still visible even at room temperature. We also find a third relatively sharp increase in the polariton ab- sorption for a detuning of approximately -40 meV, now with a stronger temperature dependence. The enhanced absorption starts to become visible only for temperatures larger than approximately 100K. This occurs as the scattering into the KΛ states is only allowed via the absorption of phonons, which is activated at sufficiently large temperatures. Note that phonon absorption into the KK’ states is pos- sible even for smaller detuning values (∆ = −55 for LA absorption), as this valley lies below the KΛ state. Thus, there is no additional increase visible 3 tuning and temperature for (a) WSe2 and (b) MoSe2 monolayers in a cavity. (c) Polariton absorption of WSe2 at the fixed temperature of 77K as a function of detun- ing and momentum. The absorption increases as more phonon-driven scattering channels into the dark exciton states KΛ and KK′ open up, as denoted by the vertical orange and red lines in (a). (d) Detuning-resolved lower polariton linewidth at 77 K. in the presented detuning range. Overall, the absorption in MoSe2 is weaker than in WSe2 due to the reduced effects of dark excitons supported by the different band alignment, which forbids the scattering via emission of phonons. At high temperatures, a few weak step-like increases are present due to the thermally-activated absorp- tion of intravalley optical modes (purple) or inter- valley phonons toward the dark KK’ valley (red). In MoSe2, the scattering into KK’ is possible only at high detunings because the energy of KK’ states is 9 meV above the bright exciton, in contrast to WSe2 where it lies 46 meV below the bright exciton (cf. Fig. 1(c)). So far, we have investigated the polariton absorp- tion at zero momentum. Figure 3(c) shows the LP absorption in WSe2 at a fixed temperature of 77K as a function of detuning and momentum. For neg- ative cavity detuning values and below k = 2 μm−1, there is only a negligibly small absorption. The rea- son is that there is a certain polariton access energy required to scatter into the dark exciton states (Fig. 1(d)). Furthermore, the steep lower polariton dis- persion allows us to show the opening of these scat- tering channels as a function of momentum. The smaller the negative detuning, the lower is also the required momentum for this scattering to occur with critical detuning values for different channels ap- pearing at k = 0 μm−1, cf. Fig. 3(c). Finally, we show that not only the absorption magnitude but also the spectral linewidth of the lower polariton [2(2γ+Γ)] is strongly sensitive to the opening of the detuning-driven polariton-phonon scattering channels, cf. Fig. 3(d). For MoSe2, due to the limited polariton-phonon scattering channels, the LP linewidth is determined by the cavity decay rate 4γ, i.e. on the photonic Hopfield coefficient of the lower polariton, which decreases with increasing detuning. As a direct consequence, we find a reduced LP linewidth as the detuning increases (red line in Fig. We find the same behaviour also for WSe2 until the polariton-phonon scattering channels start to open up at specific detuning values, resulting in a series of sharp increases of the LP linewidth. Polariton linewidth: Now, we complement the theoretical predictions with cryogenic reflectance measurements of WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers in a cavity. We generalize Eq. (1) to study the reflected signal given the asymmetric cavity-decay rates in the two mirrors of our cavity. We utilize the full spectral tunability of our open cavity to map the coupling conditions of the two considered samples based on integrated MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers. Both ex- periments yield a clear anti-crossing behaviour of the upper- and lower polariton branches in the reflection contrast study, featuring a Rabi-splitting of 20 meV for WSe2 and a slightly reduced Rabi-splitting of 16 meV for MoSe2 To assess the role of dark excitons in our experiment, we extract the linewidth of the lower polariton resonance by fitting it with a Fano- type of lineshape and plot the result as a function of detuning. theoretically predicted and experimentally measured lower polariton linewidth as a function of detuning at a fixed temperature of 3.5 K. While for MoSe2, we observe both in theory and experiment a smooth increase of the LP linewidth as a function of de- tuning (Fig. 4(a)), we find a more complex be- haviour for WSe2 (Fig. 4(b)). We observe in the experiment a series of step-like increases in the po- lariton linewidth at the specific detuning values of 4 ically predicted (blue line) and experimentally measured (orange dots) lower polariton linewidth obtained from reflection measurements at 20 K for a (a) MoSe2 and (b) WSe2 monolayer in a cavity. The thin blue line shows the calculated linewidth without scattering into dark ex- citon states, while the dashed line represents the intrinsic linewidth without inhomogeneous broadening. The ver- tical black lines denote the energy of spin-dark excitons in experiments as well as the detuning values at which the scattering channels with TA and LA phonons are opened. approximately -40, 29 and 26 meV (orange line in Fig. 4(b)). Our theoretical predictions can repro- duce well the latter two (blue line) and can clearly trace back their microscopic origin to the opening of the scattering channel toward the dark KΛ ex- citon via the emission of TA and LA phonons, re- spectively (cf. also Fig. 2(a)-(b)). When neglect- ing the scattering to dark states, these character- istic sharp increases vanish (thin blue line in Fig. 4(b)). Note that to match the experiments better, we have slightly red-shifted the microscopically ob- tained energy of KΛ excitons (by 6meV). The exact position of these dark states is still under debate in literature. In our microscopic model, we include only spin-conserving phonon-induced scattering pro- cesses. It is likely that the interaction with the spin- dark KK excitons is responsible for the first increase in the linewidth, whose broad shape is roughly cen- tred around the energy of these states (detuning of -40 meV). Note that the direct comparison between theory and experiment suggests that inhomogeneous broadening plays an important role, as indicated by the overall increase of the polariton linewidth with detuning also in the ∆ ≪ 0 regime (solid lines in Fig. 4). In contrast, for a purely homogeneous linewidth, we predict a decrease with detuning, the dashed blue line in Fig. 4, reflecting the behaviour of the photonic Hopfield coefficient. This suggests the existence of macroscopic/micrometric inhomogeneities, e.g. due to strain in the sam- ple, whereas smaller-scale disorder could lead to motional narrowing . Hence, we have intro- duced an inhomogeneous broadening enhancing the exciton scattering in the rate Γ to match the general experimental trend with detuning. This has no impact on the main message of our work, namely the appearance of the characteristic series of step-like increases in the polaritonic linewidth at specific detuning values. Their observation in Fig. 4 has allowed us to experimentally determine the relative energy of bright and dark excitons in TMD materials via polaritonic spectra. Conclusion: We have presented a microscopic study combining material-specific many-particle theory with cryogenic spectroscopic measurements to investigate polariton absorption and reflectance in hBN-encapsulated WSe2 and MoSe2 monolayers integrated into a tunable Fabry–Perot cavity. Interestingly, we find both in theory and experi- ment the appearance of a series of characteristic step-like increases at specific detuning values both in polariton absorption and polariton linewidth in WSe2 monolayers. This behaviour is a clear signature of the opening of phonon-driven scattering channels between the lower polariton branch and the dark exciton states in WSe2. These results show the potential of polaritons to map the full exciton landscape, including bright and dark states in atomically thin semiconductors. Acknowledgements: We acknowledge funding from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) via SFB 1083 and the regular project 524612380, as well as from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foun- dation via the Grant KAW 2019.0140. The com- putations were enabled by resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Comput- ing (SNIC). We also acknowledge financial support within the projects SCHN1376 11.1 and SCHN1376 14.1, and within the program for major equipment (INST 184/220-1 FUGG) funded by the German 5 Research Foundation (DFG) is acknowledged. Sup- port by the Nieders ̈achsisches Ministerium f ̈ur Wis- senschaft und Kultur (MWK) within the project ”DyNano” is gratefully acknowledged. B.H. grate- fully acknowledges support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 21H05233 and 23H02052) and World Premier Inter- national Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan. S.T acknowledges primary support from DOE-SC0020653 (materials synthesis), Applied Ma- terials Inc., NSF CMMI 1825594 (NMR and TEM studies), NSF DMR-1955889 (magnetic measure- ments), NSF CMMI-1933214, NSF 1904716, NSF 1935994, NSF ECCS 2052527, DMR 2111812, and