IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2023 1 RESURF Ga2O3-on-SiC Field Effect Transistors for Enhanced Breakdown Voltage Junting Chen, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Junlei Zhao, Jin Wei, and Mengyuan Hua, Member, IEEE Abstract— Heterosubstrates have been extensively stud- ied as a method to improve the heat dissipation of Ga2O3 devices. In this simulation work, we propose a novel role for p-type available heterosubstrates, as a component of a reduced surface field (RESURF) structure in Ga2O3 lat- eral field-effect transistors (FETs). The RESURF structure can eliminate the electric field crowding and contribute to higher breakdown voltage. Using SiC as an example, the designing strategy for doping concentration and dimen- sions of the p-type region is systematically studied using TCAD modeling. To mimic realistic devices, the impacts of interface charge and binding interlayer at the Ga2O3/SiC interface are also explored. Additionally, the feasibility of the RESURF structure for high-frequency switching oper- ation is supported by the short time constant (∼0.5 ns) of charging/discharging the p-SiC depletion region. This study demonstrates the great potential of utilizing the electrical properties of heat-dissipating heterosubstrates to achieve a uniform electric field distribution in Ga2O3 FETs. Index Terms— Ga2O3, heterosubstrate, SiC, RESURF, field effect transistors I. INTRODUCTION G ALLIUM oxide (Ga2O3) has attracted intensive research interests in deep-ultraviolet photodetectors , power electronics , , and radio-frequency applications in recent years. With the merit of intrinsic material properties of Ga2O3, such as ultrawide bandgap (Eg ≃ 4.8 eV), high critical electric field (Ecrit. ≃ 8 MV·cm), and decent electron mobility (μn ≃ 200 cm2·V−1·s−1), the Ga2O3-based power electronics have much higher Baliga’s figure of merit (BFOM) compared to Si and other wide-bandgap semiconductors . However, the intrinsically low thermal conductivity of Ga2O3 (κT ≃ 0.1- 0.3 W·m−1·K−1 ) becomes a major obstacle in the design of power electronics, because the resultant high thermal resis- tance and self-heating effects seriously hamper the efficiency, Manuscript received xx Month 2023; revised xx Month 2023; accepted xx Month 2023. Date of publication xx Month 2023; date of current version xx Month 2023. The review of this article was arranged by Editor Xxxx. Yyyyy. (Corresponding author: Mengyuan Hua.) Junting Chen is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shen- zhen 518055, China, and also with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China. Junlei Zhao, and Mengyuan Hua is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Southern University of Science and Tech- nology, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: huamy@sustech.edu.cn). Jin Wei is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineer- ing, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. reliability, and scalability of the Ga2O3 power devices , and hence their competitiveness in power applications. As a remedy for this thermal management challenge, heat dissipation of Ga2O3-based devices can be improved by uti- lizing heterogeneous semiconductor substrates with higher thermal conductivity, such as sapphire , , diamond – , GaN, and SiC. Among these heterosubstrates, SiC is an attractive choice owing to its high thermal conduc- tivity and low cost. The thermal conductivity of SiC is 490 W·m−1·K−1, better than most typical semiconductor substrates (e.g., 150 W·m−1·K−1 for Si, 46 W·m−1·K−1 for sapphire, and 130 W·m−1·K−1 for GaN ). Compared with diamond, large-diameter SiC wafers can be produced at a much lower cost which can be further reduced with poly- crystalline samples . Heterogeneous binding of Ga2O3 on SiC substrate has been demonstrated through surface activation bonding , fusion bonding , and direct growth , . Moreover, wafer-scale integration of hundreds-nm Ga2O3 thin film on SiC can be achieved with the ion-cutting tech- nique . As a result of the effectively promoted heat dissipation, Ga2O3 field-effect transistors (FETs) based on such heterosub- strates deliver improved thermal stability and suppressed self- heating effects , . Currently, overcoming the interfacial thermal impediments of the heterogeneous integration is still an active area of research. However, the investigations are mainly focused on the thermal properties and heat dissipation, whereas the electrical properties of the heterosubstrates and their potential benefits for the power electronics have not been extensively explored. In this work, we demonstrate the utilization of p-type doping of SiC heterosubstrate as a component of a reduced surface field (RESURF) structure to suppress electric field (E-field) crowding in lateral Ga2O3 FETs. The E-field crowding is one of the major issues that limit the breakdown voltages (BVs) of lateral high-voltage devices. The RESURF technology is firstly developed to address this issue in silicon devices , and is later implemented in SiC , , and GaN de- vices , showing remarkable benefits in terms of more evenly-distributed E-field, and thus higher BVs. As for Ga2O3, the lack of p-type doping techniques poses a fundamental challenge to realizing the RESURF structures. In contrast, p- type doping is readily available for SiC substrates. The upper limit of the acceptor doping concentration in SiC is as high as 1020 cm−3, with the feasibility of selective-area doping. Therefore, in addition to improving the thermal dissipation, arXiv:2401.10046v1 [physics.app-ph] 18 Jan 2024 2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2023 SiC RESURF structures. The device with RESURF structures withstands much higher V DS. In (b), the E-field along cutline g-g’ is shown in the positions, and are critical in the following discussion. The values of key simulation parameters in (a): LGS, LG, LGD, tc, tbuf, ND are 2 μm, 2 μm, 10 μm, 0.2 μm, 1.5 μm, and 3×1017 cm-3, respectively. One of the optimal values of NA, Lp, tp that used in (d) is 0.6×1017 cm-3, 7 μm, 0.65 μm, respectively. The breakdown is defined as the E-field in the Ga2O3 reaches 8 MV·cm-1, or the E-field in the SiC reaches 3 MV·cm-1. the Ga2O3-on-SiC heterosubstrate also offers an excellent platform to construct RESURF structures with n-type Ga2O3 to achieve a more evenly distributed E-field, and thus higher BV. To guide the experimental demonstration of the RESURF structures, the impact of key parameters, such as acceptor concentration (NA) and dimensions of the p-SiC region are studied. To mimic the realistic devices, the influences of Al2O3 binding interlayer and charges at the Ga2O3/SiC interface are investigated. In final, the charging/discharging rates of the p-SiC region during the fast switching transient are also investigated. II. PROPOSAL OF RESURF STRUCTURES AND FABRICATING FEASIBILITY As shown in Fig. 1, the device structure (Fig. 1 (a)) and the E-field distribution (Fig. 1 (b)) of the conventional heterosub- strate Ga2O3-on-SiC FET is compared with that of a proposed selective-area p-SiC RESURF FET (Fig. 1 (c) and (d)). In the conventional FET, the E-field crowds at the drain-side gate corner, and the BV of the device is 253 V. By introducing a selective-area p-SiC with optimal parameters (Fig. 1 (d)), the E-field is distributed over a larger area instead of crowding at the gate corner, benefiting to a higher BV of 2055 V. It is noticed that, the RESURF structures can be combined with other techniques (e.g., field plates , and p-NiO on the top surface) to further increase the BV of devices. The fabrication of the proposed RESURF Ga2O3-on-SiC FETs is feasible based on existing techniques. The con- ventional Ga2O3-on-SiC FETs have been successfully fabri- cated , , . Based on the existing devices, the fabri- cation of the proposed RESURF FETs requires two additional steps: (i) the selective area p-doping of the SiC substrate, and (ii) the Ohmic contact of the p-SiC. The selective-area p-doping technique is well-established and commonly used in SiC devices . Moreover, the doping of the SiC substrate can be done before integrated to the Ga2O3 layer, so the engineering of p-SiC region is rather independent from the following fabrication of Ga2O3 devices. As for the Ohmic contact, forming Ohmic contact to the p-SiC needs high temperature (600-1100 °C) annealing process , whereas forming Ohmic contact to the n-Ga2O3 needs low temperature (400-600 °C) annealing process . As a result, the Ohmic contact to the p-SiC should be formed before the formation of the Ohmic contact to the n-Ga2O3. Overall, utilizing the electrical properties of the heterosubstrate by the proposed RESURF structures would not add too much complexity to the device fabrication process. III. E-FIELD REGULATION IN RESURF STRUCTURES In this section, the impacts of the three key parameters, including the acceptor concentration (NA), the thickness (tp), and the length (Lp) of the p-SiC region (as illustrated in Fig. 1 (c)) are systemically studied. Meanwhile, the influence of the interface charges and the Al2O3 interlayer at the Ga2O3/SiC interface in practical devices are also discussed. In the following discussions, as labeled in Fig. 1 (c), three critical potential breakdown positions are: (i) the gate corner at drain side (point A), (ii) the p-SiC edge at drain side (line B’), and (iii) the corner of the drain-side n+-Ga2O3 (point C). We note that the E-field at point B is very close or equal (97-100% at CHEN et al.: RESURF Ga2O3-ON-SiC FETs (MONTH 2023) 3 Fig. 2. E-field strength along cutline (a) g-g’ and (b) h-h’ of FET with the n-Ga2O3/p-SiC RESURF structure with increasing NA at V DS = 800 V. Fixed Lp = 7 μm and tp = 0.8 μm (c) Overall BVs depending on the NA. VDS=800 V) to the peak value of the E-field along line B’. Therefore, for simplicity, the E-field at point B will be used to represent that along line B’. A. Acceptor Concentration of the p-SiC Fig. 2 (a) and (b) show the E-field distribution along the cutlines g-g’ and h-h’, respectively, with the different NA in the p-SiC at a VDS of 800 V. Without the RESURF structures, the E-field tends to crowd at point A, leading to low-voltage device breakdown. Low-level p-doping (NA in range of 0.2-0.6×1017 cm−3) contributes negative space charge in the p-SiC to terminate a part of the E-field that originally directs to point A, and results in a fast reduction of the E-field at point A from 12.2 MV·cm−1 to 3.1 MV·cm−1. However, as a compensation, the E-field at point B increases from 0.4 MV·cm−1 to 2.3 MV·cm−1. With the NA further increasing to 1.4×1017 cm−3, more holes in the p-SiC can further deplete the Ga2O3 channel. Consequently, the depletion region in the Ga2O3 extends toward drain terminal, leading to the E-field at point C increases from 0.4 MV·cm−1 to 6.9 MV·cm−1, and that at point B further increases to 3.2 MV·cm−1. Meanwhile, the E-field at point A shows less significant decrease (2.7 MV·cm−1 at NA of 1.4×1017 cm−3). Since line B’ (p-SiC) has a lower critical E-field (3 MV·cm−1) compared to point A (Ga2O3, 8 MV·cm−1), the Fig. 3. E-field strength along cutline (a) g-g’ and (b) h-h’ of FET with the n-Ga2O3/p-SiC RESURF structure with changing tp at V DS = 800 V. Fixed NA = 0.8×1017 cm-3 and Lp = 7 μm. (c) Overall breakdown voltages depending on the tp. breakdown point can easily transfer from point A to line B’ when the p-SiC starts to terminate the E-field. Fig. 2 (c) shows the relationship between the overall BV and NA. When the NA increases from 0.2×1017 to 0.5×1017 cm−3, the BV increases because the E-field at point A is reduced. Starting from the NA of 0.5×1017 cm−3, the breakdown at line B’ dominates the breakdown of the devices. The BV decreases with the further increasing of NA due to the increase of the E-field along line B’. Overall, the NA of 0.5×1017 cm−3 is the nearly balanced value for the E-field at points A and B to simultaneously reach their critical E-fields. B. Thickness of the p-SiC As shown in the Fig. 3 (a) and (b), the effect of tp on the E-field distribution is similar to that of NA. As expected, the increase of tp firstly redirects a portion of the E-field from point A to point B, indicated as a fast reduction of E- field at point A. Moreover, the further increase of tp extends the depletion region of the n-Ga2O3 channel toward drain terminal, resulting in the larger E-field from point C to point B. Similar to the overall trend in Fig. 2 (c), the BV increases with tp increasing from 0.2 μm to 0.5 μm (Fig. 3 (c)), owning to the reduction of E-field peak at point A. Then, the 4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2023 Fig. 4. E-field strength along cutline (a) g-g’ and (b) h-h’ of FET with the n-Ga2O3/p-SiC RESURF structure with changing Lp at V DS = 800 V. Fixed NA = 0.8×1017 cm-3 and tp = 0.6 μm. (c) Overall BVs depending on the Lp. BV decreases with the tp further increasing from 0.5 μm to 1.2 μm owing to the increase of the E-field peak at point B. Based on the analyses shown in Figs. 2 and 3, we conclude that an optimal overall BV of the device can be reached by carefully engineering the NA and tp in the p-SiC region with respect to a balanced E-field distribution simultaneously close to the critical points of the E-field at point A in Ga2O3 and point B in SiC. It is worth noting that, in both Fig. 2 (a) and Fig. 3 (a), E-field peaks appear at point C when the NA and tp is very large (at NA of 1.4×1017 cm−3 and tp of 1.2 μm, respectively). However, in those cases, the line B’ in the SiC breakdowns before the E-field at point C reaches the critical value. As a result, the E-field at point C would not be a critical concern as long as NA and tp is not aggressively large. C. Length of the p-SiC Fig. 4 (a) and (b) show the E-field distribution with different Lp. The p-SiC region with too short Lp can not sufficiently block the E-field from crowding at point A. An E-field peak of 8.5 MV·cm−1 can be seen at the Lp of 1 μm. On the other hand, the p-SiC should not be too close to the drain terminal, otherwise it will cause the E-field to crowd at point C. A sudden increase of the E-field peak at point C (22 MV·cm−1) can be found when the Lp reaches 9 μm (Fig. 4 (a)). When Fig. 5. Effects of the different types of charge at the Ga2O3/SiC interfaces on the BVs. Fixed NA = 0.6×1017 cm-3, tp = 0.6 μm, and Lp = 7 μm. the Lp is in a proper range (3-7 μm in this simulation), the E-field at point A and point B decreases monotonically with Lp increase (Fig. 4 (b)), because a longer p-SiC benefits to a longer depletion region in the Ga2O3 channel, and thus a smaller E-field at a same VDS bias. To sum up, an Lp of 7 μm is the optimal Lp in this simulation, which provides a wide depletion region in Ga2O3 channel, but does not lead to E-field crowing at point C. D. Interface Charge To mimic the realistic condition of device, the impact of net charges at the Ga2O3/SiC interface is studied. In Fig. 5, the BV with respect to the interface charge density is plotted. The BV is normalized to that of the device without interface charge. A small amount of negative charge (2×1011 cm−2) can act as field plates, which help blocking the point A from high E-field, thus slightly improve the breakdown voltage. As for the case where there is a large amount of negative interface charge, it is similar to the case where the Lp is very long (9 μm in Fig. 4). Excessive negative interface charge will cause the E-field to crowd at point C, lowering the breakdown voltage. Positive interface charge has monotonic impact on the breakdown voltage. The positive interface charge compensates the negative space charge in the p-SiC region, and thus elim- inates the improvement brought by the RESURF structures, causing the E-field to crowd at point A again. Moreover, the excessive positive interface charge can emit E-field to point A, further enhancing the E-field at point A. As a result, the BV decreases monotonically with positive interface charge. In practical applications, the interface charge at the Ga2O3/SiC interface should be carefully controlled. E. Al2O3 Interlayer An additional Al2O3 interlayer at the Ga2O3/SiC interface (Fig. 6 (a)) is often adopted to improve the interface binding quality and hence the thermal dissipation , . The E- field distribution with and without the 20-nm Al2O3 interlayer is compared in Fig. 6 (b) (cutline g-g’) and Fig. 6 (c) (cutline h-h’). The Al2O3 interlayer slightly weakens the impact of the CHEN et al.: RESURF Ga2O3-ON-SiC FETs (MONTH 2023) 5 Fig. 6. (a) Schematic illustration of Al2O3 interlayer. E-field strength along the cutlines (b) g-g’ and (c) h-h’ of the device with and without the 20-nm Al2O3 interlayer. Fixed NA = 0.8×1017 cm-3, tp = 0.8 μm, and Lp = 7 μm. V DS = 800 V. RESURF structure, leading to a 1.7% increase of peak E-field at point A, a 0.4% decrease of peak E-field at point B, and a 67% decrease of peak E-field at point C. As points A and B are the dominate breakdown points in proper designed devices, and the influence of the Al2O3 interlayer at points A and B is quite small, the Al2O3 interlayer in the practical devices will not limit the adoption of the proposed RESURF structures. In summary, with the preset dimensions and doping con- centration of the n-Ga2O3 channel epilayers, the optimal BV can be obtained when the point A and the line B’ reach their critical E-field simultaneously. In the example shown in Fig. 1 (d), by carefully engineering the NA and the dimen- sions of p-SiC, at VDS=BV=2055 V, the E-field at point A is 7.91 MV·cm−1, and that at point B is 2.99 MV·cm−1, indicating that point A and point B breakdown almost at the same time. Meanwhile, the interface charges should be minimized in practical fabrication process, and the binding interlayer has less impact on the BV. IV. SWITCHING SPEED OF RESURF DEVICES During practical switching process, VDS switches between high and low values. When the VDS switches to high values, holes will leave the p-SiC to establish a depletion region (Fig. 7 (a)). When the VDS switches to low values, holes will flow back to the p-SiC. The charging/discharging rate of the depletion region is limited by the contact resistance and sheet resistance of the p-SiC, and should be fast enough for high frequency applications. To estimate the (dis)charging time of the p-SiC’s depletion region, the simulation in Fig. 7 (b) is Fig. 7. (a) Schematic illustration of the depletion region in the p-SiC at high V DS bias, and its charging/discharging path. ”Cap.” represents the capacitor formed by the depletion region. ”Res.” is the equivalent resistance when charging/discharging the depletion region. (b) Illus- tration of the V DS waveform applied in the simulation. (c) Absolute current passing through the p-SiC region after a sudden rise/drop of V DS. (d) Extrapolated effective time constant (τeff) of (dis)charging the p-SiC region. Fixed NA = 0.6×1017 cm-3, tp = 0.6 μm, and Lp = 7 μm. The contact resistance of the Ohmic contact to the p-SiC is calibrated to 10-4 Ω·cm-2 . The hole mobility in SiC is estimated to be 100 cm2·V-1·s-1 according to the NA . V GS = −20 V. conducted. First, VDS is suddenly (within 0.1 ns) increased from 0 to 800 V (charging), or decreased from 800 to 0 V (dis- charging). Then, the current through the p-SiC is monitored (Fig. 7 (c)), from which the effective time constant (τeff) for charging/discharging are both estimated to be ∼0.5 ns after a ∼0.5 ns of oscillation (Fig. 7 (d)). Therefore, the (dis)charging time (usually defined at 5τeff) for the p-SiC’s depletion region is ∼2.5 ns. The fast (dis)charging rate demonstrates the feasibility of such p-SiC RESURF structures in high frequency (MHz level) switching applications. V. CONCLUSION In this work, the electrical properties of heat-dissipating Ga2O3-on-SiC heterosubstrate have been utilized to construct RESURF structures in Ga2O3 FETs. The proposed RESURF structures can evenly distribute the E-field to achieve higher BVs. With careful design of the NA and dimensions of p-SiC, as well as eliminating the interface charges, the BV can be improved from 253 V to 2055 V with the RESURF structures. The Al2O3 interlayer in the existing heterosubstrate devices has minimal influence on the RESURF structures. Addition- ally, RESURF Ga2O3-on-SiC FETs shows a fast (dis)charging rate for high-frequency switching applications. This study provides a demonstration of unlocking the full potential of heat-dissipating heterosubstrates by leveraging their electrical properties. 6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. XX, NO. XX, MONTH 2023