1 One-dimensional proximity superconductivity in the quantum Hall regime Julien Barrier,1,2* Minsoo Kim,1,3 Roshan Krishna Kumar, 4 Na Xin,1,2,5* P. Kumaravadivel,1,2 Lee Hague,2 E. Nguyen,1,2 A. I. Berdyugin,1,2 Christian Moulsdale,1,2 V. V. Enaldiev,1,2 J. R. Prance,6 F. H. L. Koppens,4 R. V. Gorbachev,1,2 K. Watanabe,7 T. Taniguchi,7 L. I. Glazman,8 I.V. Grigorieva,1,2 V. I. Fal’ko,1,2,9 A. K. Geim1,2,* 1 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 2 National Graphene Institute, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK 3 Department of Applied Physics, Kyung Hee University, South Korea 4 ICFO — Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain 5 Department of Chemistry, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 6 Department of Physics, University of Lancaster, Lancaster, UK 7 National Institute for Materials Science, Tsukuba, Japan 8 Department of Physics, Yale University, New Haven, USA 9 Henry Royce Institute for Advanced Materials, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK * To whom correspondence should be addressed: J.B. (julien.barrier@icfo.eu), N.X. (na.xin@zju.edu.cn) and A.K.G. (geim@manchester.ac.uk) Summary Extensive efforts have been undertaken to combine superconductivity and the quantum Hall effect so that Cooper-pair transport between superconducting electrodes in Josephson junctions is mediated by one-dimensional (1D) edge states1–6. This interest has been motivated by prospects of finding new physics, including topologically-protected quasiparticles7–9, but also extends into metrology and device applications10–13. So far it has proven challenging to achieve detectable supercurrents through quantum Hall conductors2,3,6. Here we show that domain walls in minimally twisted bilayer graphene14–18 support exceptionally robust proximity superconductivity in the quantum Hall regime, allowing Josephson junctions operational in fields close to the upper critical field of superconducting electrodes. The critical current is found to be non-oscillatory, practically unchanging over the entire range of quantizing fields, with its value being limited by the quantum conductance of ballistic strictly-1D electronic channels residing within the domain walls. The described system is unique in its ability to support Andreev bound states in high fields and offers many interesting directions for further exploration. Main text Proximity superconductivity based on quasi-1D conductors acting as weak links have attracted considerable interest from both fundamental and applied perspectives. This includes phenomena involving magnetic flux tunneling10,19 and the associated prospect of the ampere standard based on quantum phase slips11–13. In terms of applications, the critical current Ic in Josephson junctions (JJs) is normally suppressed by very weak perpendicular magnetic fields B because of Fraunhofer-type interference between Cooper pairs propagating along different trajectories20. If proximity superconductivity were provided by strictly-1D states, the suppression could be avoided allowing 2 superconducting quantum interference devices operational in high B. Of particular interest is the use of the quantum Hall (QH) conductors as weak links because not only this allows control of the mediating 1D states by gate voltage but also can lead to the realization of topologically-protected many-body quasiparticles (see, e.g., refs. 8,9). Despite the long-term interest in JJs incorporating QH conductors, the experimental progress has so far been limited mainly to the observation of influence of superconducting electrodes on normal-state transport and studies of so-called chiral Andreev edge states (CAES) that appear at superconductor-QH conductor interfaces1–6,21,22. Recently, proximity superconductivity in the QH regime was also reported for graphene-based JJs2,6,22. Supercurrents supported by QH edge states were found to be extremely fragile (critical current, Ic of ~ 1 nA at mK temperatures2,6,22,23) so that often the proximity could not be reproduced even for devices of conceptually similar designs20,24,25. Below, we describe an alternative route for achieving superconducting coupling deep in the QH regime. This utilizes boundaries between AB and BA domains in Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene14–18,26–30 which are found to serve as ballistic strictly-1D wires connecting superconducting electrodes in quantizing B where the graphene bulk becomes completely insulating for Cooper pairs. Fig. 1| Josephson junctions incorporating domain walls in minimally twisted graphene bilayers. (a) Device schematic showing a DW acting as a weak link in the QH regime. Regions with AB and BA stacking are illustrated by the circular insets. The carrier density was varied by applying gate voltage to a Si wafer shown in dark blue (Methods). Top inset: False-color electron micrograph of a typical device containing several edgeless JJs in series. MTGB is shown in green; NbTi in yellow. (b) Differential resistance as a function of Idc in small B for a junction with a single DW. Strong deviations from the Fraunhofer pattern (white curve) emerge above 10 mT. (c) Examples of dV/dI curves in the QH regime for the same junction. (d) Full map measured up to 7 T in steps of 10 mT. The red curve shows Ic defined as peak positions in dV/dI (Idc). The white curve marks the zero-resistance state’ boundary where a finite V emerged above the noise level. Data in panels b-d are for the same edged junction; W ≈ 3 μm, L ≈ 200 nm, n ≈ 2 ́1012 cm-2, 50 mK, Iac = 3 nA. The studied devices were made from minimally twisted graphene bilayers (MTGBs) as detailed in Methods. In brief, monolayer graphene was cut into two pieces that were then placed on top of each other using the parallel transfer accompanied by rotation at an angle of < 0.1° (see ‘Device fabrication’ 3 in Methods). Such an assembly is known to undergo lattice reconstruction that results in formation of relatively large regions of Bernal-stacked bilayer graphene, which are separated by narrow AB/BA domain walls (DWs) with the width w ≈ 10 nm14,15. The resulting domain structures could be visualized by piezo-force microscopy (Extended Data Fig. 1a) and, for MTGBs fully encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (see Methods), by photocurrent scanning microscopy (Extended Data Figs. 1b,c). Electron-beam lithography, dry etching and thin-film deposition were employed to make superconductor–normal metal–superconductors (SNS) junctions with MTGBs playing a role of the normal metal between superconducting (NbTi) electrodes separated by distances L of ~100–200 nm (Methods). The electrodes exhibited the critical temperature Tc ≈ 7.0 K and the upper critical field Hc2 ≈ 9.5 T. In total 8 devices were studied, each containing 3 to 7 MTGB junctions (Fig. 1a, Extended Data Figs. 1d,e). The junctions’ width W was between 0.5 and 4 μm, and they incorporated different numbers NDW of DWs to act as weak links between the NbTi electrodes (Fig. 1a). JJs were made in two geometries that we refer to as edged and edgeless, where graphene was either etched away everywhere, except for a narrow slit between the electrodes, or extended well beyond it, respectively (cf. schematics of Fig. 1a and Extended Data Fig. 1f). Comparison between the two geometries allowed us to assess the role played by graphene edges. As a reference, we also made similar JJs but without DWs (NDW = 0), as well as JJs incorporating extended defects (slits and wrinkles) connecting the NbTi electrodes (‘Josephson junctions without domain walls’ in Methods). In addition to the imaging, we employed normal-state electron transport to evaluate NDW within the examined JJs. To this end, two-probe conductance was measured at the neutrality point (NP) in high B (filling factor ν = 0). For JJs without DWs, their NP conductance approached zero, indicating that the MTGB bulk became insulating at ν = 0 (Extended Data Fig. 2). In contrast, devices with DWs exhibited a finite zero-ν conductance with values weakly dependent on T and close to 4e2/h per DW, where e is the electron charge and h the Planck constant (Extended Data Fig. 2d). This observation agrees with the theoretical expectation that, at the NP, AB/BA walls should support chiral spin-degenerate edge states17,18,29,30. Good correlation was found between NDW estimated from our imaging and zero-ν measurements (Extended Data Fig. 2b). Because DWs could shift and even disappear from JJs during fabrication (Methods) and their number was difficult to identify from the images if DWs were close to each other, below we label JJs according to the NDW values found from the transport measurements. To characterize JJs in the superconducting state, we measured their IV characteristics using small ac currents Iac of typically 2–5 nA and varying dc bias Idc (’Characterization of MTGB junctions’ in Methods). First, we focus on JJs’ behavior at high gate-induced electron densities (positive n > 1012 cm-2) which provided a low-resistance NS interface between MTGBs and NbTi electrodes (~10 Ω μm). In low B ≲ 50 mT, all our devices exhibited similar characteristics, independent of NDW and their design (including the reference JJs). Examples are provided in Fig. 1b and Extended Data Fig. 3a that show differential resistance dV/dI maps around zero B. They are dominated by the expected interference (Fraunhofer) oscillations, although deviations from the standard dependence (white curves) are also notable. Such behavior is typical for graphene JJs20,25. In the intermediate B (before entering the QH regime), Ic(B) did not decay μ 1/B, as expected for the conventional SNS junctions, but instead exhibited giant fluctuations with numerous pockets of the zero-resistance state, which persisted up to a few T in our shortest junctions (Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 4). This ‘mesoscopic’ behavior is characteristic of ballistic JJs20 and, again, was observed for all our devices. Both low- and intermediate- B regimes were discussed in detail previously20,25 and are briefly reviewed in Methods. Accordingly, our emphasis below is on the proximity superconductivity that emerged in the QH regime and was exclusive to JJs containing DWs. 4 From the semiclassical perspective, ballistic junctions enter the QH regime if the cyclotron diameter 2rc becomes smaller than L so that only skipping orbits along edges (or DWs) connect the superconducting electrodes directly. In the normal state, the onset of the QH regime was evident as a rapid increase of the two-probe resistance and the concurrent appearance of Shubnikov-de Haas (SdH) oscillations (Extended Data Figs. 2a,5,10a). In this regime, no supercurrent could be discerned in any JJ without DWs, neither for the edged nor edgeless geometry, nor in reference devices (Fig. 2a, Extended Data Fig. 5), even in JJs incorporating the narrow (< 10 nm) slits that supported closely-spaced counterpropagating edge states (see Extended Data Fig. 5c and ’Josephson junctions without domain walls’ in Methods). This agrees with the previous reports20,23–25, especially taking into account our highly transparent NS interfaces such that CAES are expected to decohere at short distances6. In stark contrast, every JJ with DWs exhibited proximity superconductivity that extended deep into the QH regime (Figs. 1c,d; Extended Data Fig. 3b) and could approach Hc2 within ~1 T (Extended Data Fig. 4b). This shows that DWs provide an exceptionally robust channel for Cooper-pair transport. Comparing JJs with different NDW, we found that each DW could typically carry a supercurrent of ~ 10 nA (Extended Data Figs. 3,8). To emphasize robustness and reproducibility of the DW-supported proximity, we also studied the inverse ac Josephson effect (Shapiro steps) in the QH regime and found good agreement between the experiment and theory (Extended Data Fig. 9). Fig. 2| Supercurrent in the QH regime for different numbers of domain walls. Differential resistance maps for JJs without DWs (a) and with one DW (b), two DWs (c) and 14 ±4 DWs (d). All the devices were electron doped with n ≈ 2-3 ́1012 cm-2. B varied in steps of ~ 50 μT, T ≈ 50 mK, Iac = 5 nA. Color scales in Ω. (a-c) measured at B = 3 T, (d) at 5 T. Looking in more detail, for JJs with a single DW, the proximity superconductivity not only persisted deep into the QH regime but also exhibited a qualitative change in behavior such that, counterintuitively, supercurrents appeared to be stabilized by quantizing fields. Indeed, giant fluctuations in Ic(B), characteristic of intermediate B, were suppressed for 2rc ≲ L where Ic remained constant over extended field intervals of ~ 0.1 T (Fig. 2b, Extended Data Figs. 6b,c). This is in contrast to the case of 2rc > L, where the superconductivity was confined to mT-scale pockets (Fig. 1d; ref. 20). Furthermore, Ic varied relatively little over the entire interval of quantizing B (despite strong and oscillating changes in the normal-state resistance) and disappeared only on approach to Hc2. On top of this gradual variation, we observed numerous abrupt changes, mostly small but occasionally substantial in magnitude (Fig. 1d, d a c b δB (mT) Idc (nA) 40 30 20 10 0 -25 0 25 0 DW, 3T 0 600 δB (mT) Idc (nA) 40 30 20 10 0 -25 0 25 1 DW, 3T 0 400 δB (mT) Idc (nA) 20 15 10 5 0 -50 0 50 2 DW, 3T 0 200 δB (mT) Idc (nA) 10 5 0 -50 0 50 multiple DWs, 5T 0 200 5 Extended Data Fig. 7). They were irreproducible for different sweeps of B and different sweep directions (Extended Data Fig. 7) and attributed to jumps of pinned vortices in the NbTi electrodes. This is generally expected because Andreev bound states responsible for Josephson coupling should depend on the superconducting order parameter in the vicinity of DWs and, hence, local vortex configurations5,21. For JJs with multiple DWs, the behavior could also be understood from the same perspective. For two DWs, the supercurrent was approximately twice as high as for one DW and showed oscillations nearly periodic in B (Fig. 2c), as expected for interference between constant supercurrents carried by two channels. The observed periodicity in B was a few times longer than that for the Fraunhofer oscillations near zero B, which yielded that, in the QH regime, the characteristic area per flux quantum φ0 = h/2e was smaller than the total JJ area L ́W, in agreement with two supercurrent channels being present within the junction. For many DWs, the oscillating pattern became aperiodic and was interrupted more frequently by vortex jumps (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4b). This agrees with the presence of multiple supercurrent channels, which should result in a convoluted interference pattern that is further complicated by vortices intervening at many locations. The most revealing feature of the behavior observed for single-DW junctions is minimal variations in Ic over a wide range of B. If the supercurrent were due to Andreev bound states arising from QH states counterpropagating at the opposite sides of the DW, one would expect Aharonov-Bohm oscillations with the periodicity ΔB ≈ φ0 /(w+2rc)L < 0.1 T where 2rc accounts for the extent of QH edge states into the graphene bulk (‘Steady supercurrent along a single domain wall’ in Methods). No sign of such oscillatory behavior was observed in our JJs (Figs. 1d,2b; Extended Data Figs. 6,7). Even including vortex jumps, Ic(B) in the QH regime varied by less than a third over intervals > 3 T (Fig. 2d), which ruled out any underlying oscillations with ΔB < 10 T. The latter value translates into a spatial scale φ0 /ΔBL ≲ 1 nm, much less than even the superconducting coherence length in NbTi. This means that QH edge states could not be responsible for the observed proximity. This is also consistent with the fact that our slits with the width of < 10 nm supported no supercurrent in the QH regime despite the nearby counterpropagating edge states. To explain Ic(B) that remained steady over several Tesla, we refer to recent calculations that suggested the presence of 1D channels inside DWs29, which differ from the well-known 1D states that appear if an energy gap is opened in the graphene bulk17,18,26–28. These internal channels are valley degenerate so that Andreev bound states involving the 1D electrons do not encircle any magnetic flux. This explains constant Ic(B) such as shown in Fig. 2b and Extended Data Figs. 6b,c. The remaining variations in supercurrent over larger B intervals can be attributed to a gradual suppression of the order parameter as vortices jump and pack up at the NS interface. The magnitude of the supercurrents observed in the QH regime (up to 20 nA per DW) is also revealing. In zero B, the Ic(T) dependence (Extended Data Fig. 8a) was exponential with the characteristic energy δE ≈ 0.2 meV (for details, see Methods). This suggests that our ballistic JJs were in the long-junction regime where the supercurrent was limited by decoherence of Andreev bound states rather than the superconducting gap, in agreement with the previous conclusions for ballistic 2D junctions20,31,32. The value of Ic in zero B is well described by δE / eRn where Rn is the normal-state resistance of the JJs. This is again in agreement with refs.20,31. It is reasonable to expect that the decoherence should be equally important for our 1D channels of the same length L and, therefore, roughly the same δE limited the critical current along DWs. This reasoning is consistent with the T dependence observed in the QH regime (Extended Data Fig. 8c). Although Rn for the discussed range of high B and n was, typically, ~ 0.5 kΩ (Fig. 2), this value arises mostly due to bulk carriers20. The supercurrent itself was provided by DWs and should then be limited by their resistance, that is, by h/4e2 (only one 1D sub-band is expected to be occupied29; Extended Data Fig. 2d). Accordingly, we expect Ic ≈ (δE/e)/(h/4e2) ≈ 30 nA. 6 This agrees well with the experiment, especially considering an additional contact resistance at the 1D- 3D interface between the DW and NbTi electrodes, which should reduce Ic. Finally, we discuss how the 1D proximity superconductivity was affected by the carrier density, n. In low B, the n-dependences were similar for all our JJs, with or without DWs (Fig. 3a). In comparison to the previous reports using JJs made from monolayer graphene20,25, the only notable difference was the near absence of Fabry-Pérot (FP) oscillations in our devices. Such oscillations require a limited transparency of the NS interface to allow standing waves and were previously observed for hole doping where interfacial pn junctions provided suitable conditions20,25. The 2D-3D interface for our bilayer JJs was quite transparent even for hole doping and caused only weak FP oscillations near zero B (Fig. 3a). In the QH regime, the NS interface changed its character into 1D-3D and no supercurrent could be detected for hole doping because of high resistance of the interfacial pn junctions (Fig. 3b). On the other hand, pronounced oscillations in Ic(n) were observed for electron doping where the 1D-3D interface was more transparent. These oscillating are attributed to FP resonances that occur each time an integer number of half the 1D Fermi wavelength matches the domain wall length L (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 10). A surprising feature of the observed FP oscillations was that their period changed little with decreasing n, even approaching the NP (Figs. 3b,c). This behavior described in detail in Methods seems difficult to reconcile with the fact that the electron wavelength generally diverges at zero carrier density. Nonetheless, the observed periodicity is in good quantitative agreement with that expected for our specific 1D channels (Fig. 3c) where electrons inside the DWs retain a finite density even in the case of charge-neutral bilayers29 (see Supplementary Information). Fig. 3| Fabry-Pérot oscillations in supercurrent provided by a single DW. (a and b) Differential resistance as a function of doping and dc bias in zero field and the QH regime, respectively. In panel b, B = 3 T corresponds to 2rc < L for all n. Positive and negative n correspond to electron and hole doping, respectively. Same JJ as in Fig. 1, T ≈ 50 mK, Iac = 5 nA. White arrows in b indicate minima in Ic. (c) Observed minima’s positions in n (symbols) compared with the expected FP resonances for 1D electrons inside a 10-nm-wide DW with L = 160 nm (solid curve). For details, see Methods and Supplementary Information. Horizontal error bars: uncertainty is determining the minima’s positions (Extended Data Fig. 10). 7 To conclude, AB/BA domain walls are unique in their ability to support Andreev bound states in the QH regime. The walls allow high critical currents, nearing the theoretical limit, which are practically independent of B due to the strictly-1D nature of electronic states inside the walls. This ballistic system offers many interesting directions for further exploration. For example, if the energy gap is opened in the bilayer graphene bulk by biasing the two layers17, the 1D states inside AB/BA domain walls acquire topological protection29 and should allow chiral supercurrents3–6, which is an essential albeit not sufficient condition for the realization of non-abelian anyons5,33. It would also be interesting to find how the observed proximity superconductivity is affected if the spin or valley degeneracy is lifted by exchange interactions, which may, e.g., allow tunable p junctions. Furthermore, because the 1D Andreev bound states are tunnel-coupled to the graphene bulk, there is an intriguing possibility to explore interaction of the supercurrents with fractional and, especially, even-denominator QH states that were observed in encapsulated bilayer graphene and suggested to contain non-abelian quasiparticles8. Finally, AB/BA domain walls provide interesting venues not only within the physics of low-D superconductivity, but also in terms of normal-state transport due to their unusually long, wire- like geometry while preserving ballistic properties. Such 1D systems are exceptionally rare and could be used to address a number of phenomena in 1D including Luttinger liquids.