1 Title: Mixed equilibrium/nonequilibrium effects govern surface mobility in polymer glasses Authors: Jianquan Xu1, Asieh Ghanekarade2, Li Li1, Huifeng Zhu1, Hailin Yuan3, Jinsong Yan3, David S. Simmons2*, Ophelia K. C. Tsui3,4*, Xinping Wang1* Affiliations: 1School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Surface & Interface Science of Polymer Materials of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Sci-Tech University, Hangzhou 310018, China. 2Department of Chemical, Biological, and Materials Engineering, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33620, United States. 3Department of Physics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 999077, China. 4William Mong Institute of Nano Science and Technology, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 999077, China. *Corresponding authors. Emails: dssimmons@usf.edu (DSS); okctsui@ust.hk (OKCT); and wxinping@zstu.edu.cn (XW). Abstract: The temperature at which supercooled liquids turn into solid-like glasses (Tg) can change at the free surface, affecting the properties of nanostructured glasses and their applications. However, inadequate experimental resolution to determine the Tg gradient and a longstanding debate over the role of nonequilibrium effects have hindered fundamental understanding of this phenomenon. Using spatially resolved Tg measurements and molecular dynamics simulations, we reveal a crossover from equilibrium behavior to a new regime of near- surface nonequilibrium glass physics on cooling. This crossover causes the form of the nonequilibrium Tg gradient to change, highlighting the need to include these physics for rational understanding of the properties of realistic nanostructured glass-forming materials. They also potentially recast the interpretation of decades of experimental data on nanoconfined glasses. 2 Introduction Since the 1990s (1, 2), it has been well-established that the glass transition temperatures (Tg) of organic and polymer glass-formers change upon confinement in nano-scale domain size (h). These alterations have garnered significant attention. On the one hand, they play a central role in determining diverse properties of nanostructured materials, such as viscosity (3), dielectric response (4), thermal expansivity (5, 6), and heat capacity (7). On the other hand, the observation of broken-symmetry or finite-size alterations in the glass transition has long been anticipated to shed light on the nature of glass formation itself—a longstanding problem in condensed matter physics. However, it remains unsettled how the surface-induced alterations in dynamics and Tg propagate into the material over distances of 10 nm (8, 9) to 1 m (10-12), which is far greater than the propagation of alterations in thermodynamics and structural properties (8, 9). Over the past decade, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have revealed a coherent picture of alterations in dynamics near interfaces under equilibrium conditions. This understanding suggests that the relaxation time () of glasses exhibit a double exponential gradient over 10 nm from the surface (9, 13-16), and the associated equilibrium dynamical Tg, denoted as Tgeq, takes on an exponential gradient form (15). Experimental confirmation of these gradient has been suggested as a critical indicator of the nanoconfinement effect and could potentially reveal insights into the mechanism of the glass transition (15). However, there have been concerns about whether these gradient forms obtained from simulations (which have relatively short timescales of ≤ 1 s) persist at experimental timescales (which are typically 100 s at the glass transition). But several results suggest that this should be a significant issue. For instance, simulations by Kob et al. (13) and Hocky et al. (14) showed that the double- exponential mobility gradient saturates rather than continuing to evolve with increasing simulation times. Recent experiments by Li et al. (17) and Zhang et al. (18) also support the double-exponential form of the gradient of surface diffusivity in organic glasses and relaxation time in a colloidal glass, respectively. To confirm if the exponential form of Tg gradient found in simulations is also present in experiment, we conducted measurements using three surface techniques with different probe depths to determine the local Tg as a function of depth (z) in various polymers. Our results show that the Tg(z) gradients are linear in z. It is important to note that the experiments by Li et al. (17) and Zhang et al. (18) were conducted at temperatures (T) above the bulk Tg (Tg,bulk), while ours were conducted at or below Tg,bulk, making our experiments more susceptible to nonequilibrium effects. Experimental studies typically define Tg by observing a gain (or loss) of equilibrium during heating (or cooling). Since these studies necessarily involve the system in a nonequilibrium state before (or after) the glass transition, we refer to this Tg as the nonequilibrium Tg (Tgne). In contrast, typical simulations as discussed above (8, 9, 13, 15) and some experiments (3, 4, 19) measure viscosity or  at a fixed temperature under equilibrium or during a slow temperature scan (20). These studies investigate equilibrium dynamics and the equilibrium Tgeq and are commonly used to gain insights into the physics of glass transition. The difference between Tgne and Tgeq in terms of the involvement of a nonequilibrium state during the glass transition have sparked a long-standing debate on whether nonequilibrium effects may impact common experimental measurements of Tg (20, 21). This highlights the potential necessity of considering nonequilibrium effects when interpreting experimental results. 3 To gain a better understanding of our experimental result and the potential influence of nonequilibrium effects on the glassy dynamics of nanoconfined glasses in general, we perform MD simulations on the near-surface dynamics of long-chain polymers, incorporating extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, associated with an initially nonequilibrium chain conformational state, and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects, which refer to the unavoidable loss of equilibrium at Tgne, to the systems. The results from these simulations not only explain the observed Tg(z) gradient in our experiment, but also shed light on the puzzling “onset behavior” observed in experiments, where the temperature dependence of  of polymer nanofilms qualitatively changes just below Tgne. Our findings suggest the presence of new nonequilibrium physics that transforms the magnitude and basic form of near-interface alterations in dynamics and Tg relative to the purely equilibrium limit. This provides valuable insights into the dynamics of nanoconfined glasses and highlights the importance of considering nonequilibrium effects in future studies. Results To measure the Tgne(z) profiles in cyclic PMMA (c-PMMAm) and linear PMMA (l-PMMAm) with varying degrees of polymerization (m), we have used a method we developed recently (22, 23). This method involves labeling the polymer with a fluoro-tracer and determining the temperature at which it gains mobility on heating, which is used as the Tgne. By using a combination of water contact angle measurements, sum-frequency generation vibrational spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to finely adjust the measurement probe depth, z, we obtain the local Tgne at varying z with nanoscale resolution. In Fig. 1, we present the Tgne(z) data for the studied c-PMMAm. The results indicate that beyond a depth of 1–2 nm from the surface, Tgne (z) increases linearly with z until it reaches the bulk Tg,bulkne. The penetration depth, ht (= 7.8 nm) at which Tg,bulkne is recovered is independent of molecular weight, consistent with previous findings on the near-surface relaxation time of linear polystyrene (l-PS) (24). The observed linear gradient is also consistent with our l-PMMA data (see fig. S1) and published data for l-PMMA (22) and l-PS (23). Our findings demonstrate that the experimentally measured Tgne(z) differs from the exponential form observed for Tgeq(z) in simulations (15). To determine whether this difference arises from nonequilibrium effects, we conduct simulations of glass formation in freestanding long-chain polymer films and their bulk counterpart upon incorporating both extrinsic and intrinsic nonequilibrium effects. To incorporate extrinsic nonequilibrium effects, we perform melt-quench simulations in which long- chain conformational statistics begin and remain modestly out of equilibrium, which qualitatively mimics the effect of trapped nonequilibrium chain configurations commonly produced during fabrication of polymer films. To investigate intrinsic nonequilibrium effects at simulation versus experimental timescales, we devise a simulation protocol to analyze changes in Tgne (z) as the simulation time scale (tANN,max, the maximum annealing time applied to the system) increases. By comparing these results with Tgeq (z), we evaluate if nonequilibrium effects can explain the experimentally observed linear Tgne (z). To control the nonequilibrium effects, we employ a two-step protocol in our simulations. First, we subject the system to a high-temperature configurational annealing, where we control the extrinsic nonequilibrium effects. Then we thermally quench it to various measurement 4 temperatures (T) and perform an isothermal (segmental) annealing for a maximum duration of tANN,max to control the intrinsic nonequilibrium effects (see Supplementary Simulation Method). Consequently, the system falls out of equilibrium when bulk—the relaxation time in the middle of the film, which resembles bulk behavior—exceeds tANN,max. Therefore, Tg,bulkne is approximately the temperature at which bulk = tANN,max. To maintain consistency, we define Tg,bulkeq as the temperature at which bulk equals tANN,max under equilibrium. In our simulation, tANN,max is initially set to 106 Lennard-Jones time (τLJ). We measure  at z from the intermediate scattering function of the polymers at z (Supplementary Simulation Method). Fig. 2A displays the  data obtained at several z’s near the surface and in the middle of the film plotted versus 1/T. Solid lines are fits of the equilibrium data, employing the vertical dotted line as a cutoff (which warrants that  << tANN,max) to a validated functional form for the temperature dependence of equilibrium dynamics (25). At lower temperatures, we continue to employ these fit curves (colored solid curves) to extrapolate the equilibrium dynamics at all the depths examined, as validated previously (26). Inside the mid-film, which emulates bulk behavior, the data (orange squares) closely obey the equilibrium line down to temperatures where  is greater than tANN,max, showing that Tg,bulkne ≅ Tg,bulkeq, as found before (20). In the near-surface region (z  3.0625), however,  increasingly deviates from the equilibrium curves with decreasing z for T < Tg.bulkne, suggesting that intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are more effective in altering dynamics closer to the surface. Similar to Tg,bulkne and Tg,bulkeq, we determine Tgeq(z) and Tgne(z) by finding the temperatures where the equilibrium curves and nonequilibrium data, respectively, intersect the dotted line representing  = 106 τLJ (= tANN,max) in Fig. 2A. The fractional change in Tgne(z) and Tgeq(z) relative to Tg,bulkeq is compared in Fig. 2B. As one can see, Tgeq(z) (filled squares) exhibits an exponential gradient, while Tgne(z) (orange circles) exhibits a linear regime at the surface. When we decrease tANN,max to 105, which is equivalent to decreasing the degree of supercooling or increasing the effective cooling rate q (= 1/tANN,max), the linear regime of the Tgne(z) gradient (green diamonds) penetrates less far into the films, while Tgeq(z) (open squares) remains unchanged. In this simulation,  = 106 τLJ corresponds to 1 s and the length scale of the bead- spring potential,   1 nm. Since the penetration depth of Tgne(z) grows with supercooling, a modest naïve extrapolation suggests that the entire gradient would plausibly be linear by the experimental timescale at Tgne, which is consistent with our experimental results. Our findings above provide insights into the source of the nonequilibrium effects. First, they cannot arise purely from extrinsic nonequilibrium (chain conformation) effects because nonequilibrium chain conformations exist above Tg,bulk, and yet our Tgeq(z) data continue to report an exponential gradient like that in prior simulations of short chains possessing conformational equilibrium (15). We further show in figs. S2 and S3 that improving chain equilibrium weakens but does not eliminate deviations of  from the equilibrium curves in the vicinity of Tgne. Therefore, it appears that the nonequilibrium effects found here are causally driven, to leading order, by the intrinsic loss of equilibrium near Tgne. We have observed that the “onset behavior”, a long-standing anomaly of nanoconfined glasses, is also found near Tgne. In this behavior,  begins to exhibit an Arrhenius T-dependence at low temperatures (as opposed to the Vogel-Fucher-Tammann T-dependence commonly exhibited by glasses), which has been previously observed (7, 27, 28). We explore whether the same intrinsic nonequilibrium effects can explain this onset behavior. In Fig. 3A, we 5 demonstrate the onset behavior in our experimental l-PMMA173 system through the data of log(q) versus 1/Tgne of nano-films determined by ellipsometry (various symbols). Here, Tgne denotes the mean-film Tg measured on heating the films at rate q. The data shows that the various film thicknesses exhibit Arrhenius T-dependences that extrapolate upward to a point (open circle) on or near the bulk curve (solid line). To gain insight into this observation from our simulations, we extrapolate the simulated Tgeq(z) and Tgne(z) gradients to longer timescales and average them over supported films (on a dynamically non-perturbing substrate) of comparable thicknesses to yield the mean-film values of Tgeq and Tgne (see Supplementary Simulation Method). The result, shown in Fig. 3B, reveals that the logarithmic rate vs 1/Tgne data (dashed curves) exhibits an upward concavity that is absent in the equilibrium Tgeq data (dotted curves). Mathematically, this is a qualitative consequence of the growing range of the linear nonequilibrium regime with increasing tANN,max (or 1/q) (Fig. 2B). Practically, this leads to the emergence at low temperature of a regime of nearly Arrhenius dynamics. If we infer data points from these extrapolations over a timescale range and resolution comparable to various cooling- rate-Tg experiments (shown as solid circles in Fig. 3B), the results essentially replicate the onset behavior reported in Fig. 3A. Specifically, Arrhenius fits to these data (colored solid lines) extrapolated upward towards a convergent point close to the equilibrium bulk curve (black solid line). In contrast, the Tgeq (dotted) curves do not exhibit this convergence, but is projected to continue following the fractional power law decoupling behavior (29) previously reported in simulation and predicted in theory. While these curves find an appreciable departure from the bulk curve, it is much weaker than that observed for the nonequilibrium curves. These observations show that the low temperature experimental onset behavior results from a linear gradient in Tgne caused by intrinsic nonequilibrium effects. The fact that the onset behavior has been observed in small molecule glasses (28), which lack the long-ranged conformational modes present in polymers (27), indicates that extrinsic nonequilibrium effects are insignificant in the onset behavior. Furthermore, this behavior is found whether Tgne is obtained by heating (Fig. 3A) or cooling (27, 28), which further reinforces the interpretation that intrinsic nonequilibrium effects are the main contributing factor to the onset behavior. Discussion and Conclusion Our observations suggest a unified picture of altered dynamics and glass formation near a free surface. In equilibrium, surfaces induce an exponential Tgeq gradient along with a weak long- ranged tail, which is consistent with the simulation literature (15) and experiments(17, 18). However, as the system falls out of equilibrium on cooling through Tgne, intrinsic nonequilibrium effects qualitatively modify and enhance the surface-induced gradient in Tg. A linear nonequilibrium gradient progressively grows inward from the surface with increasing equilibration timescale (or equivalently decreasing thermal quench rate), leading to an onset of much stronger and more Arrhenius (log q vs 1/Tg) average-Tg shifts. It is this average-Tg shift that is probed in many experiments that report the onset of a new regime of behavior at low temperatures and rates. Besides this onset behavior, several other anomalous experimental observations, such as extraordinarily long-ranged Tg gradients at polymer-polymer interfaces (11) and reports of two-distinct Tg’s in some thin films systems(30), also emanate from Tgne measurements that we now know are susceptible to nonequilibrium phenomena. This may suggest a new foundation for understanding these remarkable observations by adding nonequilibrium effects into consideration. Results of this work and two recent experiments (17, 6 18) suggest that the interfacial dynamical behavior observed in previous computer simulations (9, 13-15) likely represents the genuine equilibrium dynamical situation extended to experimental timescales and can be used to validate extant theories of glass transition (15) and shed light into the nature of the glass transition. However, the mechanism by which intrinsic nonequilibrium effects produce deviations of ne from the equilibrium counterpart (Fig. 2A) is unintuitive. Specifically, the deviations are more pronounced closer to the surface even though the relaxation time in that region is shorter and equilibrium can be attained more rapidly. We suggest that intrinsic nonequilibrium effects may be driven by a non-local effect, which originates from a nonequilibrium density profile ((z)) that emerges near the surface below Tg,bulkne (31). Using simulations, we have obtained one such profile and presented it in Fig. 4A. This profile displays a peak near the surface (at z = 0) when the temperature falls below Tg,bulkne (the density data as a function of temperature can be found in table S1). The underlying cause of this phenomenon can be seen in the temperature dependence of the equilibrium (liquid) and nonequilibrium (glassy) densities shown in Fig. 4B. When the temperature falls below Tg,bulkne, the mid-film that resembles the bulk starts to follow the weaker temperature dependence of glass density (blue dashed line), reflecting a nonequilibrium decrease in density due to the vitrification of this bulk-like part of the film. As cooling continues below the bulk Tg, the density peak near the surface becomes more prominent. This nonequilibrium effect cannot impact the mid-film Tg, because it emerges below the mid-film Tg (upon cooling) as a result of the loss of equilibrium at Tg,bulk. However, as shown in Fig. 4A, at their local Tgeq, molecules just beneath the surface are sandwiched between the surface and a counterintuitively less dense and thus softer vitreous underlayer. Prior theory (32), experiment (11, 33), and simulation work (34) have indicated that nanoscale proximity to a soft domain tends to enhance dynamics. Therefore, in addition to the equilibrium effect of a dynamical enhancement by the free surface, these molecules also experience a nonequilibrium enhancement of dynamics by their proximity to a softer underlayer. Consequently, Tgeq is further suppressed beyond what would be expected from equilibrium dynamics. Moreover, since the relative softness of the underlayer driving this effect increases as the system is cooled more (see Fig. 4B), this additional dynamical enhancement is more pronounced for material closer to the surface, which has a lower Tg even under equilibrium conditions. This explains why the nonequilibrium enhancement in dynamics is most prominent near the free surface as shown in Fig. 2. In essence, this nonequilibrium effect amplifies the equilibrium dynamical gradient with an additional dynamic-enhancing mechanism. However, because this mechanism is based on the underlying equilibrium dynamical enhancement present at the free surface, it would not occur without the underlying equilibrium effect in the first place. Collectively, our results indicate that nonequilibrium effects play a central role in mediating the thermal and dynamical properties of thin films and nanostructured glasses. Furthermore, those properties can be modulated both by tuning the thermal pathway (and hence Tgne) or trapping nonequilibrium molecular conformations at high temperatures. These possibilities allow for new strategies to rationally control the properties of diverse nanostructured materials. In contrast, most current theories of altered dynamics near interfaces focus on purely equilibrium systems. Given the envisaged opportunities, extending these theories to account for nonequilibrium effects should be a priority in future work. 7