1 Designing for effective heat transfer in a solid thermal energy storage system Shomik Verma, Colin Kelsall, Kyle Buznitsky, Alina LaPotin, Ashwin Sandeep, Asegun Henry* Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A. * ase@mit.edu 1. Abstract Thermal energy storage using sensible heating of a solid storage medium is a potential low-cost technology for long-duration energy storage. To effectively get heat in and out of the solid material, channels of heat transfer fluid can be embedded within the storage material. Here we present design principles to improve performance of channel- embedded thermal energy storage systems, and we apply these principles to a high- temperature system using graphite as the storage material and liquid tin as the heat transfer fluid. We first analyze the impact of geometry and material properties on the performance of the system, determining the ideal channel spacing and length to achieve high (dis)charge temperature uniformity. We then analyze how controlling the fluid flowrate, heating infrastructure, and heat engine can increase discharge power uniformity and accelerate charging. Finally, we model 100 high-temperature graphite storage blocks using a porous media approximation and implement the developed design principles to demonstrate significant improvement in performance for both discharging (constant discharge power for >90% of rated duration) and charging (>90% charged within 4 hours). Overall, the hierarchical design procedure presented here enables the design of cheap yet high-performing solid thermal energy storage systems. Keywords: thermal energy storage, solid storage material, channel-embedded, performance improvements, discharge power uniformity, charging acceleration, grid- scale storage, porous media approximation 2. Introduction Renewables such as solar produce clean but intermittent electricity. Large-scale penetration of solar requires long-duration energy storage (>10 hours) to reliably meet demand and provide cleanly generated electricity at night or on cloudy days.1 Energy systems modeling shows the energy capacity cost (ECC, dollars per amount of thermal energy stored in kWh) is an important metric for evaluating long-duration energy storage technologies, and that an ECC of less than $20/kWh is critical for cost-competitiveness of renewables with storage technologies.2 Thermal energy storage (TES) is one promising technology with low ECC.3 In this energy storage technology, electricity is stored in the form of heat. Electricity can be converted to heat through resistance heating or heat pumps, and heat can be stored 2 through latent or sensible heating of a material surrounded by insulation to retain the heat, and heat can be converted back to electricity using a variety of heat engines including turbines, thermoelectrics, or thermophotovoltaics.4,5 There are a few important considerations for the storage material. First, we must choose cheap materials that can store high amounts of heat because of the emphasis on low ECC. Second, we should maximize the amount of thermal energy stored per volume to reduce insulation costs. Lastly, we should maximize the operating temperature to ensure high heat to electricity conversion efficiency. As shown in Figure 1(a), the materials with the lowest cost per unit thermal energy, highest energy density, and highest operating temperature are generally solids and rely on sensible heating. These solid storage systems require a heat exchanger to be integrated into the storage material for charging or discharging.6 There are different types of heat transfer mechanisms, including a radiative heater relying on radiation between a hot emitter and the storage medium, direct Joule heating of the storage medium, and a fluid-based heat exchanger using a heat transfer fluid (HTF) to carry the heat. Radiative heating can have high heat transfer resistance, and direct Joule heating depends on the electrical properties of the storage medium reducing flexibility in material choices. In contrast, fluid-based heat exchange enables low heat transfer resistance and cheap storage materials, so is often preferred. The challenge of using a solid storage material is that it may perform poorly from a heat transfer perspective. Specifically, the system would ideally output a constant temperature (and power) with time, to operate like an electrochemical battery, be in alignment with how the grid is currently operated, help improve reliability, and take advantage of price spikes. Systems that use liquids as the storage material, in either one or two tanks, can generally output high-temperature heat as long as hot fluid remains in the tank.7–10 Solid storage systems can be significantly worse, because as the storage material cools, the outlet temperature of the HTF decreases, potentially reducing the amount of power discharged from the TES system.9 Despite being cheap and energy dense, this can put solid storage systems at a disadvantage when compared to other forms of energy storage, and it is therefore important to design the heat transfer infrastructure for maximum performance. 3 maximum amount of heat (assuming 500°C for sensible heating) without decomposing. Solids enable the lowest cost and highest energy densities, as well as other benefits including achieving high temperatures and limited corrosion. Data used to create this plot is presented in Section S1. (b) Thermal energy grid storage (TEGS) system considered in this work. The system can be divided into charging and discharging infrastructure. For charging, electricity from any desired source is used to heat up liquid tin to high temperatures (~2400oC) with resistive heating. The hot tin then flows through graphite storage blocks to heat them up, storing the energy in the form of sensible heat. During discharge, cold (~1900oC) tin flows through the graphite blocks, heating up, and the hot tin then flows to the power block featuring multi-junction thermophotovoltaic (TPV) cells which convert the heat to electricity. Graphite is the storage medium and liquid tin is the heat transfer fluid. (c) Side cross-section view of a graphite storage block with embedded liquid tin channels, and top view of a graphite storage block showing the tin channel inlets. Dashed lines show how the larger block can be split into 25 sub-blocks, each with only 1 channel. Several previous works have investigated different heat exchanger designs and performance improvement strategies. One simple heat exchanger design is to use particles of solid storage medium surrounded by a heat transfer fluid, as investigated by many researchers including ELSihy et al.,11 Rodriguez and Lemos,12,13 and Marti et al.,14 who also discuss performance improvements through materials and operational changes. However, this geometry relies on the storage material being available as particles, and often features high pressure drops in the fluid.15 For other heat exchanger designs, Wu et al. compared four different geometries, including a block with channels of HTF drilled into it (channel-embedded block), solid rectangular plates with HTF flowing around them (parallel-plates), a bundle of solid rods with HFT flowing around it (rod-bundle), and the packed bed configuration as discussed previously.16 They found that the packed-bed . . . . . . . . . Electricity in from any source powers heaters Electricity out using thermophotovoltaics (TPV) Charging Discharging Insulated graphite thermal storage blocks with liquid tin heat transfer fluid Top view Side (cross-section) view (b) (c) 10°1 100 101 102 103 104 cost ($/kWh-th) 102 103 energy density (kWh-th/m3) solid liquid PCM (grayed out liquids boil below 1200°C) Sand Cement Concrete Iron ore Si Fe Graphite Salt Al Fire bricks Mg Na Mineral oil K Ca Cu Ni Sn Ga MgO CaO (a) 4 configuration had the best outlet temperature uniformity, indicating optimization needs to be done for the other configurations.16 Among the other configurations, the channel- embedded block allows the most flexibility in the form of the storage medium, as channels for HTF flow simply need to be drilled within or placed around the storage material, instead of having to form the storage block into different shapes. Therefore, the channel- embedded block configuration is investigated in this work. Some previous studies have investigated how best to optimize these channel- embedded solid systems for charging or discharging performance, using various parameters. Jian et al. investigated the effects of diameter ratio, channel length, flowrate, and number of tubes on discharge performance, optimizing storage cost based on an analytical solution using a corrected lumped capacitance model.17 There have also been experimental validations of this lumped capacitance model.18,19 Prasad et al. investigated the effect of the number of tubes and flowrate on charge and discharge performance.20 While the studies above only considered a single block, large-scale TES systems will consist of many blocks operating in an interconnected way. Doretti et al. considered series vs. parallel arrangements of blocks, as well as the diabatic case of heat loss to the environment, finding the optimal configuration using the minimal number of blocks.21 Kuang et al. investigated the effect of increasing the flowrate with time to counterbalance the decreasing temperature in two series-connected rod-bundles, enabling the extension of the stable discharging time by 1.6 times.22 Despite these previous works, there are still significant gaps in understanding exactly what is required for effective design. Many works consider only charging or discharging in isolation but not how designing for one condition impacts the other. Previous works often use a corrected lumped-capacitance approximation, which may not be valid for the large Biot numbers associated with some HTFs (such as liquid metals), and which ignores axial conduction. Further, previous works often only choose one storage material, and the impact of varying material properties on performance is not made clear. Perhaps most importantly, no previous work has considered a multi-block configuration of the size required for grid-scale deployment. This configuration requires analysis of optimal flow distribution and heat transfer between the blocks, which is particularly relevant at high temperatures (>1500oC). Therefore, this study will focus on how to design for effective heat transfer in a large-scale, channel-embedded solid thermal energy storage system during both discharging and charging. We have developed general design principles to maximize performance, with performance metrics defined for constant-power discharge and accelerated charging. We then use these design principles to analyze a specific solid sensible thermal energy grid storage system called TEGS (Thermal Energy Grid Storage). While only the TEGS system is analyzed here, the design principles are applicable to many solid storage systems, as discussed throughout. An overview of the TEGS system is shown in Figure 1(b). In this system, graphite is used as the storage medium, and can be found in the form of large channel-embedded blocks (as shown in Figure 1(c)) which may be connected in series or parallel. Liquid tin is used as the HTF. During charging, resistance heaters are used as the heat input from electricity, and during discharging, thermophotovoltaics (TPV) are the heat engine. TPV works by converting the light radiated by a heat source into electricity. The system 5 operates from a minimum temperature of 1900°C to a maximum of 2400°C, to maximize TPV efficiency and power density.23 There are many questions we would like our design principles to answer. How big and how many channels should there be per block? How do the storage blocks best interface with the charging and discharging infrastructure? How should the HTF flow between the blocks be configured? What is the best arrangement of blocks considering radiation between them? One way to answer these questions would be to model the entire storage system, including coupled fluid flow and heat transfer, and radiation between the blocks. However, this quickly becomes computationally intractable due to the large size (~1GWh) and long duration (~30 hours) of the systems of interest. Therefore, we have developed a hierarchical design and modeling methodology to determine design principles that result in optimal performance. We started with analyzing the impact of physical (material properties, geometry) and operational (flowrate) variables on the performance of a single HTF flow path, then apply the insights generated to a model of a multi-block grid-scale TES system. 3. Theory and preliminary calculations Given a storage system, the duration of storage (hours) is defined as the thermal energy (Wh) divided by the power extracted (W). Thermal energy is defined as: E = m! % c",!(T)dT $!"#,% $!&',% ≈ m!c",!ΔT! where m! is the total mass of the solid blocks, c",!(T) is the specific heat of the solid as a function of temperature, and T%&',! is the maximum operating temperature while T%(),! is the minimum operating temperature of the storage system. If the specific heat does not change significantly over the temperature range, it can be considered constant and the integral can be simplified, where ΔT! = -T%&',! − T%(),!/. The thermal power extracted (or provided) is calculated by: (1) where ṁ * is the flowrate of HTF through the system, c",*(T) is the specific heat of the HTF as a function of temperature, T*,+,- is the HTF outlet temperature from the storage blocks, and T*,() is the HTF inlet temperature to the storage blocks. Again, if the specific heat can be considered constant, this expression can be simplified where ΔT* is the difference in HTF outlet and inlet temperatures. During discharge, hot HTF leaves the storage heat exchanger, is cooled by the heat engine, and returns to the storage system cooled (top right loop in Figure 1(b)). The temperature of cold HTF entering the storage -T*,()/ is assumed to be the minimum operating temperature of the system (T%(),!), and ideally the storage would heat up the HTF such that its outlet temperature -T*,+,-/ is the highest operating temperature of the 6 system -T%&',!/ for the entire discharge. This is because providing the maximum temperature enables higher heat engine efficiency, improving the round-trip efficiency of the thermal storage system. Constant temperature is optimal because, as mentioned previously, providing a constant power output enables operation like an electrochemical battery, improving reliability, maximizing revenue, and easing grid integration. Conversely, during charging, cold HTF leaves the storage system, is heated by the charging infrastructure, and hot HTF returns to the storage system (bottom left loop in be the maximum operating temperature of the system -T%&',!/, and ideally the HTF would transfer all its heat to the storage medium such that its outlet temperature -T*,+,-/ from the storage blocks is the lowest operating temperature -T%(),!/. Thus, max-ΔT*/ = T%&',! − T%(),! = ΔT! and Q%&' = ṁ *c",*ΔT!. We can now define a characteristic time scale τ, non-dimensional time t∗, non- dimensional temperature as a function of time Θ(t), and non-dimensional temperature as a function of non-dimensional time Θ∗(t∗), for a given storage system: τ = ! "!"# = #$$%,$ #̇ '$%,' (2) t∗ = t τ ⎩⎪⎨ ⎪⎧T(t) − T%() T%&' − T%() during discharge T%&' − T(t) T%&' − T%() during charge Θ∗(t∗) = Θ(t) In reality, the ideal outlet temperatures discussed above are not achievable. As a solid thermal storage medium discharges and cools, the outlet temperature of the HTF decreases. Conversely, during charging the HTF outlet temperature increases as the storage medium heats up. Thus, there is non-ideality in real system operation. To get some intuition for this phenomenon, we can simulate a real system as an example. We model a simplified version of the TEGS system (a single block of graphite as the solid storage medium and one flow channel liquid tin as the HTF), with the specific geometric, material, and operational parameters described in Section 5.1. In this simulation, we start with a graphite block at Θ = 1 and flow tin in at Θ = 0 until the entire block is at Θ = 0. outlet temperature during (dis)charge, for the system described above with different graphite thermal conductivities, to show the impact of material properties on performance. From this example, we see that while the higher thermal conductivity cases start to approach the ideal limit, there is still significant room for improvement. 7 storage system or electrochemical battery (dashed line), and the non-ideal (dis)charge profiles of channel-embedded passive system (solid lines, the nondimensional (dis)charge temperature profiles as a function of non-dimensional time for the 3 thermal conductivities shown). The block is initially at Θ=1 everywhere, and tin enters at Θ=0 until the block is at Θ=0 everywhere. Note that the same curves are obtained using either the discharging or charging definition of Θ. One simple strategy for improvement is over-sizing storage capacity such that the storage system is never discharged more than e.g., 25%. However, this directly increases costs, as large amounts of storage material are never fully utilized. It also reduces the charging speed as the system would always be at a high temperature, reducing the ΔT available for charging power. These effects are discussed further in Section S2. Because of these issues, oversizing is ruled out as a potential solution. Instead, we are interested in determining how performance can be maximized based on changes to geometry, operation, and block arrangement in the storage system. We first define a temperature-based figure of merit (FOM) as, FOM$ = % Θ∗(t∗) dt∗ / 0 If Θ∗(t∗) was an idealized square curve, this integral would evaluate to 1, so this FOM serves as an indicator of how ideal the actual (dis)charge profile is. While this is a useful non-dimensional metric, it has some limitations, namely that it only considers temperature and not power. What we care about practically are (a) how long we can output a constant electrical power during discharge, and (b) how fast the system can charge. Thus, to be more explicit, we first define electrical discharge and charging power as P+,- = Q+,-η1(!23&456 Q() = P()η23&456 where η1(!23&456 is the efficiency of the heat engine used to generate electricity (P+,-) from the thermal power discharge from the storage (Q+,-), and η23&456 is the efficiency of the based FOMs. For discharge, FOM7,1(!23&456 = t7!"# τ which compares the amount of time that the storage system can output the nominal electrical power -t7,%&' /, to the rated storage duration (τ) as defined in Equation 2. We define another FOM for charging, 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 t§ 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 £§ Two-tank Increasing k 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 t§ 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 £§ ideal k = 5 W mK k = 10 W mK k = 30 W mK (of solid storage material) 8 FOM7,23&456 = ∫ ṁ (t)c",9)ΔT(t) : 0 dt which compares the integrated electrical power input over the charging duration to the energy capacity, and is essentially the state of charge of the system after the charging duration. In this work, we seek to maximize these FOMs. Because modeling the entire storage system is computationally intractable due to the large system size (~1 GWh), long durations (~10 hours), and large range of geometry sizes (~1mm to ~1m), we propose a hierarchical design procedure to methodologically model and optimize performance, in increasing levels of fidelity to a real system, as summarized in Figure 3. First, as shown in Figure 1(c), each large block can be separated into individual sub-blocks with only 1 channel embedded. Even with this simplified geometry, there are many variables (as shown in Figure 3(a)), so we use dimensional analysis to understand the state space and evaluate the effects of physical (geometric and material) parameters on FOM$. In addition to the physical variables, operational variables such as flowrate and heat engine operation are also important. Thus, second, as shown in Figure 3(b), we simulate a single-channel cylinder during both discharging and charging to determine the impact of operational variables such as flowrate, heater power, and heat engine control on FOM7,1(!23&456 and FOM7,23&456. Finally, as shown in porous media approximation to determine the effects of block interconnection, block arrangement, and radiation between the blocks on the power FOMs. of a block with a single channel by varying the physical parameters, (b) operational optimization by varying flowrate and controlling the heater power and heat engine, and (c) large-scale model with multiple large blocks to understand the impact of flow configuration (how many blocks should the tin flow through before exiting), block arrangement (what is the impact of n and m on performance), and radiation (how does the high temperatures of the blocks impact performance). !Sn cp,Sn kSn NuSn USn Tin DSn Tout DC !C cp,C kC TC,init L Joule heating Pin Charging Discharging TPV control Pout !̇ !",$%&'() !̇ !",*+,$%&'() . . . . . . . . . (a) (b) (c) Tin inlet Radiation Out? Continue? n blocks m blocks 9 4. Results and discussion 4.1. Impact of storage medium physical parameters on performance First, we utilize dimensional analysis to help determine the impact of geometric parameters and material properties on performance. We are particularly interested in (a) how to design the channel-embedded heat exchanger, namely the channel spacing and length, and (b) how the thermal properties of the storage medium affect performance. For this analysis, we simplify the geometry to consider a cylindrical storage block with a single HTF channel. Figure 3(a) shows this simplified geometry along with key parameters in the analysis. We consider a cylindrical HTF channel of diameter D* surrounded by solid with outer diameter D!, both having length L. The HTF flows at velocity U(t) and has a convective heat transfer coefficient with the solid of h. Material properties such as density, specific heat, and thermal conductivity of both fluid and solid are also needed. Conducting dimensional analysis on the 15 variables with 4 dimensions results in 11 dimensionless Π groups, all of which are provided in Section S3. Rearranging in terms of known variables, we find that FOM$ = f W L D! , D! D* , k! k* , c",! c",* , ρ! ρ* , UD* α! , hD* k* = Nu;(, ρ*UD* μ* = Re;(, μU< k*ΔT = Bra These 9 dimensionless groups define the state space of possible channel- embedded thermal storage designs. By varying these 9 parameters, we can explore the impact of different variables on the FOM. To demonstrate how this tool can be used in a real system, we consider the TEGS system with liquid tin as the HTF and graphite as the storage medium. From previous works,24 we know that the densities and specific heats of different grades of graphite do not vary significantly, while thermal conductivity does. Tin material parameters are considered constant in this analysis. Further, we assume the volume ratio of tin to graphite to be 1%, which enables favorable technoeconomics as the cost of tin is ~30 times higher than that of graphite, and higher volume fractions increase the cost per energy of the system.25 This 1% volume fraction implies ) =;( ) = 100 ⇒ ;% ;( = √101 ≈ 10 is a constant. Additionally, we assume laminar tin flow meaning constant Nu = 3;( ?( . This assumption is validated in Section S3. Based on these assumptions, we can simplify the expression above such that FOM$ can be written as a function of 3 dimensional groups: FOM$ = f W L D! , UD* α! , k! k* a Where @ ;% is an aspect ratio, A;( B% compares tin advection to graphite conduction, and ?% ?( compares the thermal conductivities of the two materials. We now have a more manageable 3-dimensional state space. We can use a finite element model (as discussed in Section 5.1) of the simplified geometry to calculate values of FOM$ for points in this 3D 10 state space, and determine where it is optimal to operate. 2D slices of the 3D state space are shown in Figure 4(a), which shows FOM$ vs @ ;% and A;( B% for various values of ?% ?(. Visually, we first note that we can quickly identify the region of design space we want to operate in, namely the high-FOM yellow region. This allows quick evaluation of whether a designed configuration will be high performing. However, we also note that these plots look very similar across different k ratios, which is unexpected because we previously determined a lower solid thermal conductivity k! should reduce performance. Instead, we notice that the impact of k! comes in the x-axis, since k! also appears in α! = ?% C%2*,%. Thus, for a given flow geometry, lower values of k! shift the operating point to the right, away from the high-FOM yellow region, as A;( B% increases. thermal energy storage system called TEGS, showing 2D slices of ! " and #" $ vs. FOM% for constant k&/k'. (b) Dimensioned sweeps of the parameter space for a given graphite thermal conductivity (10 W/m/K) and storage duration of 30 hours. The solid line is an isocontour of FOM=0.9, and the star shows the optimal operating point for largest diameter and smallest length to achieve high FOM. (c) depicts a line of FOM vs. D corresponding to the blue dashed line in (b). (d) and (e) are equivalent plots for a storage duration of 10 hours. While this non-dimensional map is useful, it is not immediately clear how to use the map to design a high-performing system. We thus demonstrate an example of how the mapped design space can be used practically, to design the geometric parameters of the TEGS system. We first consider a storage duration (τ) of 30 hours and a graphite !"!/$" %"/%!=0.01 %"/%!=0.03 %"/%!=0.1 %"/%!=0.3 %"/%!=1 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 D (m) 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 FOMT FOMT vs. D for L = 10 m (c) (a) 0 10 20 30 40 50 L (m) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 FOMT FOMT vs. L for D = 0.2 m (d) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 D (m) 0 20 40 60 80 100 L (m) ø=30 hours, k=10 W/m/K FOMT U (m/s) 0.9 ★ (b) Constant L, vary D Constant D, vary L ★ ★ 11 thermal conductivity (k!) of 10 W/m/K. We then choose a length L and graphite diameter D! (which also defines D* since ;% ;( was fixed at 10) of the storage block. We can then use the duration τ and length L to calculate the flow velocity U, by re-writing Equation 2 as τ = ρ!V!c"! ṁ *c"* = ρ!Lπ(D! < − D* <)c"! ρ*UπD* <c"* = ρ!L fgD! D*h < − 1i c"! ρ*Uc"* = 100 ρ! ρ* c",! c",* L U ⇒ U = W100ρ!c",! ρ*c",* a gL τh Thus, using the input variables τ, k!, L, and D!, we can calculate U and therefore all 3 of the dimensionless groups, and can use the non-dimensional map to determine the FOM$. The results are shown in Figure 4(b). A few trends are evident. First, reducing the diameter of the graphite D! (and therefore the tin channel D*) improves FOM$, as seen in the heat can more easily enter/leave the graphite, improving its performance. However, if we were to only reduce the graphite diameter D! while keeping D* constant, this would hurt the energy density (energy per volume) and cost of the system, since the tin HTF would take up more volume. Instead, because we scale down the fluid diameter D* with D!, we retain the energy density and low cost of the system while improving performance. Although the FOM monotonically increases with reduced D*, the reduction in D* does cause an increase in pressure drop, which should be avoided due to higher parasitic power consumption of the motor, wear on mechanical parts, and higher leakage potential. We recall that pressure drop in a tube is defined as: ΔP = ρ9)U<L 2D* f(Re) ⇒ ΔPD&% ∝ μ9)UL D* < , ΔP-,4E,4+,53 ∝ ρ9)U<L 2D* suggesting that we should not go to the extreme of D* → 0 if we want to prevent high pressure drops. This demonstrates the tradeoff between low D* improving performance while increasing pressure drop. The second important trend is that increasing the tin channel length L improves FOM, but this effect plateaus quickly, as seen in Figure 4(d). For the configuration considered here, the FOM stops improving after around 10m, suggesting that e.g. a 20m long channel-embedded block has equivalent thermal performance to 2 10m long blocks. This is important because, from the pressure drop definition above, it is beneficial to minimize L. We can therefore conclude that placing n 10m long pipes in parallel has equivalent thermal performance to a single 10n m long pipe, and the n pipes in parallel have 4n (laminar) to 16n (turbulent rough) times lower pressure drop. Thus, optimizing the FOM with the constraint of minimizing pressure drop (minimizing L and maximizing D) suggests an optimal operating point of D9 = 20cm (D* = 2cm) and L = 10m to achieve an FOM$ of 90%. 12 This analysis is repeated for storage duration τ = 100 hours and graphite thermal conductivity k! = 1 W/m/K in Section S4 to demonstrate applicability to a different configuration. While only the TEGS system is considered here, the design procedure can be applied to any channel-embedded solid thermal storage system, by (a) applying the dimensional analysis derived here for the system in question and mapping the state space, (b) selecting a storage duration and material properties, and (c) determining the maximum diameter and minimum length that provides a high FOM (e.g. 0.9) based on the state space map. Now that an understanding of the effect of physical parameters has been developed, we can consider operational variables and how the storage block would be integrated with charge and discharge infrastructure. 4.2. Coupling the storage medium with (dis)charging infrastructure Given a solid storage geometry from the previous section, we can now determine how the operation of the storage system impacts performance. There are two specific items to improve. First, output electrical power should ideally be constant over time, at the rated output power of the storage system, which is what utilities would expect and is what power plants and electrochemical batteries provide. However, as seen in Figure 2, temperature slowly decreases over time, potentially reducing power output. Second, since the intent of the storage system is to improve the reliability of variable renewable energy sources, the system should be able to charge quickly when renewable energy is available; it is anticipated that there will be greater value on the grid for a storage system that can charge faster than it discharges.26,27 Thus, the two reasons for trying to optimize operational variables are (a) achieving closer to constant electrical power output on discharge and (b) faster charging. 4.2.1. Constant power output during discharge For discharging, while we could use FOM$ above, it is not fully appropriate for a few reasons. First, it only considers temperature and not power directly. Second, the setup of FOM$ assumes the HTF flowrate does not change with time, which is the simplest operation mode but may not be optimal. Third, the integral form obscures potentially important discharge dynamics – for example, a system that outputs 100% of rated power for 80% of rated duration has the same FOM$ as a system that outputs 80% of rated power for 100% of rated duration. However, the first system is more ideal because utilities expect the rated power output. Of course, the most ideal system would output 100% of rated power for 100% of rated duration; therefore, we define an FOM directly based on duration of constant power output, namely, FOM7,1(!23&456 = t7!"# τ where t7,%&' is the amount of time that the storage system can output the nominal electrical power, and τ is the storage duration as in Equation 2. 13 We now introduce a technique to maximize FOM7,1(!23&456 for a general thermal storage system. First, if we want to output constant electrical power, we need to ensure constant thermal power is being output. We noted previously that the cause of thermal power decrease over time is the drop in outlet temperature due to the storage medium being cooled. To counteract this, as the outlet temperature (and therefore ΔT*) drops, we could concurrently ramp up mass flowrate of the HTF, keeping output thermal power Q%&' c",*ΔT*(t) We must bound ṁ * however, to avoid extreme flowrates as ΔT* drops to 0. Therefore, we define a maximum flowrate ṁ %&' and a maximum flowrate factor f = %̇ !"# we can calculate the ΔT* at that point as ΔT*,-346! = Q%&' c",*ṁ %&' where we have defined a threshold ΔT*,-346! below which output power starts to decrease because the flowrate cannot increase further. This suggests that the thermal power output as a function of time is Q+,-(t) = oQ%&' when ΔT*(t) > ΔT*,-346! Higher values of ṁ %&' (and therefore higher f) will result in lower values of ΔT*,-346!, from the equation above. This then implies that higher f results in longer durations of constant power output at Q%&', since ΔT*(t) will be higher than ΔT*,-346! for longer. To make this approach clear, we consider an example using the TEGS system, of a single cylindrical graphite block of length L = 10m and diameter DJ = 0.2m (tin channel diameter D9) = 0.02m), with a graphite thermal conductivity of 10 W/m/K, based on the geometric optimization done in the previous section. We then consider a storage duration of 31.6 hours and a maximum flowrate factor f = %̇ !"# %̇ '+! = 5.6 (for demonstration purposes – we will consider additional values later). We can then numerically model the system while incorporating the approach above, with the results shown in Figure 5(a)-(c). As seen, as the outlet temperature of the tin HTF decreases (Figure 5(a)), we can increase the mass flowrate until a value of 5.6 times the flowrate at t=0 (Figure 5(b)). We can therefore keep the thermal power output constant for time t7,%&' (blue line in Figure 5(c)). 14 the storage medium. First considering a discharge duration of 31.6 hours and a flowrate factor of 5.6, (a) Tin outlet temperature from the storage medium, subtracted by the inlet temperature (1900oC), (b) flowrate of tin as a function of time showing the ramping, (c) thermal power of the tin output from the storage medium (blue line) and electrical power output from the TPV (red line), (d) Normalized TPV area required to convert the thermal power to electrical power at 40% efficiency, (e) the impact of allowing the flowrate to increase to a certain factor on the discharging FOM, for τ = 31.6, with the triangle showing the f=5.6 case, (f) The percent of additional TPV area required to achieve the and flowrate factors, with solid line an isocontour of FOM(,*+&,-./01=0.9, and the dashed line showing where τ = 31.6 While the approach above keeps output thermal power constant, we ultimately want to convert the thermal power to electrical power. Keeping electrical power constant is challenging, because as the discharging process progresses, the heat carried by the HTF becomes lower grade (lower temperature) and higher flowrate. The heat engine will likely have a harder time converting the lower grade heat to electricity. This suggests that the heat engine may need to be throttled at the beginning of discharge, meaning it would output less than its rated (maximum) power when temperature is maximum. To give an example of how a heat engine may follow this strategy, we consider the heat engine used in the example TEGS system, which is thermophotovoltaics (TPV). TPV converts the energy radiated by a heat source, in this case the liquid tin HTF, to electricity. However, as the temperature of the HTF drops, the intensity of emitted radiation decreases, meaning more TPV area is required to keep the generated electrical power constant. To demonstrate this, we develop a simple model: η$7L where q"(T) is the net (radiative) heat flux from the HTF to the TPV (modeled based on experimental data), T*,&K5(t) is the 4th order average of HTF temperature as a function of time, and A$7L(t) is the active area of the TPV as a function of time. As the HTF temperature decreases, q"-T*,&K5/ will also decrease, suggesting more TPV area will need to be exposed to the HTF to extract the same amount of thermal power from the tin (Q+,-) and generate the same electrical power (the thermal power Q+,- is converted to electrical power P+,- at a TPV efficiency η$7L). In the schematic of the TEGS system shown in Figure 1(b), the TPVs are fully facing the liquid tin, but this could be changed with time – this analysis suggests the TPV stick should be initially retracted, then as the !!!"# " 0 5 10 max flow factor (f ) 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 FOMP,discharge 10 20 30 tP,max, hr ø = 31.6 hours (e) 0 5 10 max flow factor (f ) 0 25 50 75 100 TPV area added (%) ø = 31.6 hours (f) 0.9 ! = 31.6 h) (g) ! = 31.6 h) (h) (a) (b) (c) (d) FOMP,discharge=0.92 ▼ ▼ 15 temperature of the HTF drops, the TPV stick should be inserted further to expose more TPV area to the HTF. This is demonstrated in Figure 5(d), where we see the TPV area exposed to the tin HTF increases with time to keep the electrical power generated constant (Figure 5(c), red line). The example above only considered a single maximum flowrate factor f, so next we consider multiple different values. As discussed previously, the benefit of increasing f is longer duration of constant discharge power as the higher flowrate can counteract the lower HTF outlet temperature. However, the lower HTF outlet temperature results in a lower radiated heat flux, meaning more TPV area is required to convert the thermal power to electrical power. Therefore, there is a tradeoff between higher FOM7,1(!23&456 and higher cost of installing additional TPV cells. τ = 31.6 hours, as we increase the flowrate factor, the FOM7,1(!23&456 increases. Particularly, we note that in the base case (flowrate factor f = 1) we get an FOM7,1(!23&456 of 0.4. Increasing the flowrate factor to 3 (meaning the flowrate can increase to 3x the nominal flowrate) allows FOM7,1(!23&456 to reach 0.9 (equivalently, a constant power duration of 28.4 hours out of 31.6 hours). However, this requires approximately 40% more TPV cells (since the outlet temperature decreases with time), increasing the capital expenditure of the system. We have thus far only considered a storage duration of 31.6 hours, so next we expand our analysis to durations ranging from 10 to 100 hours, as shown in Figure 5(g) and (h). As seen, the systems with longer storage duration times require a lower flowrate factor f to reach an FOM of 0.9, while systems with shorter duration require higher f to reach an FOM of 0.9. This can be explained by the different outlet temperature profiles for different storage durations. The longer storage durations already have a more uniform discharge profile without any modifications (at f = 1) so only minimal modifications are necessary. In contrast, shorter storage durations have a faster decline in outlet temperature as their nominal flowrate is higher, which makes achieving a constant power output more difficult. Next, we note that the percent increase in TPV area added (relative to f = 1 for each storage duration) is independent of the storage duration. To understand this better, we consider a flowrate factor f – we can calculate the threshold ΔT*,-346! = 7 2*,,'%̇ ((-H0)* = 2-,,'%̇ ((-H0)M00°J 2-,,'%̇ ((-H0)* = M00°J * . Because the TPV area is calculated based on ΔT*,-346!, the additional TPV area required is independent of the storage duration and only depends on f. In summary, in this sub-section we introduced a technique for keeping discharge electrical power constant. First, we keep output thermal power constant by counterbalancing the dropping HTF outlet temperature with an increasing HTF mass flowrate. To convert this thermal power to electrical power, we throttle the heat engine at the beginning of discharge to allow for high power output later, when the HTF temperature is low and flowrate high. There is a tradeoff between performance and cost, which should be evaluated with technoeconomic analysis in a future work. 16 4.2.2. Accelerating charging We can apply the same approach to the second objective of fast charging. For this objective the uniformity of power over time is not as important, rather we care about charging the system as fully as possible within the charging duration. We therefore define a charging FOM as the ratio between the electrical energy input over the charging duration to the energy capacity: FOM7,23&456 = ∫ ṁ (t)c",9)ΔT(t) : 0 dt which is essentially the state of charge of the system after charging is complete. Since η23&456 depends on the type of heating infrastructure used and is generally fixed, for this analysis we will focus on the thermal power in the numerator. Maximizing FOM7,23&456 therefore corresponds to maximizing the amount of thermal power input into the system. To motivate the above methodology for charging, if we keep the flowrate constant then as the outlet temperature of HTF from the solid storage increases (as the solid heats up), the amount of thermal power we can supply to the HTF through the heaters drops, since the ΔT between the HTF outlet temperature and the maximum operating temperature of the system decreases. Therefore, we can increase the flowrate to keep the thermal power input constant. We evaluate the effectiveness of the methodology presented in the context of the TEGS system. For this analysis, we consider a graphite block of the same dimensions as the previous subsection (length L = 10m, diameter DJ = 0.2m, tin channel diameter D9) = 0.02m, determined from dimensional analysis). For the accelerated charging analysis, we first consider a short charging duration of τ = 5 hours, which corresponds to, for example, the amount of time abundant solar might be available during the day. The nominal flowrate for such a system would be ṁ )+% = O/M3 2*,,'(M00°Q). To accelerate charging, we define a similar maximum flowrate ṁ %&' and a flowrate factor f = %̇ !"# %̇ '+!. The flowrate is allowed to increase with time as the outlet temperature drops, to keep the power input at its maximum (rated) value, until reaching this maximum flowrate. The results for the given system, with 5 hours of charging duration and various flowrate factors, are shown in and flowrate factors. 17 rated charging power. First considering a charge duration of 5 hours, (a) ΔT of the tin outlet vs. inlet to the storage medium, (b) flowrate of tin as a function of time, (c) thermal power of the tin output from the storage medium. (d) The impact of allowing the flowrate to increase to a certain factor on the charging FOM, for τ = 5h. (e) Charge FOM for various storage durations and flowrate factors, with solid line an isocontour of FOM(,,-./01=0.9, and the dashed line showing where τ = 5 lies. As seen in Figure 6(d), increasing the flowrate factor from 1 to 5 improves FOM7,23&456 from 75% to 90%, with nominal improvements above 5x. The specific response of the thermal storage system to various flowrate factors is shown in Figure the accelerated charging is easier at longer durations since their charging FOMs are already high with no modifications (at f = 1), similar to the phenomenon observed in discharge power uniformity. We note that for all durations >4 hours, we can nearly fully charge the system (>90%) with flowrate multipliers of 10 or lower. For shorter durations, full charge could be accomplished with higher flowrate factors, but other techniques such as changing the geometry of the channels might be required instead. In summary, accelerating charging by increasing HTF flowrate to establish a near- constant power input is promising, as it has the potential to reach almost complete charging in a short duration. Although it increases pressure drop, it requires minimal infrastructure to implement (only additional pumping throughput), so there is little tradeoff between performance and cost. Other options for accelerating charging are presented in Section S7, but are shown to be not effective for various reasons. In our analysis thus far, we have only considered a single channel-embedded cylinder. In the following section, we will analyze a larger block consisting of multiple channels and will add modeling of radiation between blocks, to determine how different configurations impact performance, as well as how to improve poorly performing configurations. (a) (b) (c) ! = 5h 0.9 (e) 5 10 max flow factor (f ) 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 FOMP,charge (d) Increasing f 18 4.3. Large-scale modeling of a thermal storage system To analyze a large array of blocks, approximations must be made to reduce the computational expense of solving the full fluid and temperature profiles within each block. We employ a porous media approximation for each block. The details of the porous media approximation are provided in Section 5.2, with the essence being that the porous block is made to exhibit equivalent heat transfer and fluid flow as the channel-embedded block by matching porosity, permeability, and the solid-fluid heat transfer coefficient. The resulting approximation shows good agreement to the fully coupled channel-embedded model with 2-3 orders of magnitude faster computation (see Section S6). To show how this porous media approximation can be used for design, we consider the TEGS system with graphite as the storage medium and tin as the HTF. We consider large rectangular graphite blocks of dimensions 1m x 1m x 4m, which was determined by quotes from manufacturers and structural limitations of resting the blocks on porous insulating materials. From the previous dimensional analysis, we found that 0.02m tin channel diameter with 0.2m spacing is ideal – therefore each graphite block must have a 5x5 array of tin channels to allow a spacing of 0.2m (as shown in Figure 1(c)). We also noticed that the ideal tin flow path length was at least 10m, but since each block is only 4m high, blocks may have to be connected in series. Due to the high temperatures of the storage system (~2000°C), the blocks also emit significant radiation which must be included in the simulation. Radiation can detract from (dis)charge performance by helping make the system more isothermal, reducing the outlet temperature of the tin. We consider a grid-scale system of ~200 MWh of thermal energy storage capacity, corresponding to 100 blocks. Using the porous media approximation, we investigate 5 different block arrangement configurations, as shown in Figure 7. x 4m are considered here. Insulation surrounds the blocks and is occasionally shown as transparent for clarity. (a) Shows all 100 blocks stacked vertically, (b) shows 100 blocks placed in a line, (c) shows a 10 x 10 grid of blocks with a single flow path connecting all of them, (d) shows a 10 x 10 grid of blocks with 10 flow paths, and (e) shows a 10 x 10 grid of blocks with 100 independent flow paths. . . . 1m x 1m x 4m 100 blocks Configuration 1: vertical stack (a) . . . 100 blocks Configuration 2: horizontal string (b) Configuration 3: all in series (c) 10 blocks 10 blocks Configuration 4: 10 parallel paths (d) Configuration 5: 100 parallel paths (e) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Inlet/outlet Between blocks 10 blocks 10 blocks 10 blocks 10 blocks 19 The first configuration (Figure 7(a)) includes all blocks stacked vertically, which ensures blocks are thermally isolated from each other since each block radiates only to the surrounding insulation, but is impractical due to the immense height of the resulting system. The second configuration (Figure 7(b)) has all blocks arranged in a string, which ensures each block can only radiate to 2 adjacent blocks, limiting interaction. Configurations 1 and 2 require a significant amount of insulation due to their long aspect ratio, but they are optimal from a heat transfer standpoint. Next, we consider 3 more practical configurations using a grid of blocks. Configuration 3 (Figure 7(c)) arranges a 9x11 grid with all blocks in series such that the tin inlet is only on the top left block and the tin outlet is only on the bottom right (9x11 was used to ensure the inlet and outlet are maximally separated). Configuration 4 (Figure 7(d)) consists of a 10x10 grid with 10 parallel paths for tin flow, such that tin enters in the top row and exits in the bottom row. Configuration 5 (Figure 7(e)) features a 10x10 grid with all blocks in parallel, such that tin enters and exits from each block. Note that configurations 3, 4, and 5 have significantly less outer surface area than 1 and 2, reducing the amount of insulation required. Now, we consider discharging performance over a duration of 20 hours. The results for the tin outlet temperature as a function of time for the 5 different configurations are shown in Figure 8(a). As seen, configurations 1 and 2 have very similar performance. While no blocks can see each other in configuration 1, in configuration 2, 2 sides of each block are exposed to another block, but because each block is not significantly different in temperature from adjacent blocks, this has limited influence on temperature, so its performance is similar to configuration 1. Configurations 3 and 4 are also similar. In both cases, most blocks are exposed on all 4 sides to other blocks. The temperature difference between adjacent blocks is possibly much higher than in configuration 2, which helps explain the difference in performance. GIFs of the temperature evolution of the blocks for configurations 3 and 4 are present in Section S8. Configuration 5 is worse than configurations 3 and 4. This difference can be partially explained by the short tin flow path of 4m in configuration 5, which is less than the 10m ideal discovered through dimensional analysis. As seen, the discharge performance of the 10x10 grids needs to be improved. We thus employ the technique outlined in Section 4.2.1 of increasing flowrate and TPV area with time to improve the power uniformity during discharge. As seen in Figure 8(b), this methodology vastly improves performance and even makes the 10x10 case outperform the vertically stacked case. Notably, only a small increase in maximum flowrate (1 to 1.25) enables the configuration to outperform the vertically stacked case in terms of duration of constant discharge power, with only a minimal cost increase (additional pumping costs and ~10% more TPV area). With a maximum flowrate of 5x the nominal (requiring ~50% more TPV area), we achieve constant power output for ~90% of the 20-hour discharge cycle (18 hours), as seen in Figure 8(c). 20 and 4 hours of charging. (a) Comparison of the outlet temperature of tin vs. time for the 5 block configurations described previously. The blue and green lines nearly overlap, as do the yellow and red lines. (b) The outlet power from the tin to the discharging infrastructure, for the 1x100 reference case (conf 2), as well as the 10x10 grid case (conf 4) implementing the flowrate ramping technique presented previously (for f = 1 through 10), showing the 10x10 grid can perform better than the 1x100 case when implementing flowrate ramping. (c) Demonstrates the impact of increasing maximum flowrate on the discharging FOM for the 10x10 grid. GIFs of temperature profile vs. time for configuration (3) and (4) during discharge are shown in Figure S5. (d) Comparison of the outlet temperature of tin vs. time for the 5 block configurations during charging. (e) The inlet power from the charging infrastructure to the tin, for various flowrate multipliers in configuration 4. (f) The impact of increasing flowrate ramping factor on the charging FOM for the 10x10 grid. Next, we consider charging performance over a duration of 4 hours. The tin outlet temperature as a function of time for the 5 different configurations are shown in Figure 8(d). As seen, the difference between the configurations is not as drastic as in discharging, suggesting that the faster rate of charging causes adjacent blocks to reach similar temperatures quicker, limiting the effect of radiation between blocks. However, the 10x10 grid with all blocks in parallel (configuration 5) still performs worse than all other cases, again demonstrating the importance of the dimensional analysis conducted previously showing the minimum tin path length of 10m. Further, it is evident that charging performance needs to be improved, since the tin outlet temperature has not reached 2400C within the 4 hours (which would indicate a fully charged system). For accelerating charging, we use the technique introduced in Section 4.2.2 of increasing flowrate above nominal as the temperature rises to create a constant power input. Figure 8(e) shows how increasing the flowrate multiplier f allows for longer durations of constant input power, accelerating the charging speed. Figure 8(f) shows that the block is nearly completely charged within 4 hours by allowing the flowrate to increase five-fold above nominal, which improves charging performance while only increasing pumping costs. Overall, these simulations show that for a grid of blocks, the choice of flow path is minimally important as long as the tin flow path length is higher than the minimum determined by dimensional analysis. If no modifications to flowrate were used, a thermally 0 5 10 15 20 time (hrs) 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300 2350 2400 outlet T (±C) (1) 1x100 vertical blocks (2) 1x100 string of blocks (3) 10x10 grid, all series (4) 10x10 grid, 10 parallel paths (5) 10x10 grid, 100 parallel paths (a) 2 4 6 8 10 flow multiplier 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 FOMP,charge Conf. 4 (f) 0 1 2 3 4 time (hrs) 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300 2400 outlet T (±C) (1) 1x100 vertical blocks (2) 1x100 string of blocks (3) 10x10 grid, all series (4) 10x10 grid, 10 parallel paths (5) 10x10 grid, 100 parallel paths (d) f=1 for all cases f=1 for all cases Conf. 1: 1x100 vertical blocks Conf. 2: 1x100 string of blocks Conf. 3: 10x10 grid, all series Conf. 4: 10x10 grid, 10 parallel paths Conf. 5: 10x10 grid, 100 parallel paths 2 4 6 8 10 flow multiplier 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 FOMP,discharge Conf. 4 (c) 0 1 2 3 4 time (hrs) 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 Power (MW) (e) Increasing f 4 time (hrs) Conf. 4: f = 1 Conf. 4: f = 2.5 Conf. 4: f = 5 Conf. 4: f = 7.5 Conf. 4: f = 10 0 5 10 15 20 time (hrs) 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 Power (MW) (b) Increasing f 0 5 10 15 20 time (hrs) 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 Power (MW) Conf 2: f = 1 Conf 4: f = 1 Conf 4: f = 1.25 Conf 4: f = 3 Conf 4: f = 5 Conf 4: f = 10 21 isolated string of blocks would be ideal, but this would be impractical due to the drastically high insulation costs. Although the grid is worse due to radiation between the blocks, the techniques developed in this work can be utilized to enhance performance. 5. Experimental procedures 5.1. Numerical modeling of a single channel-embedded cylinder COMSOL Multiphysics® was used for coupled fluid flow and heat transfer modeling. Low-quality graphite was used was the storage medium while liquid tin was used as the heat transfer fluid. The relevant material properties of graphite and tin are present in the table below. If ranges were provided, a temperature-dependent property was used in the model varying from 1900 to 2400C. Material Property Value Low-quality graphite Thermal conductivity (k) 10 W/m/K Specific heat (c") 2000 J/kg/K Density (ρ) 1700 kg/m3 Liquid tin Thermal conductivity (k) 60-65 W/m/K Specific heat -c"/ 247-250 J/kg/K Density (ρ) 4800 kg/m3 Dynamic viscosity (μ) 0.001 Pa⋅s An axially symmetric 2D model was used with the outer boundary being adiabatic. Other dimensions and flowrates were determined based on user inputs. As mentioned, laminar flow was used as the primary purpose was to accurately model heat transfer, and turbulent flow only minimally impacts heat transfer as detailed in Section S4. For the example case presented in Section 3, a block of diameter 0.2m, length 10m, and channel diameter 0.02m was used, with a tin flowrate of 0.04 kg/s, and other material properties given above. During discharging we have assumed a constant η1(!23&456 of 0.4, and during charging we have assumed a constant η23&456 of 0.99. 5.2. Porous media approximation with porosity. 22 25 tin channels embedded of diameter 2cm, and (b) porous media approximation of the same block, where two temperature fields are tracked in the entire block, with parameters matched to achieve equivalent fluid and thermal response. For a porous block to exhibit equivalent heat transfer and fluid flow as a channel- embedded block, we must match some parameters.28 First is the porosity, such that the volume fraction of liquid and solid is the same. Second is the permeability, which is tuned to match the pressure drop in the reference block. Namely, the porous media fluid flow adds an additional source term in the momentum equation: S = κ>/μ + W1 2 ρ|u| √κ a u where κ is the permeability, μ is the viscosity, and u is the velocity. The permeability was tuned such that the pressure drops matched. Next, the porous media approximation keeps track of two temperature fields, one for fluid and one for solid. They are coupled with a heat source/sink term involving a relative heat transfer coefficient. The governing heat transfer equations in the solid and fluid, respectively, are: (1 − ε")ρ!c",! ∂T! ∂t + -−(1 − ε")k!∇<T!/ = h!* gA Vh -T* − T!/ ε"ρ*c",* ∂T* Vh (T! − T*) where ε" is the porosity, s subscripts indicate solid while f indicates fluid. A and V are the pore surface area and volume, which are calculated directly from the geometry of the reference block. h!* is the heat transfer coefficient between the solid and fluid. In our case, it includes convection and conduction resistances. Namely, h!* = 1 (R2+)K + C/R2+)1)A s = 0.20m, H = 4m s H !!" = 0.02& (a) (b) 23 R2+)K = 1 hA = 1 Nu k D A , R2+)1 = ln wr+ r(x 2πkL Where C/ is a correction factor to both convert the cylindrical conduction resistance to rectangular and to convert the conduction resistance to a convection resistance, as was done in Xu et al.29 Note that because the lateral conduction is included in the heat transfer coefficient h!* through the R2+)1 term, the thermal conductivity k! in the governing heat transfer equation is anisotropic, with 0 laterally and the nominal values axially, to avoid double-counting the conduction contributions. Once the above values are obtained, a coarse-grained porous media approximation may be used. To validate this approximation, we consider the TEGS system, and model a large graphite block with 25 tin channels. We compare the tin outlet temperature vs. time for both the full geometry case and the porous media approximation for a variety of flowrates. This comparison is shown in Figure S6. As seen, the porous media approximation offers good agreement with 2-3 orders of magnitude faster computation. 5.3. Simulation parameters for large-scale modeling For each of the configurations, we consider surface-to-surface radiation between blocks and the insulation, which is externally adiabatic. We use a spacing of 10cm between the blocks and insulation, and 20cm between blocks. We assume all surfaces have emissivity 0.9, which is slightly higher than the reported emissivity of graphite at high temperatures,30,31 so overestimates the heat transfer between blocks. Where possible, the flow configuration is defined such that if the outlet of one block is at the bottom (top), the inlet of the subsequent block is also at the bottom (top). This reflects the real-world flow conditions. Only a 10x10 grid is considered in this work as this is the most optimal grid to minimize outer surface area for insulation. Other grids could be considered by repeating the analysis and taking advantage of the faster simulation time of the porous medium approximation. 6. Conclusions and future work In summary, this work introduces design principles for sensible heat solid thermal storage systems to improve their (dis)charge performance. We consider the channel- embedded configuration, which features channels of heat transfer fluid embedded within the solid storage medium. Typically, these systems may have poor performance, facing challenges in output power uniformity during discharge and slow charging rates. Further, if the sensible heating occurs at high temperatures as required for high round-trip efficiency, radiation between blocks can degrade performance. This suggests design optimization is necessary. However, grid-scale versions of this system are computationally intractable to model fully. Therefore, in this work we have utilized a hierarchical approach to design optimization, developing design principles for channel- embedded thermal storage systems at each step of the hierarchy. We then apply these 24 design principles to a specific system that uses graphite as the storage medium and liquid tin as the heat transfer fluid (called thermal energy grid storage or TEGS). First, we investigate the impact of geometric parameters on performance using dimensional analysis. We define an FOM based on temperature uniformity with time and derive the non-dimensional groups that impact this FOM for a general system. To demonstrate how this analysis can be used for a specific system, we consider the TEGS system, which allows us to simplify some terms and develop a relationship between storage medium diameter, heat transfer fluid flow path length, and FOM. Specifically, for a storage medium of thermal conductivity 10 W/m/K, we find a diameter of 20cm and length of 10m achieves a temperature FOM of 90% for a discharge duration of 30 hours. While we have generated these numbers for TEGS specifically, the dimensional analysis is generalizable to other channel-embedded thermal energy storage systems using different materials and storage durations. Next, we investigate how varying the operation of the storage system can help optimize discharging and charging performance. For discharge, we define an FOM based on the time the storage system can provide the nominal power compared to the rated storage duration. We find that increasing HTF flowrate as the outlet temperature drops enables near-constant power output, but requires throttling of the heat engine. Using the TEGS system as an example, we find that allowing flowrate to increase by 5x and TPV area to increase 50% allows >90% discharge FOM. For charging, we define an FOM based on the fraction of storage capacity able to be charged in a certain charging duration, i.e. the state of charge after the charging duration. We find that we can apply the same methodology from discharging of ramping up flowrate as temperature difference drops, to keep input power constant at its maximum value. For TEGS, allowing flowrate to ramp up by 5x allows 90% charging within 5 hours. Finally, we model the full grid-scale system and propose a porous media approximation that is calibrated to match the heat transfer and fluid flow properties of the fully coupled case to accelerate computation. We apply this to TEGS to find and consider 100 1m x 1m x 4m commercially available graphite blocks (corresponding to a thermal energy capacity of 200MWh) arranged in various configurations to determine the effect of radiation between the blocks. We first find that blocks should be connected in series to achieve the minimum tin flow path as determined by dimensional analysis (at least 10m). We then find that the 10x10 grid arrangement of blocks (minimizing insulation costs) underperforms compared to arrangements featuring blocks that are thermally isolated from each other. By utilizing the insights generated in previous parts, this thermal performance can be improved to near its maximum, and we demonstrate discharging and charging FOMs of >90%. In this work we have primarily studied heat transfer considerations and have briefly discussed their impact on cost where appropriate. A more rigorous technoeconomic analysis evaluating each proposed improvement to performance is warranted and should be the focus of a future study. Further, while we have considered discharging and charging in isolation, it is also important to consider the transition between the two. While a detailed analysis is outside the scope of this work, many results in the literature suggest that flow should be reversed between discharge and charge, to ensure thermoclines developed in the storage media are maintained.32–34 Longer-duration studies where the system is charged and discharge multiple times should be the subject of a future work. 25 Further, it would be useful to model the grid integration of such a thermal energy storage system with realistic power input/output profiles. This would involve further modeling and approximations to the large-scale model to enable longer duration simulations. Overall, this work develops design principles to improve the performance of cheap thermal energy grid storage systems, which in turn facilitates its adoption and helps increase renewables penetration for a cleaner future. 7. Data availability Data and code are available on GitHub.35 8. Acknowledgements This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Award Nos. 1745302 and 2141064. 9. Author contributions Conceptualization, S.V., C.K., A.H.; Methodology, S.V., C.K., K.B., A.L., A.S., A.H.; Investigation, S.V.; Writing – Original Draft, S.V.; Writing – Review and Editing, S.V., K.B., A.L., A.S., A.H.; Supervision, A.H. 10. Declaration of interests A.H. has founded a company for thermal energy storage based on the TEGS system discussed in this work, and therefore has a financial interest. 26 11.