1 Spin current control of magnetism L. Chen1, Y. Sun1, S. Mankovsky2, T. N. G. Meier1, M. Kronseder3, H. Ebert2, D. Weiss3 and C. H. Back1,4,5 1Department of Physics, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 2Department of Chemistry, Ludwig Maximilian University, Munich, Germany 3Institute of Experimental and Applied Physics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany 4Munich Center for Quantum Science and Technology, Munich, Germany 5Center for Quantum Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany Exploring novel strategies to manipulate the order parameter of magnetic materials by electrical means is of great importance, not only for advancing our understanding of fundamental magnetism, but also for unlocking potential practical applications. A well-established concept to date uses gate voltages to control magnetic properties, such as saturation magnetization, magnetic anisotropies, coercive field, Curie temperature and Gilbert damping, by modulating the charge carrier population within a capacitor structure1-5. Note that the induced carriers are non-spin-polarized, so the control via the electric- field is independent of the direction of the magnetization. Here, we show that the magnetocrystalline anisotropy (MCA) of ultrathin Fe films can be reversibly modified by a spin current generated in Pt by the spin Hall effect. The effect 2 decreases with increasing Fe thickness, indicating that the origin of the modification can be traced back to the interface. Uniquely, the change in MCA due to the spin current depends not only on the polarity of the charge current but also on the direction of magnetization, i.e. the change in MCA has opposite sign when the direction of magnetization is reversed. The control of magnetism by the spin current results from the modified exchange splitting of majority- and minority-spin bands, and differs significantly from the manipulation by gate voltages via a capacitor structure, providing a functionality that was previously unavailable and could be useful in advanced spintronic devices. Spin torque (spin transfer torque and spin-orbit torque), which involves the use of angular momentum generated by partially spin-polarized and pure spin-polarized currents, is a well-known method for manipulating the dynamic properties of magnetic materials. In structures such as giant magnetoresistance or tunnel magnetoresistance junctions, the flow of a spin-polarized electric current through the junction imparts spin- transfer torques on the magnetization in the free ferromagnetic layer6-8. In heavy metal (HM)/ferromagnet (FM) bilayers, a charge current flowing in the HM induces a spin accumulation at the HM/FM interface, and generates spin-orbit torques acting on the FM9. These torques serve as a versatile control mechanism for magnetization dynamics, influencing processes such as magnetization switching10,11, domain wall motion12-14, magnetization relaxation (e.g., Gilbert damping)15, and even auto-oscillations of the 3 magnetization16,17. These innovative approaches and their combinations open up a spectrum of possibilities for tailoring magnetic properties with potential implications for advanced technologies such as magnetic random access memories9,18. While the impact of a spin current on the orientation of the magnetization (M) is widely recognised, there has been no explicit observation so far of successful spin current driven manipulation of the magnitude of M пҖӯ representing the static properties of magnetic materials. To explore this prospect, Fig. 1 illustrates the process of spin Fig. 1. Schematic of the microscopic mechanism of manipulation and modification of magnetism by a spin current. (a) The electron spins transmitted into the FM contain both transverse and longitudinal components with respect to M. Due to exchange coupling, the transverse component dephases and is absorbed by M, which gives rise to the damping- like spin-orbit torque and is responsible for changing the direction of M. The longitudinal component of the spin current is on average aligned with M, leading to additional filling of the majority band when M is oriented along the +z-direction, and an enhancement of the magnitude M as well as an increase of magnetic anisotropies are expected due to the enhanced splitting of the majority- and minority-spin energy bands. (b) When M is aligned along the вҖ“z-direction, the spin-polarized electron enters the minority band, which can lead to a decrease of M as well as a decrease of magnetic anisotropies because of the reduction of the splitting of the majority- and minority-spin energy bands. (c) and (d): The same as (a) and (b) but the polarization of the spin current is reversed, which is expected to reduce M DL-torque пҒ„M > 0 M a b c d DL-torque пҒ„M < 0 M DL-torque пҒ„M < 0 M DL-torque пҒ„M > 0 M 4 current transfer6-8,19-22. The spin accumulation generated by a charge current I, e.g. by the spin Hall effect (SHE) in the heavy metal, contains both transverse and longitudinal spin components with respect to M. The incident transverse spin current dephases and is absorbed by M, which gives rise to the damping-like spin-orbit torque and is responsible for the change of the direction of M19,20. After the spin transfer and within the spin diffusion length of the ferromagnetic metal, the exiting spin current is on average aligned with M, and the spin-up electron can fill the majority band when M is along the пҖ«z-direction (Fig. 1a). Due to the enhanced splitting of the majority- and minority-spin bands, this leads to an enhancement of M as well as an increase of the magnetic anisotropies. When M is along the пҖӯz-direction as shown in Fig. 1b, a decrease of M is expected because of the filling of the minority band and the reduction of the splitting of the majority- and minority-spin energy bands. Similarly, once the polarity of the spin current is reversed by reversing the polarity of I, a decrease (an increase) of M is expected if M // +z (пҖӯz) as shown in Fig. 1c (Fig. 1d). Therefore, the change of the magnetization пҒ„M by a spin current is expected to be odd with respect to the inversion of either the charge current or magnetization, i.e., пҒ„M(I, M) = пҖӯпҒ„M(пҖӯI, M) = пҖӯпҒ„M(I, пҖӯM). To prove the above scenario, Pt(6 nm)/Al(1.5 nm)/Fe(tFe = 4.5, 2.8, 2.2 and 1.2 nm) multilayers with different Fe thicknesses tFe are grown on a single two inch semi-insulating GaAs (001) wafer by molecular-beam epitaxy (Fig. 2b and methods). The Pt layer with strong spin-orbit interaction serves as the source of the spin current injected into the Fe layer22, and is thus responsible for the modification of the dynamic and static magnetic properties. The Al separation layer is used to avoid the magnetic proximity effect between Fe and Pt. Since Al has a weak spin-orbit interaction and a 5 long spin diffusion length, we assume that the spin current injected through the Pt/Al interface is transmitted unchanged to the Al/Fe interface and the transparency for the spin current remains unchanged. The effective mixing conductance geff вҶ‘вҶ“ at the Pt/Al/Fe interfaces, arising form spin pumping, is determined to be 2.7Г—1018 mпҖӯ2, which results in an interfacial spin transparency23,24 value Tint of 0.21 (Supplementary Note 2). The ultra-thin Fe films grown on GaAs (001) substrates allow us to investigate the expected modification of the magnetic properties for two reasons: Fe/GaAs (001) shows I) very low Gilbert damping values пҒЎ in the sub-nanometer thickness regime (пҒЎ = 0.0076 for tFe = 0.91 nm)25, and thus it is possible to detect the magnetization Fig. 2. (a) Schematic of the device for the detection of ferromagnetic resonance by time- resolved magneto-optical Kerr microscopy. (b) Schematic of the Pt/Al/Fe/GaAs (001) structure. (c) Diagram of crystallographic axes with easy and hard magnetization axes along <110> and <110> orientations. (d) FMR spectra for different dc currents I measured at f = 12 GHz and пҒӘI-H = 90o, where пҒӘI-H is the angle between the magnetic-field and the current direction as shown in the inset. (e) FMR linewidth (full width at half maximum) as a function of dc current for пҒӘI-H = Вұ90o; solid lines are the linear fits from which the modulation amplitude the least squares fit. The solid line is the calculation result based on the spin Hall effect of Pt when taking into account the in-plane magnetic anisotropies of Fe (Supplementary Note 4). 6 dynamics for ultra-thin samples, II) strong interfacial in-plane uniaxial magnetic anisotropy (UMA), which is advantageous for the detection of the spin current induced modification of magnetic anisotropies. The UMA originates from the anisotropic bonding between Fe and As atoms at the GaAs (001) surface26, where <110>- orientations are the magnetic easy axes (EA) and <110>-orientations are the magnetic hard axes (HA) (Fig. 2c). We perform time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr microscopy (TR-MOKE) measurements with out-of-plane driving field to characterize both the static and dynamic magnetic properties of Fe under the influence of spin currents generated by applying a charge current in Pt (Fig. 2a and methods). Typical ferromagnetic resonance FMR spectra for tFe = 2.2 nm and for the charge current applied along a -oriented device are shown in Fig. 2d. The FMR spectra are measured using a fixed microwave excitation frequency f of 12 GHz by sweeping the external magnetic-field H perpendicular to the current, i.e.пҖ пҒӘI-H = 90o, whereпҖ пҒӘI-H is the angle between the current and the magnetic field as defined in the inset of Fig. 2d. A clear modification of the FMR spectrum is observed with the application of a dc current. Each curve is well fitted by combining a symmetric (Lsym = пҒ„H2 / [4(HпҖӯHR)2 + VKerr = VsymLsym + Va-symLa-sym пҖ«Voffset , where HR is the resonance field, пҒ„H the full width at half maximum, Voffset the offset voltage, and Vsym (Va-sym) the magnitude of the symmetric (anti-symmetric) component of VKerr. It is worth to mention that, by analyzing the position of HR, we have also confirmed that the application of the charge currents does not have detrimental effect on the magnetic properties of the Fe films (Supplementary Note 3). 7 The dependence of пҒ„H on I for пҒӘI-H = Вұ90o is summarized in Fig. 2e, which shows a linear behavior with opposite slopes for пҒӘI-H = Вұ90o. This reveals the presence of the damping-like spin-orbit torque, confirming previous reports15. To extract the modification of the linewidth, the I-dependence of пҒ„H is fitted by Here пҒ„H0 is пҒ„H for I = 0, d(пҒ„H)/dI quantifies the modification of linewidth by the spin current and c1 accounts for a possible Joule heating effect on пҒ„H. A detailed measurement of d(пҒ„H)/dI as a function ofпҖ пҒӘI-H shows that d(пҒ„H)/dI varies strongly around the HA. The angular dependence can be well fitted by considering the SHE of Pt with an effective damping-like spin-orbit torque efficiency пҒёпҖ пҖ of 0.06 (Supplementary Note 4). The weaker Bychkov-Rashba-like and Dresselhaus-like spin- orbit interactions arising from the Fe/GaAs interface play a negligible role in the linewidth modulation27. Note that the distinctive presence of robust UMA at the Fe/GaAs interface significantly alters the angular dependence of d(пҒ„H)/dI. This deviation is remarkable when compared to the sinпҒӘI-H-dependence of d(пҒ„H)/dI as observed in polycrystalline samples, such as Pt/Py28,29. Away from the hard axis (~ Вұ15o), the enhanced sensitivity to SHE results from the fact that the potential barrier in the magnetic energy landscape is lowered upon the application of an external magnetic field (Supplementary Note 4). Consequently, the magnetization behaves вҖҳfreelyвҖҷ with no constraints in the vicinity of the HA, since all static torques induced by external magnetic-field and internal magnetic anisotropy fields cancel30. In this case, the magnetic stiffness is significantly reduced allowing a large cone angle of precession, which increases the sensitivity to SHE31. Having identified the modification of the FMR linewidth by SHE, we now focus 8 on the modification of the resonance field, which is related to the magnetization and magnetic anisotropies of Fe. Figures 3a and b show, respectively, the I-dependence of HR for tFe = 2.8 nm measured at selected frequencies for H applied along the easy axis (M // ), and along the hard axis (M // ). As shown at the top of each panel column, the current is applied along the -orientation, and the direction of the spin пҒі induced by SHE is along the -orientation with equal projections onto the - and -orientations. Therefore, this specific geometry allows a precise comparison of the current-induced modification of the resonance field between - and - Fig. 3. I dependence of HR measured at selected frequencies for H along - (a) and where HR(-I) and HR(+I) are respectively marked by red and blue arrows in each panel. (c) orientation, HR(-I) > HR(+I) still holds for all measured frequencies. However, for H along panels, for all the devices, the charge currents are applied along the -orientation, and the direction of the spin accumulation пҒі is along the -direction with equal projections onto the - and пҝҪ110пҝҪ -orientations. This experimental trick allows an accurate comparison of the current-induced modification for - and -orientations in the same device. 66.4 66.8 67.2 m0HR (mT) -4 -2 0 2 4 I (mA) m0HR (mT) -4 -2 0 2 4 I (mA) 17.4 17.7 18.0 18.3 55.2 55.5 55.8 m0HR (mT) -1 0 1 96.6 96.9 97.2 97.5 I (mA) m0HR (mT) -1 0 1 I (mA) a tFe = 2.8 nm tFe = 2.8 nm tFe = 1.2 nm tFe = 1.2 nm c b d H I // пҒі f = 12 GHz f = 15 GHz f = 18 GHz f = 12 GHz f = 15 GHz f = 18 GHz f = 12 GHz f = 14 GHz f = 16 GHz f = 12 GHz f = 14 GHz f = 16 GHz H I // пҒі H I // пҒі H I // пҒі 9 orientations in the same device. For M // as shown in Fig. 3a, all the HR-I traces show a positive curvature; while for M // in Fig. 3b, traces with a negative curvature are observed. The positive and negative curvatures along the and - orientations are due to the fact that the Joule heating induced by the charge current reduces the magnetization and thus the UMA, resulting in an increase of HR along , but a decrease of HR along . Apart from the symmetric parabolic dependence induced by Joule heating, a linear component in the I-dependence of HR is also observed holds for all the measured frequencies. As tFe is reduced to 1.2 nm, the I-dependence of HR along the EA is similar to the one with tFe = 2.8 nm and HR(пҖӯI) > HR(+I) still holds (Fig. 3c). However, for M along the -orientation as shown in Fig. 3d, the relative magnitude of HR(пҖӯI) and HR(+I) strongly depends on the excitation frequency, i.e., HR(пҖӯI) >HR(+I) holds for f = 16.0 GHz. The frequency-dependent shift of the resonance field indicates that the magnetic properties of Fe are modified by the spin current for thinner samples, an observation that has not been reported before. To quantify the modification of the magnetic anisotropies, the I-dependence of the HR trace is fitted by HR = HR0 + (dHR/dI)I + c2I2. (2) Here, HR0 is HR at I = 0, dHR/dI quantifies the modification of HR by the spin current, 10 and c2 accounts for Joule heating effects on HR. The f-dependences of dHR/dI for different orientations of M and different Fe thicknesses are summarised in Fig. 4. For independent of frequency with a positive zero frequency intercept (~ 0.08 mT/mA) for M // . As M is rotated by 180o to the -orientation, the sign of the intercept changes to negative with the same amplitude as the -orientation (~ пҖӯ0.08 mT/mA). This can be understood in terms of the current-induced Oersted field and/or field-like Fig. 4. (a) f-dependence of dHR/dI for H along the easy axes (- and -orientations). (b) f-dependence of dHR/dI for H along the hard axes (- and -orientations). The results in (a) and (b) are obtained for tFe = 2.8 nm which show that dHR/dI is independent of nm. The magnitude of dHR/dI along the hard axes for the thinner sample depends strongly on the excitation frequency, indicating the modification of magnetic anisotropies by spin current. The insets of (a)-(d) show the relative orientations between the current (I // , and is represented by black arrows) and the magnetic-field (or magnetization), where the easy axes are represented by brown arrows and the hard axes are represented by green arrows. -0.3 0.0 0.3 dHR/dI (mT/mA) tFe = 1.2 nm 6 9 12 15 18 -0.3 0.0 0.3 f (GHz) tFe = 2.8 nm tFe = 1.2 nm -0.3 0.0 0.3 6 9 12 15 18 -0.3 0.0 0.3 f (GHz) dHR/dI (mT/mA) tFe = 2.8 nm dHR/dI (mT/mA) dHR/dI (mT/mA) a b c d H // H // H // I // I // I // H // I // H // I // H // I // H // I // H // I // 11 torque hOe/FL, arising from the current flowing in Pt and Al, which shifts HR. The field- like torque originates from the incomplete dephasing (non-transmitted and/or non- dephased) component of the incoming spin19,20,32. For M along the hard axis as shown in Fig. 4b, the f-independent dHR/dI has also opposite zero-frequency intercepts for M // and M // with virtually identical hOe/FL value as the easy axis. This confirms that the spin accumulation пҒі (along the -orientation) has equal projection onto the <110>- and <110>-orientations. As tFe is reduced to 1.2 nm (Fig. 4c), the intercept of the f-independent dHR/dI traces along and -orientations, respectively, increases to ~ пҖӯ0.20 mT/mA and ~ 0.20 mT/mA. However, as M is aligned along the hard axis as shown in Fig. 4d, the behaviour of the dHR/dIпҖ traceпҖ differs significantly from other traces: I) itпҖ is no longer f-independent but shows a linear dependence on f with opposite slopes for M along the - and - orientations, II) the absolute value of the zero-frequency intercept along the hard axis (~ 0.32 mT/mA) is no longer equal to that along the easy axis (~ 0.2 mT/mA). The f- dependence of the dHR/dI traces cannot be interpreted to arise from the frequency- independent hOe/FL, and can only be explained by a change of the magnetic anisotropies induced by the spin current. Axis пҒ„HK пҒ„HBпҖ  пҒ„HU EA вҲҶHпҝҪ = kпҝҪf вҲҶHпҝҪ = вҲ’вҲҶHпҝҪ + kпҝҪf вҲҶHпҝҪ = вҲҶHпҝҪ вҲ’ kпҝҪf HA вҲҶHпҝҪ = kпҝҪf вҲҶHпҝҪ = вҲ’вҲҶHпҝҪ + kпҝҪf вҲҶHпҝҪ = вҲ’вҲҶHпҝҪ hard axes. In the presence of the in-plane magneto-crystalline anisotropies, the 12 dependencies of HR on f along the easy axis HR EAand the hard axis HR HA are given by the modified Kittel formula33 пҝҪ пҝҪ 2ПҖf Оі пҝҪ 2 = Ој0 2 пҝҪHR EA + HK+ HB 2 пҝҪ пҝҪHR EA пҖӯ HB пҖӯ HUпҝҪ пҝҪ 2ПҖf Оі пҝҪ 2 = Ој0 2 пҝҪHR HA + HK + HB 2 пҖӯHUпҝҪ пҝҪHR HA пҖӯ HB + HUпҝҪ (3) where пҒ§ is the gyromagnetic ratio, HK the effective magnetic anisotropy field due to the demagnetization field along <001>, HB the biaxial magnetic anisotropy field along <100>, and HU the in-plane uniaxial magnetic anisotropy field along <110>. The magnitude of HK, HU and HB at I = 0 for each tFe is quantified by the angular and frequency dependencies of HR (Supplementary Note 1). Obviously, a change of the magnetic anisotropy fields HA (HA = HK, HU, HB) by пҒ„HA (пҒ„HA = пҒ„HK, пҒ„HU, пҒ„HB) leads to a shift of HR and the magnitude of the shift пҒ„HR, defined as пҒ„HR = HR(HA)пҖ пҖӯпҖ HR(HA+пҒ„HA), depends on the excitation frequency. In the measured frequency range (10 GHz < f < 20 GHz), the пҒ„HRпҖӯf relations induced by пҒ„HA can be calculated by eq. 3, and their dependencies on f are summarized in Table 1 (Supplementary Note 6). Specifically, an increase (a decrease) of HK and HB leads to the f-dependent пҒ„HR with positive (negative) slope both along EA and HA. However, a change of HU leads to the f-independent пҒ„HR along HA, while an increase (a decrease) of HU leads to the f-dependent пҒ„HR with negative (positive) slope along EA. Since hOe/FL, generated by the dc current, also shifts the resonance field along the EA and HA axes by Вұ вҲҡ2 2 hOe/FL, where вҖҳ+вҖҷ corresponds to the and the directions, and вҖҳпҖӯвҖҷ corresponds to the and the directions, the total пҒ„HR along EA and HA is given by 13 пҝҪ вҲҶHR EA(f) = вҲҶHU пҖӯ вҲҶHB Вұ вҲҡ2 2 hOe/FL + (kK + kB пҖӯ kU)f вҲҶHR HA(f) =пҖ пҖӯ(вҲҶHU+вҲҶHB) Вұ вҲҡ2 2 hOe/FL+ (kK+kB)f (4) Here the slope k [k = kK, kU, kB, and k = пҝҪ(вҲҶпҝҪпҝҪ) пҝҪпҝҪ ] quantifies the modulation of HR induced by пҒ„HA. For пҒ„HR induced by both пҒ„HK and пҒ„HB, k вҲқ вҲҶHпҝҪ, which holds for both EA and HA. However, for пҒ„HR induced by пҒ„HU, we find k вҲқ вҲ’вҲҶHпҝҪ, which holds only for EA. Since the f-dependence of вҲҶHR EA induced by вҲҶHпҝҪ has an opposite slope as those induced by вҲҶHK and вҲҶHB , it is possible to obtain a f-independent вҲҶHR EA along EA (Fig. 4c) by tuning the corresponding parameters and to obtain a f-linear вҲҶHR HA along HA (Fig. 4d). To reproduce the results along the - and - orientations (i.e., the net magnetization of these two orientations is parallel to I) for tFe = 1.2 nm, we obtain пҒ„HB = 0.26 mT/mA, пҒ„HK = 2.0 mT/mA and пҒ„HU = 2.5 mT/mA through eqs. 3 and 4 (for details see Supplementary Note 6). In contrast, for the data sets for M along and -orientations (i.e., the magnetization is rotated by 180o and the net magnetization of these two orientations is antiparallel to I), пҒ„HB = пҖӯ0.26 mT/mA, пҒ„HK = пҖӯ2.0 mT/mA and пҒ„HU = пҖӯ2.5 mT/mA are obtained, which have the opposite polarity compared to the case of M along the - and -orientations. as a function of tFe. For tFe above 2.8 nm, the modification of the magnetic anisotropy is too small to be observed and is washed out by bulk effects. For tFe below 2.2 nm, the modification of пҒ„HA increases as tFe decreases. This indicates that the spin current induced modification of the magnetic energy landscape is of interfacial origin, similar to the damping-like spin-torque determined by the f-dependence of d(пҒ„H)/dI in the 14 same sample series (Supplementary Note 5). The modification changes sign when M is rotated by 180o, which fully validates the scenario of вҲҶHA(I, M) = пҖӯвҲҶHA(пҖӯI, M) = пҖӯвҲҶHA(I, пҖӯM) as suggested in Fig. 1. For a given M direction, the obtained пҒ„HB, пҒ„HK, and пҒ„HU have the same sign, which is also consistent with a monotonic increase (decrease) of HB, HK, and HU as temperature decreases (increases) (Supplementary Note 6). Moreover, these results also show that HU is more sensitive to the spin current than HK and HB, highlighting the importance of UMA to enable the observation of the modifications. The much smaller пҒ„HB value is due to the fact that HB is 1-2 orders smaller than HU and HK in the ultra-thin regime (Supplementary Note 1). The change of magnetic anisotropy пҒ„HK is directly related to the change of magnetization пҒ„M, which can be attributed to the additional filling of the electronic d- band. Strictly speaking, the induced filling of the bands in Fe occurs mainly close to the interface and is not homogeneously distributed, since it depends on the spin Fig. 5. Summary of tFe dependence of пҒ„HA (пҒ„HA = пҒ„HK, пҒ„HU, пҒ„HB) for opposite magnetization M directions, where solid symbols represent M // +z-direction and open symbols represent M // пҖӯz-direction. The relative orientations between the charge current I and M are shown in the inset. 1 2 3 4 5 -3.0 -1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 пҒ„[m0HA] (mT/mA) tFe (nm) пҒ„HU пҒ„HB пҒ„HK пҒ„HU пҒ„HK пҒ„HB M вҠ— I M вҠ— I 15 diffusion length of the spin current in Fe. In other words, the measured modulated magnetic anisotropies are averaged over the whole ferromagnetic film. To first-order approximation and for simplicity, we neglect the spin current distribution in Fe and assume that it is homogeneously distributed. The spin accumulation at the interface9 is given by uпҝҪ пҝҪ = 2eО»ОҫE tanh пҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ пҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ, where e is the elementary charge, пҒ¬ the spin diffusion length, E (= j/пҒі) the electric-field, j the current density and пҒі the conductivity of Pt. The areal spin density nSHE transferred into Fe, is obtained as nпҝҪпҝҪпҝҪ = uпҝҪ пҝҪО»N9, where N is the density of states at the Fermi level for Fe. Using N = 6 Г—1048 J-1m-3, пҒ¬ = 4 nm, пҒёпҖ пҖҪпҖ 0.06, пҒіпҖ  = 2.0 Г—106 пҒ—-1m-1, nSHE = 4.2 Г—1012 mB/cm2 is obtained for I = 1 mA. Since Fe has a bcc structure (lattice constant a = 2.8 Г…) with a moment of ~1.0 mB for tFe = 1.2 nm at room temperature, the areal density of the magnetic moment of Fe nFe is determined to be 2.6 Г—1014 mB/cm2. In this case, the filling of the d-band by SHE leads to a change of the magnetic moment of the order of nSHE/nFe ~ 0.16%, which agrees with the ratio between пҒ„HK and HK, i.e., пҒ„HK/HK ~ 2.0 mT/ 1 T ~ 0.2%. On the other hand, since the UMA shows a larger modulation than effective demagnetization and biaxial anisotropy, it is clear that the band structure of the interfacial Fe/GaAs plays a major role for the observed effect when the Fe film is sufficiently thin34. As shown in Fig. 1a, the spin current JS z can be represented in terms of two opposite flows of electrons carrying up and down spin moments, JS z = Jup вҖ“ Jdw, in the absence of a net electric current (Jc = Jup + Jdw = 0). Since the spin current doesnвҖҷt transfer charge, the inflow of the spin-up electrons leads to an increase of occupation of the spin-up d-states of Fe, while the outflow of spin-down electrons leads to a decrease of occupation of the spin-down d-states. A similar effect occurs in the presence of an applied magnetic field on the order of the molecular magnetic-field, i.e., H // +z 16 shifts the spin-up d-states down in energy, following by an increase of their occupation. In contrast, the spin-down d-states shift up in energy, leading to their depopulation. Therefore, to mimic the effect of spin current on the UMA and magnetic moment, we have investigated the dependence of the UMA on the external magnetic-field on the basics of first-principle electronic band structure calculations for Fe/GaAs. The resulting modification of UMA has been determined by means of magnetic torque calculations35(Supplementary Note 7). The applied magnetic-field results in an increase of the magnetic anisotropy energy along the easy axis, if the applied magnetic-field is parallel to the magnetization direction, and to a decrease of anisotropy in the case of antiparallel orientation. These changes are accompanied by an increase (for H > 0) or decrease (for H < 0) of the spin magnetic moment of Fe, consistent with experimental observations. Additional more sophisticated model might be needed to extend the existing model and to explain the experimental results quantitatively. Our results have shown that the intrinsic properties of ultra-thin ferromagnetic materials, i.e., the magnitude of M and the magnetocrystalline anisotropies, can be varied in a controlled way by spin currents, which has been ignored in the spin-transfer physics so far. This unique route of controlling magnetic anisotropies is not accessible by other existing ways using electric-field1-5 and mechanical stress36,37 in which the control of magnetism is independent on magnetization direction. Besides the magnitude of the magnetization, other material parameters, e.g., the Curie temperature, coercive field etc., are also expected to be controllable by spin current. It is known that spin- torque plays an essential role in modern spintronic devices, beyond this proof of principle, the so far unnoticed modification of the length of the magnetization vector by spin currents could offer an alternative and attractive generic actuation mechanism 17 for spin-torque phenomena, e.g., magnetization switching and auto-oscillations of the magnetization. We expect such a modification of the magnetic energy landscape to be a general feature, not only limited to ferromagnetic metal/heavy metal systems with strong spin-orbit interaction but also present in the case of conventional spin-transfer torques, where it is generally believed that the magnitude of M is fixed during the spin transfer process6-8. Moreover, the modification is not limited to in-plane ferromagnets, and one could manipulate the static magnetic properties of ferromagnets with perpendicular anisotropy by using out-of-plane polarized spin current source, e.g., WTe238, RuO239-42 and non-linear antiferromagnets Mn3Sn43 and Mn3Ga44. Finally, we believe that much larger modification amplitudes can be realized in other more effective spin current sources based on the wide-range of spin-torque material choices9. Methods Sample preparation. Samples with various Fe thicknesses tFe are grown by molecular-beam epitaxy (MBE). First a GaAs buffer layer of 100 nm is grown in a III- V MBE, after that the GaAs substrate (semi-insulating wafer, which has a resistivity пҒІ between 1.72Г—108 пҒ—.cm and 2.16Г—108 пҒ—.cm) is transferred to a metal MBE without breaking the vacuum for the growth of the metal layers. For a better comparison of physical properties of different samples, various Fe thicknesses are grown on a single two-inch wafer by stepping the main shadow shutter of the metal MBE. After the growth of the step-wedged Fe film, 1.5-nm Al/6-nm Pt layers are deposited on the whole wafer. Device. First, Pt/Al/Fe stripes with a dimension of 4.0 mm Г— 20 mm and with the long side along the - and -orientations are defined by a mask-free writer and Ar- 18 etching. After that, contact pads for the application of the dc current, which are made from 3-nm Ti and 50 nm Au, are prepared by evaporation and lift-off. Then, a 70-nm Al2O3 layer is deposited by atomic layer deposition to electrically isolate the dc contacts and the coplanar waveguide (CPW). Finally, the CPW consisting of 5 nm Ti and 150 nm Au is fabricated by evaporation, and the Fe/Al/Pt stripes are located in the gap between the signal line and ground line of the CPW (Fig. 2a). The CPW is designed to match the rf-network which has an impedance of 50 пҒ—. The width of the signal line and the gap is 50 mm and 30 mm, respectively. Magnetization dynamics of Fe is excited by out-of-plane Oersted field induced by the rf microwave currents flowing in the signal and ground lines. Measurements. For TRMOKE microscopy measurements, a pulse train of a Ti:Sapphire laser (repetition rate of 80 MHz and pulse width of 150 fs) with wavelength of 800 nm is phase-locked to the microwave current. A phase shifter is used to adjust the phase between the laser pulse train and microwave, and the phase is kept constant during the measurement. The polar Kerr signal at a certain phase, VKerr, is detected by a lock-in amplifier by phase modulating the microwave current at a frequency of 6.6 kHz. The VKerr signal is measured by sweeping the external magnetic field, and the magnetic-field can be rotated in-plane by 360o. A Keithley 2400 device is used as the dc current source for linewidth and resonance field modifications. All measurements are performed at room temperature. 19