Unifying frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains Yujia Yang,1, 2, ∗ Paolo Cattaneo,1, ∗ Arslan S. Raja,1, 2 Bruce Weaver,1 Rui Ning Wang,1, 2 Alexey Sapozhnik,1 Fabrizio Carbone,1 Thomas LaGrange,1, † and Tobias J. Kippenberg1, 2, ‡ 1Institute of Physics, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2Center for Quantum Science and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland Frequency metrology lies at the heart of precision measurement. Optical frequency combs provide a coherent link uniting the microwave and optical domains in the electromagnetic spectrum, with profound implications in timekeeping , sens- ing and spectroscopy [3–5], fundamental physics tests , exoplanet search [8–10], and light de- tection and ranging [11–13]. Here, we extend this frequency link to free electrons by coherent modulation of the electron phase by a continuous- wave laser locked to a fully stabilized optical fre- quency comb. Microwave frequency standards are transferred to the optical domain via the fre- quency comb, and are further imprinted in the electron spectrum by optically modulating the electron phase with a photonic chip-based mi- croresonator. As a proof-of-concept demonstra- tion, we apply this frequency link in the calibra- tion of an electron spectrometer, and use the elec- tron spectrum to measure the optical frequency. Our work bridges frequency domains differed by a factor of ∼ 1013 and carried by different physi- cal objects, establishes a spectroscopic connection between electromagnetic waves and free-electron matter waves, and has direct ramifications in ultrahigh-precision electron spectroscopy. Frequency is the most accurately measured physical quantity and is pivotal to precision metrology in a mul- titude of scientific and technological sectors. It was ad- vised by Arthur Schawlow, the Nobel laureate in physics in 1981, to “never measure anything but frequency” . The optical frequency comb (OFC) consists of a ‘comb’ of precisely equidistant frequency lines at optical fre- quencies separated by a microwave frequency . The OFC serves as a phase-coherent link, or a ‘light gear’, that accurately connects frequency components in the microwave and optical realms, and has revolution- ized a plethora of fields including atomic clocks , spectroscopy [3–5], ultrafast optics , telecommunica- tions , navigation and ranging [11–13]. Electron spectroscopy uses free electrons to perform spectroscopic measurements of specimens. In particu- lar, electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) measures the energy loss of electrons transmitting through and in- elastically scattered by a specimen, based on the spa- tial distribution of the electron beam bent and dispersed by a magnetic field . Typically implemented in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) with a post- column spectrometer, EELS possesses sub-atomic spa- tial resolution and is a powerful probe for local exci- tations or chemically resolved imaging, widely applied in the investigation of atomic composition , chemi- cal bonding , and vibrational properties of materials, macromolecule assemblies and subcellular compartments in biological systems , as well as ther- mal , electronic , and optical properties of nanoscale devices. Despite the excellent spatial reso- lution, the spectral resolution of EELS (about 10−3 eV for state-of-the-art techniques ) is far inferior to that of its optical counterparts, where the optical frequency comb allows measuring absolute frequencies with preci- sion reaching mHz-level or 10−18 eV . Moreover, the frequency reference or calibration standard for EELS re- lies on elemental edges associated with inner shell ion- izations. This type of calibration has a limited accuracy and applicable spectral range, and needs to presume a linear dispersion. Here, we unite electron spectroscopy with optical frequency metrology, and use the precisely measured photon energy for EELS calibration. I. FREQUENCY METROLOGY ACROSS MICROWAVE, OPTICAL, AND FREE-ELECTRON DOMAINS ogy uniting microwave, optical, and free-electron do- mains. The microwave and optical frequencies are linked by an optical frequency comb, whose carrier-envelope- offset frequency fceo and repetition rate frep are locked. Therefore, the comb teeth are located at optical frequen- cies that are precisely synthesized from microwave fre- quencies: fm = fceo + m × frep, with m the mode num- ber. A monochromatic continuous-wave (CW) laser is then offset-locked to one comb tooth with a microwave local oscillator (LO), and one obtains a synthesized op- tical frequency fopt = fceo + m × frep ± fLO. (1) The CW laser is then used to impose a coherent phase modulation onto free-electron wavefunctions [32– 34], which broadens the initially narrow electron spec- trum into a comb-like structure consisting of regularly spaced energy sidebands (see SI) at EN = E0 + N × hfopt, (2) where E0 is the initial electron energy, h is the Planck constant, and N is an integer. Equally, the genera- arXiv:2403.10486v1 [physics.optics] 15 Mar 2024 2 a Si3N4 OSA ESA Frequency Comb OBPF EDFA FPC CW laser PD PD TEM e- Light input Light output Wavelength meter b hfopt lock fceo lock fLO lock frep lock Microwave Optics Free electron Optical frequency Optical frequency Electron energy 10 MHz OPLL DPD Servo OSC fceo frep fLO Uniting optical frequency metrology with electron spectroscopy. a, Concept of frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains. Microwave and optical domains are connected by a fully stabilized optical frequency comb with the carrier-envelope-offset frequency fceo and the repetition rate frep being locked. A continuous-wave (CW) laser is offset locked to one comb tooth via a local oscillator (LO) at frequency fLO. The CW laser then coherently modulates the phase of an electron beam, generating sidebands in the electron spectrum that are regularly spaced by the photon energy hfopt. b, Experimental setup. A CW laser pumps a Si3N4 photonic chip-based microresonator in a transmission electron microscope (TEM) to modulate the electron phase and broaden the electron spectrum measured in a post-column electron spectrometer. A wavelength meter performs coarse measurement of the laser frequency. The transmitted CW laser is mixed with a stabilized optical frequency comb (OFC) to generate microwave beatnotes that are measured with an electronic spectrum analyzer (ESA). An optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) monitors the laser and the OFC. An optical phase-locked loop (OPLL) offset-locks the laser to one comb tooth. The beatnote and a 10 MHz microwave local oscillator (LO) are mixed at a 12-bit double-balanced digital phase detector (DPD) that accounts for large phase slips induced by frequency fluctuations. The DPD output, or error signal, is fed to a servo controller to adjust the laser frequency. Blue paths represent fiber connections, and black lines stand for electronic connections. EDFA: erbium-doped fiber amplifier; FPC: fiber polarization controller; PD: photodetector; OSC: oscilloscope; OBPF: optical bandpass filter. tion of energy sidebands can be understood as quantum- mechanical superpositions of electron states correspond- ing to the absorption or emission of N photons in the inelastic electron-light scattering (IELS) process. In the end, one obtains an electron spectrum consisting of en- ergy sidebands centered at the initial electron energy E0 with energy change EN − E0 = Nh(fceo + mfrep ± fLO), (3) arising from electron phase modulation at an optical fre- quency synthesized from microwave frequencies. We use a high-quality-factor Si3N4 photonic chip- based microresonator driven by a CW laser to implement the electron phase modulation (Fig. 1b). Though coherent optical modulation of free electrons was achieved more than a decade ago in the context of photon-induced near-field electron microscopy , it is the development of photonic integrated circuit- based electron phase modulation that permits both CW laser-driven operation and strong phase modulation. These attributes translate into a narrow-linewidth driv- ing laser with a well-defined frequency fopt and a large electron spectral broadening, both important to the ap- plication of precise optical frequency metrology in elec- tron spectroscopy. The experimental setup (Fig. 1b) consists of a TEM with a post-column electron energy-loss spectrometer, a photonic chip-based microresonator mounted on a cus- tom holder (Fig. 2a), and an optical frequency syn- thesizer based on a frequency comb. Efficient interac- tion requires the electron velocity to match the phase velocity of light (phase-matching condition). In the present case, electrons (∼ 120 keV energy, correspond- ing to ∼ 2.9 × 1019 Hz frequency) phase-matched to the optical wave (∼ 1550 nm wavelength) traverse the evanes- cent near-field of the microresonator and are spectrally broadened by the IELS . An optical phase-locked loop (OPLL) locks the CW laser to one tooth of a sta- bilized OFC with a 10 MHz offset frequency defined by a microwave LO, so that the absolute laser frequency is precisely determined. Figure 2b shows a typical mi- crowave spectrum with multiple beatnotes. The beatnote near 250 MHz originates from the repetition rate frep of the OFC, while the other 4 beatnotes are generated by beating the CW laser with the comb teeth of the OFC. The absolute optical frequency can be precisely measured from the microwave beatnote and the mode number m determined by the wavelength meter. When the OPLL is activated, the beatnote with the lowest frequency is locked to the LO at fLO = 10 MHz, and the microwave spectrum is displayed in the inset of Fig. 2b. In this way, an absolute optical frequency is synthesized. Figure 2c illustrates the corresponding optical spectrum. Note that OSA only monitors the optical frequency compo- nents, while precise frequency measurement is performed 3 a b c d 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 Microwave frequency (MHz) -110 -100 -90 -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 Power (dBm) -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 Electron energy - 120 keV (eV) 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 Normalized electron counts (arb. u.) 5 10 15 Frequency (MHz) -110 -90 -70 Power (dBm) Optical frequency (THz) -80 -70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 Power (dBm) ESA RBW 5 kHz Unlocked Locked OSA RBW 0.02 nm EELS dispersion 50 meV/px (nominal) Raw Pre-filtered Deconvoluted CW laser fopt Bandpass-filtered optical frequency comb fm=fceo+m·frep frep fbeat,1 fbeat,2 fbeat,3 fbeat,4 50 μm e- Frequency-locked microwave, optical, and electron spectra. a, Photograph of the photonic chip mounted on a custom holder. Inset: optical micrograph of the microresonator and schematic depiction of the electron beam position. b, Microwave spectrum recorded with an ESA. The beatnote around 250 MHz is from the repetition rate frep of the optical frequency comb, and the other beatnotes are generated by beating the CW laser with the frequency comb teeth. Inset: microwave spectrum when the OPLL is activated. c, Optical spectrum recorded with an OSA. The narrow peak corresponds to the CW laser and the lower plateau is from the bandpass-filtered frequency comb. Individual comb lines are not resolved by the OSA. d, Electron spectrum recorded with the electron spectrometer. The raw spectrum (gray) is first smoothed (black) with a Gaussian pre-filter, and then deconvoluted to generate a comb-like spectrum with well-separated peaks (green). in the microwave domain. The optical spectrum features a narrow peak from the CW laser, and a plateau from the bandpass-filtered OFC (individual comb lines cannot be resolved). electron spectrum generated by the IELS. Due to the fi- nite spectral width (0.7 −0.8 eV) of the incident electrons and hence the elastically scattered electrons (known as the zero-loss peak, ZLP), the energy sidebands at multi- ples of the photon energy (∼ 0.8 eV) are not fully sepa- rated and overlap each other. To mitigate this issue, we first smooth the raw data by convolution with a Gaus- sian pre-filter, and then use the Richardson-Lucy de- convolution to retrieve a comb-like spectrum with well-separated peaks. These electron spectral peaks are spaced by a photon energy hfopt, with the absolute opti- cal frequency fopt precisely measured or synthesized from microwave frequencies frep, fceo, and fLO (cf. Eq. 3). Consequently, a frequency link is built across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains. II. ULTRAHIGH-PRECISION CALIBRATION OF AN ELECTRON SPECTROMETER As a proof-of-concept demonstration, we apply the aforementioned frequency metrology to the calibra- tion of an EELS spectrometer attached to an un- monochromated TEM with a thermionic electron gun. Recent advances in electron monochromators, spectrom- eters, and detectors have pushed the energy resolution of EELS to the millielectronvolt level . However, the typical calibration methods of electron spectrometers fall short of the required precision or demand complicated operations. The standard calibration based on ioniza- tion edges has a limited spectral range and accuracy and is insensitive to local changes of dispersion. The drift tube scanning method could perform local calibra- tion, but suffers from multiple acquisitions and voltage instabilities. The frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains provides a direct frequency link from precisely measured microwave frequencies to the change of the electron energy (cf. Eq. 3). There- fore, the IELS-broadened electron spectrum serves as an energy reference for EELS calibration, using the energy sidebands located at multiples of the photon energy hfopt as calibration markers. We employ the IELS-broadened electron spectrum in calibrating an electron spectrometer with 2048 pixels set at 50 meV/px nominal dispersion (Fig. 3). The goal of the calibration is to obtain an ‘energy solution’, which is a precise pixel-to-energy mapping that might differ from the nominal dispersion specified by the manufac- 4 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 px -600 -400 -200 0 200 meV 0 1000 2000 px -50 0 50 eV 49.6810(147) meV/px 49.6836(147) meV/px 0 1000 2000 px -300 -200 -100 0 meV 0 1000 2000 px -10 -5 0 10 15 meV -50 0 50 meV 0 50 100 150 200 Counts a b c d e Exp. 1 Exp. 2 E0=120 keV Electron energy CCD camera hfopt 5 250 σ = 20.9 meV Electron spectrometer calibration with two independent exposures. a, Deviations of the calibration markers at multiples of the photon energy from the nominal energy of the spectrometer for Exposures (Exp.) 1 and 2. Shaded areas correspond to error bars. Inset: a schematic depiction of obtaining the energy solution from the electron spectrum. b, c, d, First, second, and third-order components of the polynomial fits of the energy solutions (pixel-to-energy mappings) for the two exposures. The first-order components illustrate the calibrated average dispersion. e, Histogram of the pixel-wise root-mean-square deviation between the energy solutions of the two exposures. Red curve represents a normal distribution fit with a standard deviation of 20.9 meV. turer. Pixel positions (with sub-pixel precision) for the calibration markers are assigned an energy of the corre- sponding multiples of the photon energy; pixels in be- tween the markers are assigned an energy from linear interpolation. We perform the calibration with two in- dependent exposures, both using electrons modulated by a CW laser at a frequency of 194 567 516 MHz. Figure 3a displays the deviation of the calibration markers (at multiples of the photon energy) from the nominal en- ergy that is linear with the pixel number with a slope of 50 meV/px. Both calibrations show a negative deviation indicating the nominal dispersion overestimates the true dispersion and that the common assumption of having a constant dispersion is inaccurate. Figures 3b-d depict the first, second, and third-order components of the poly- nomial fits of the energy solutions for the two exposures. The first-order components represent the calibrated av- erage dispersion, which is ∼ 300 μeV/px systematically less than the nominal dispersion, and differs by less than 3 μeV/px between the two calibrations with a time in- terval of 4 min 40 sec. The deviation from the nominal energy solution is dominated by a second-order compo- nent common in both exposures, while the third-order component is at the scale of data scattering. Figure 3e shows a histogram of the pixel-wise root-mean-square de- viation between the energy solutions retrieved from the two exposures, and a normal distribution fit (red curve) indicates a standard deviation of 20.9 meV. The differ- ence in the calibrated energy dispersions and the stan- dard deviation of the energy solutions are indicative of the ‘jitter’ between two measurements. The similarity between the two exposures in local irregularities (Fig. 3a&e), calibrated dispersion (Fig. 3b), and global nonlin- earity (Fig. 3c) cross-verifies the accuracy and precision of our frequency-metrology-based calibration method. We further compared the spectrometer calibrations using electrons modulated at four different absolute optical frequencies: 194 567 516 MHz, 193 474 819 MHz, 192 384 387 MHz, and 191 292 697 MHz (with measure- ment time intervals of 25 min 25 sec, 18 min 17 sec, and 15 min 19 sec). Figure 4a illustrates the deviation of the calibration markers from the nominal energy for the four calibrations. The calibrated average dispersions, or the first-order components of the polynomial fits of the en- ergy solutions, are shown in Fig. 4b. Similarly to the previous case, the calibrated average dispersions reveal a systematic error of ∼ 300 μeV/px in the nominal disper- sion, and differ from each other by less than ∼ 20 μeV/px. We exhibit an example of electron-based frequency metrology by measuring the optical frequency from the IELS-broadened electron spectrum. With the number of electron energy sidebands and their energy span, one could back-calculate the photon energy and thus the opti- cal frequency. Figure 4c shows the error in such measure- ment for the four optical frequencies, using the nominal or pre-calibrated pixel-to-energy mapping of the electron spectrometer. The errors are in the range of 1.20 THz to 1.28 THz, corresponding to a fractional error of about 6-7 parts in 103. Alternatively, we calibrate the spectrome- ter using electrons modulated at the optical frequency of 194 567 516 MHz, and the resultant measurement er- rors in optical frequency become less than 61.1 GHz, cor- 5 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000 px -600 -400 -200 0 200 meV fopt = 194 567 516 MHz fopt = 193 474 819 MHz fopt = 192 384 387 MHz fopt = 191 292 697 MHz 0 500 1000 1500 2000 px -50 0 50 eV 191 192 193 194 195 Optical frequency fopt(THz) Pre-calibration error (THz) 191 192 193 194 195 Optical frequency fopt(THz) 0 50 100 Post-calibration error (GHz) a b c d 49.6836(147) meV/px 49.6672(147) meV/px 49.6737(147) meV/px 49.6676(147) meV/px 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 calibration -50 Electron spectrometer calibrations with electrons modulated at four different optical frequencies. a, Deviations of the calibration markers at multiples of the photon energy from the nominal energy of the spectrometer. Shaded areas correspond to error bars. b, First-order components of the polynomial fits of the energy solutions (pixel-to- energy mappings) for the four calibrations, showing the calibrated average dispersions. c&d, Errors in optical frequencies measured from electron spectra before (c) and after (d) calibrating the electron spectrometer with electrons modulated at the optical frequency of 194 567 516 MHz. Error bars in (c) are derived from the maximal deviation of the pre-calibration nominal dispersion from the calibrated dispersion, and error bars in (d) are obtained from the calibration uncertainty of the average dispersion. responding to a fractional error less than 3.2 parts in 104. We emphasize that this value does not represent the precision limit of such measurement, as it does not exclude the effects of instrument performance, instabil- ity, and lab environment. We also point out that the frequency-resolving capability in our demonstration is di- rectly provided by free electrons, in stark contrast to pre- vious reports where the frequency-resolving capability of high-precision electron spectroscopy comes from tuning the laser frequency . III. DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK To summarize, we unify frequency metrology across microwave, optical, and free-electron domains. The cas- caded frequency link is enabled by an optical frequency comb that unites microwave and optical frequencies and a photonic chip-based electron phase modulator that bridges optical waves and free electrons. Our work con- nects frequency domains differed by a factor of ∼ 1013 and carried by different physical objects - electromagnetic waves and free-electron matter waves. The precision of such frequency metrology could be further enhanced by state-of-the-art electron monochromators and spectrom- eters. The photonic microresonator-based electron phase modulator provides an efficient electron-photon coupling so that the energy sidebands in the electron spectrum cover the full range of the spectrometer and a single ac- quisition is sufficient for calibrating the whole spectrome- ter. The efficient coupling is also achieved with both the laser and the electron beam in CW mode, making the calibration technique available in any TEM. We antic- ipate our results would significantly improve the spec- tral resolution of electron spectroscopy, which already excels at the atomic-scale spatial resolution. This im- provement could further the spectroscopic capabilities of free electrons in vibrational spectroscopy , chemical shift analysis , quasiparticle search , and quantum optics . Our work sets the milestone for establishing a precise standard or definition of electron energy change in the context of EELS. The IELS electron spectrum from the photonic chip-based device could calibrate the elec- tron energy-loss spectrum of a specimen when two spec- tra are taken in succession. In-line calibration could also be implemented with a customized sample mount hold- ing both the photonic chip and the specimen. Beyond calibration, the investigation lays the foundation for cre- ating an ‘electron frequency comb’ when using photon energy sufficiently larger than the initial electron energy spread, thus enabling novel ultrahigh-precision frequency metrology with free electrons. Methods Photonic chip design, fabrication, and packaging: The Si3N4 photonic chip (wafer ID: D66_01_F10_C16) was fabricated by the photonic Damascene process , with SiO2 bottom cladding and no top cladding. The microresonator has a ring radius of 20 μm. The nominal waveguide cross sections are 2 μm × 650 nm and 800 nm×650 nm for the microresonator and the bus waveguide, respectively. The microresonator was characterized by a frequency- 6 comb-assisted broadband optical spectroscopy with tunable diode lasers . The measured total loss rates of the resonances used in the experiment are around ∼ 150 MHz, corresponding to a quality factor Q of ∼ 1.3 × 106. The input and output fibers were prepared by splicing a short segment of ultrahigh numerical aperture (UNHA-7) fiber to a single mode fiber (SMF-28), and the photonic chip was packaged by attaching the fibers to the bus waveguide inverse taper with an ultraviolet-cured epoxy . The packaged photonic chip was mounted on a custom-built TEM sam- ple holder, and the measured fiber-to-fiber optical transmission is ∼ 18.6%. Transmission electron microscopy and electron energy-loss spectroscopy: The photonic chip was inserted into a TEM (JEOL JEM-2100PLUS) with a LaB6 thermionic electron gun. The elec- tron beam was emitted by the gun in the continuous-beam mode and accelerated to 120 keV, allowing for phase matching with the microresonator optical modes. The beam current was in the range of 5-10 pA. The initial energy spread of the electron beam was 0.7- 0.8 eV. During the experiment, the TEM was in low-magnification (×300 on the control panel) mode with the objective lens off. The electron beam was tightly focused close to the surface of the pho- tonic chip with a spot size at the sample of ∼40 nm (FWHM) at a distance of 20 −30 nm from the chip surface, and a convergence angle of ∼ 100 μrad (50 μm condenser aperture, spot size set with free-lens control of the condenser lenses). The electron spectra were measured with a post-column spectrometer (Gatan Imaging Filter GIF Quantum SE) with a 2048×2048 pixels CCD camera (US1000) and ∼ 5 mrad collection semi-angle. Each EELS spectrum was ob- tained by summing 5 frames of 2-sec exposure each. The photonic chip was mounted on the tip of a custom-built sample holder with teflon fiber feedthroughs allowing bare optical fibers to enter the TEM column and be coupled to the photonic chip. During the experiments, the surface of the photonic chip was kept parallel to the TEM optical axis and to the electron beam optical axis. The electron energy-loss spectra were acquired in TEM mode with the electron beam focused tangent to the microresonator waveguide and parallel to its surface. The electron spectral broadening was maximized by fine-tuning the electron beam position and the pho- tonic chip tilt. Optical setup: The CW laser was emitted by a tunable exter- nal cavity diode laser (Toptica) with a wavelength around 1550 nm and amplified by an erbium-doped fiber amplifier (Keopsys). The optical power sent to the input fiber was 50 −80 mW. The opti- cal polarization was controlled by a fiber polarization controller to excite the transverse magnetic mode family of the microresonator, and the laser frequency was tuned to specific resonant frequen- cies (shown in Fig. 4). A fraction of the output light was sent to a wavelength meter (HighFinesse) for coarse measurement of the optical frequency. The wavelength meter was calibrated by an internal neon lamp before each experimental session. The erbium- doped-fiber-laser-based optical frequency comb (Menlo Systems) was self-referenced and filtered by an optical bandpass filter. The frequency comb had a repetition rate frep = 251.6575 MHz and a carrier-envelope-offset frequency fceo = 20 MHz. The optical fre- quency comb and the output light were mixed at a fast photodiode (New Focus), with their spectral overlap monitored by an opti- cal spectrum analyzer (Yokogawa) and their beatnotes measured by an electronic spectrum analyzer (Rohde & Schwarz). An opti- cal phase-locked loop (OPLL) performed offset locking of the CW laser to one tooth of the optical frequency comb. Specifically, the lowest-frequency beatnote was brought to ∼ 10 MHz by tuning the laser piezo controller. The beatnote was then filtered, amplified, and compared with the reference, a 10 MHz local oscillator, using a double-balanced 12-bit digital phase detector (Menlo Systems). The digital phase detector has a large phase detection range and accounts for frequency fluctuation induced phase slips. The phase detector output, i.e. the error signal, was used as the input signal of a PID servo controller, of which the output signal was fed back to the laser current controller for actuation. The ambiguity of the beatnote frequency (± in Eq. 1) was removed by observing the shift direction of the beatnote while adjusting the laser frequency when the OPLL was deactivated. An oscilloscope monitored both the error signal from the phase detector and the optical transmission measured by a photodiode. Data processing and analysis: The incident electrons, as well as the elastically scattered electrons, have a finite spectral width (0.7 −0.8 eV) comparable to the photon energy (∼ 0.8 eV). There- fore, the energy sidebands in the IELS electron spectrum are not fully separated and overlap each other. As a result, the electron spectral peak positions deviate from the regularly spaced energy grid defined by integer multiples of the photon energy. To miti- gate this issue, we first smooth the raw data by convolution with a Gaussian pre-filter, and then use the Richardson-Lucy (RL) de- convolution to retrieve a comb-like spectrum with well-separated peaks . The RL deconvolution uses the experimentally mea- sured zero-loss peak (ZLP) spectrum as the deconvolution Kernel, after proper normalization and zero-padding. For electron spec- trometer calibration, the peak positions of the deconvolved, comb- like electron spectrum are used as calibration markers. Pixel posi- tions (with sub-pixel precision) of the calibration markers are as- signed an energy of the corresponding integer multiples of the pho- ton energy, which is determined from absolute optical frequency measurement. Pixels in between the calibration markers are as- signed an energy from linear interpolation. As the result, the en- ergy solution, i.e. the pixel-to-energy mapping, of the spectrometer is retrieved. The energy solution is then fitted with a third-order polynomial, with the slope of the linear component representing the calibrated average dispersion. The iterative RL deconvolu- tion typically has an optimal number of iterations, at which point the deconvolution has to be terminated to prevent noise amplifica- tion . For each electron spectrum, the deconvolution is tested for a range of parameter combinations with the Gaussian pre-filter width in 0.01-0.16 eV (standard deviation) and the number of iter- ations in 10-300. The optimal parameter set is determined by eval- uating the calibration results, i.e. the calibrated average dispersion and energy solution, in three validation methods: (1) simulation- validation, where the deconvolution is performed on a simulated IELS electron spectrum with a known spectrometer energy solu- tion as the ground truth; (2) self-validation, where a single exper- imental electron spectrum is deconvolved with different parameter combinations; (3) cross-validation, where two experimental elec- tron spectra generated with the same absolute optical frequency and recorded in rapid succession (less than 5 min time interval) are deconvolved and compared. In consequence, the obtained range of optimal parameter combinations is 0.05-0.09 eV for the Gaus- sian pre-filter width and 60-100 for the number of iterations. The same range of parameter combinations is applied in the process- ing of all electron spectra. We use a range rather than a single parameter combination to ensure the robustness of the calibration method and to estimate the calibration uncertainty. The final cali- bration is the average of the calibrations obtained from all param- eter combinations in the aforementioned range, and the maximal deviation from the average is taken as the uncertainty, which is 14.68 μeV/px in the average dispersion and 35.08 meV (0.7 pixel under nominal dispersion) pixel-wise root-mean-square uncertainty in the energy solution. These two uncertainty values are obtained from cross-validation and are the largest values from all three val- idation methods. Hence, the two uncertainty values represent a conservative estimate and do not exclude short-term jitter from instrument drift, instability, and lab environment.