Unveiling the physics of the spin-orbit coupling at the surface of a model topological insulator: from theory to experiments D. Puntel,1 S. Peli,2 W. Bronsch,2 F. Cilento,2 H. Ebert,3 J. Braun,3 and F. Parmigiani1, 4, 5, ∗ 1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy 2Elettra - Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Strada Statale 14, km 163.5, 34149 Trieste, Italy 3Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-University M ̈unchen, Butenandtstr. 5-11, 81377 M ̈unchen, Germany 4Elettra - Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Strada Statale 14, km 163.5, Trieste, Italy 5International Faculty, University of Cologne, Albertus-Magnus-Platz, 50923 Cologne, Germany Spin-orbit interaction affects the band structure of topological insulators beyond the opening of an inverted gap in the bulk bands, and the understanding of its effects on the surface states is of primary importance to access the underlying physics of these exotic states. Here, we propose an ab initio approach benchmarked by pump-probe angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy data to model the effect of spin-orbit coupling on the surface states of a topological insulator. The critical novelty of our approach lies in the possibility of accounting for a partial transfer of the spin-orbit coupling to the surface states, mediated by the hybridization with the surface resonance states. In topological insulators, the fraction of transferred spin-orbit coupling influences the strength of the hexagonal warping of the surface states, which we use as a telltale of the capability of our model to reproduce the experimental dispersion. The comparison between calculations and measurements, of both the unoccupied and part of the occupied Dirac cone, indicates that the fraction of spin-orbit coupling transferred to the surface states by hybridization with the resonance states is between 70% and 85% of its full atomic value. This offers a valuable insight to improve the modeling of surface state properties in topological insulators for both scientific purposes and technological applications. INTRODUCTION Spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in topological insulators (TIs) is responsible for the opening of an inverted bandgap between the valence and the conduction band that endows the band structure with non trivial topology [1–5]. In the surface regime separating the nontrivial in- sulator and the vacuum, topology arguments dictate the existence of Dirac-like states inside the gap, which are known as topological surface states (TSSs, schematized with brown lines in Fig. 1(a)) [6–8]. Since the majority of the technological applications of TIs is based on the electronic properties of the TSS [9–14], a detailed un- derstanding of the influence of SOC on these states is vital, as it can provide pathways to tailor the proper- ties of the TSS and, therefore, the optical and transport properties of the system. As a recent experimental de- termination of the e-ph coupling strength in BiSe and BiTe has shown , a quantitative understanding of the mechanisms that affect the physical properties of TSS in TIs can unlock the gate to control the transport degree of freedom at the surface of these materials. In addition to the TSS, the bandstructure of model TIs in the vicinity of the Fermi level comprises several features, summarized in Fig. 1(a): unoccupied surface resonance states (SRSs, in dark brown) [16–18], a two- dimensional electron gas arising from surface defects (in orange) and the bottom of the conduction band (in shaded yellow), which is typically populated due to unin- tentional electron doping of the surface . A deviation of the TSSs dispersion from linearity has been found to lead to the so-called hexagonal warping of the constant- energy surfaces (CESs) in the kx − ky plane (Fig. 1(b)) [21–24]. The hexagonal warping has attracted great at- tention due to the consequences on the out-of-plane spin polarization of the TSS and the modification of the scattering properties due to a larger nesting of the Fermi surface . The phenomenon is most often ex- plained by means of effective models like the k·p Hamil- tonian . However, an ab initio characterization of the mechanism through which the SOC acts on the surface state dispersion is still lacking. On the other hand, this approach was applied to the Rashba surface state of Au(111) in order to investigate the effect of SOC on topologically-trivial surface states from an ab initio perspective . The comparison with photoemission experiments has shown that the correct value for the Rashba splitting of these states is recovered assuming that only the 50% of the full SOC of atomic Au is acting on the surface states. The evidence of a partial SOC transfer in surface states of simple metals raises the question of whether this mech- anism is common also to the surface states of TIs. The two cases are rather different, since topological surface states retain a marked bulk character via the hybridiza- tion with the SRSs. Hence, at variance with the case of Au(111) Rashba states, the SOC is mediated to the surface states via hybridization with the SRSs. Our study indicates that it is possible to model the hybridization-mediated transfer of SOC from the bulk to the surface states in the framework of an ab initio the- ory. This coupling allows the transfer to surface states of a fraction of the atomic SOC, similarly to the case of Au(111) Rashba states. Along with other changes in the arXiv:2403.01029v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 1 Mar 2024 2 dispersion, the fraction of transferred SOC influences the strength of the TSS warping, in agreement with the pre- diction of the k · p Hamiltonian. On these bases, we per- formed one-step photoemission calculations for the pro- totypical topological insulator Bi2Se3 (Fig. 1(c)) vary- ing the fraction of SOC transferred to surface states from its full atomic value down to 50%. To prove the validity of this model, we benchmark our results with pump-probe Angle-Resolved Photoelectron Spectroscopy (ARPES) measurements on Bi2Se3 single crystals. The Dirac point in as-grown Bi2Se3 crystals falls below the Fermi level, for an extent that depends on the amount of substitutional defects in the bulk and additional aging of the surface . Thanks to this effect, equilib- rium ARPES can be capable of detecting evidences of the hexagonal warping . However, since the warping increases with the distance from the Dirac point, pump- probe ARPES is advantageous since it allows access to the unoccupied part of the spectrum, where the changes in the TSS dispersion due to warping are more severe . A match of the calculations with the spectroscopic data, both above and below the Fermi level, is recovered when assuming that the fraction of the SOC transferred to the surface is less than 85 %, but in excess of about 70 %, hence giving physical consistency to the model we employed to describe the hybridization-mediated partial transfer of SOC to surface states. MODELING THE SPIN-ORBIT COUPLING MECHANISM AT A SOLID SURFACE In topologically trivial systems, the emergence of sur- face states is related to the symmetry breaking intro- duced by the surface itself. The surface properties are best accounted for by a realistic potential barrier, in our case of Rundgren-Malmstr ̈om type , which includes no relativistic effect and is treated as an additional layer on top of the surface. The bulk band structure proper- ties, on the other hand, are determined from the fully- relativistic atomic potentials in the context of the Dirac equation. To determine the coupling between the two, multiple scattering theory must be employed . This coupling can be allowed to be fractional, meaning that only a fraction of the relativistic properties of the atomic potentials, and thus also of the SOC, is transferred to the surface states. The physical validity of this model is proven by the results obtained on the Rashba splitting of the Au(111) surface state and further confirmed by the successful application of the same model to the Shockley state at the Ag/Pt(111) interface . Since the existence of the TSSs directly derives from the topologically nontrivial nature of the bulk bandstruc- ture, the bulk character of the TSSs is much more pro- nounced in TIs than in metal surfaces, with the conse- quence that the TSS extends for several layers inside the a c TSS DP BCB EG SRS TSS EG BCB SRS (c) (a) (b) Bi Se kx E kx ky (a) Scheme of the dispersion of Bi2Se3. The sur- face resonance state (SRS, dark brown), the 2D electron gas (EG, orange), the bulk conduction band (BCB, yellow), the topological surface state (TSS, brown) and the Dirac point (DP, black) are indicated. (b) CES cut at the dashed line of panel (b), with the features indicated accordingly. The outer black hexagon indicates the orientation of the first Brillouin zone (not scaled). (c) Conventional unit cell of Bi2Se3 with Bi atoms in purple and Se atoms in green. The quintuple layers are highlighted by purple tetrahedra. This panel was gener- ated using the atomic coordinates from the Materials Project database through the software VESTA . bulk. From the bandstructure point of view, the bulk character is transferred to the TSS by the hybridization with SRS . These facts have two important conse- quences for the physics of SOC at the surface of a topo- logical insulator. First, to determine the effect of the SOC on surface states it is not sufficient to compute the scattering properties between the surface barrier and the atomic potentials, since this approach accounts only for physics localized entirely at the surface, which is not the case for TSS. Second, the SOC influences the surface states via a mechanism that is more complex than the multiple scattering between two potentials, namely the hybridization with the surface resonances, for which no analytical treatment or numerical simulation is presently available. This complexity forces one to model the SOC reduction in an effective way. The pure band structure calculation is performed assuming the full value of the SOC for all layers of the semi-infinite bulk. The atomic potentials are then used as an input for the photoemis- sion calculation, which includes the surface barrier and its coupling to the atomic potentials via multiple scatter- ing. In the photoemission step of the calculation, where 3 surface states and resonances are fully taken into account, the SOC of the atoms in the first 20 layers is reduced to a tunable fraction of its atomic value. In this way, the model reproduces a situation where the bulk bandstruc- ture is determined with the full SOC, while only the sur- face states experience a smaller fraction of SOC, hence effectively modeling the partial SOC transfer through the hybridization with the SRS. The modification of the SOC was applied in the spec- troscopic calculations in the first 20 layers of the semi- infinite stack of atomic layers, accounting for a reduction of the SOC strength as felt by the surface-related elec- tronic structure. Since Bi atoms are twice as heavy as the Se atoms and thus the SOC is stronger, the SOC re- duction is operated on Bi atoms only. The underlying approach focuses on the SOC term of the first-principle Hamiltonian while leaving all other relativistic correc- tions unchanged . METHODS The electronic structure calculations were performed self-consistently in the ab initio framework of fully rela- tivistic spin-density functional theory, solving the corre- sponding Dirac equation. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof parametrization was used for the exchange and corre- lation potentials . Furthermore, these calculations were performed for the full SOC. For the spectroscopi- cal analysis, the spin-density matrix formulation of the fully-relativistic one-step model was employed . The surface of the solid was represented by a Rundgren- Malmstr ̈om-type potential , already successfully ap- plied to the case of Bi2Se3 . As this form of the surface barrier implies a z-dependent potential, the total photocurrent also includes a surface contribution that explicitly accounts for the dispersion of all the sur- face features. The photoemission calculations were per- formed for the photon energy used in the measurements (10.8 eV, see below) and for the geometry of our experi- mental setup. To correctly reproduce the relative inten- sity of the surface spectral features, the matrix elements in the surface region were calculated . The measurements were performed at the Time- Resolved ARPES endstation of the T-ReX laboratory (Elettra, Trieste). The setup is based on the output of an Yb-doped fiber laser (Coherent Monaco), a fraction of which is used as a pump (1.2 eV). A cascade of har- monic generation stages in BBO crystals and in Xe gas generates the ninth harmonic of the other part of the beam (10.8 eV). The incidence angle of the pump and the probe beams on the sample at normal emission is of 30◦, which applies to all the measurements of this work. Further details on the setup are reported elsewhere . All the measurements were performed at 110 K and with s probe polarization unless otherwise indicated. The pump-probe measurements were performed at the fixed time delay ∆t ∼1 ps between the pump and the probe pulses, at which the population in the vicinity of the Fermi level is maximum due to the cascade relax- ation mechanism of the charge carriers . The sys- tem was excited with a p-polarized pump at a fluence of ∼150 μJ/cm2. The CESs were measured with the p-polarized probe by rotating the sample in steps of 0.5◦ along the tilt axis (perpendicular to the analyzer slit, corresponding to ky in our axis system for the reciprocal space) and recording an E vs. kx map for each angle. These maps are stacked together to obtain the full 3D map of the I(E, kx, ky) photoemission intensity, which can be visualized by slic- ing it at constant energy. RESULTS Ab initio one-step photoemission calculations varying the SOC strength To analyze in detail the impact of the SOC on the TSS we scale its strength from 100 % of its full atomic value to 50 %. sion maps along the ΓK direction for s-polarized 10.8 eV photons, for the cases of 100% and 50% SOC (see Sup- plemental Material ). The energy scale is relative to the Dirac point (DP) and ranges from slightly below the DP to ∼800 meV above it. The linearly dispersing Dirac cone displays the characteristic “V” shape above the DP, while close to it the dispersion slightly deviates from ex- act linearity. The part below the DP instead strongly deviates from the linear dispersion, displaying an “M”- like shape (dashed red box). No population is observed in between the two branches of the TSS up to ∼ 500 meV above the DP. From here to higher energies a small diffuse population is visible, which we attribute to the surface projection of the bulk conduction band (BCB). Around ∼ 800 meV above the DP a second sharp feature emerges (dashed blue box). The position and dispersion of this feature is compatible with the SRS mentioned above . Upon decreasing the SOC strength, several changes oc- cur in the band structure. We first observe that the “M” shape of the dispersion below the DP is smeared out in favor of a monotonic dispersion (panel (d)). The TSS also broadens, with a width that increases with the dis- tance from the DP. Alongside with this, an increase in the BCB population is visible as a gradual change of contrast between the area enclosed by the TSS and that outside. The small intensity of the BCB with respect to the TSS is due to a matrix element effect at this photon energy . This is advantageous since it allows a larger con- tribution from the TSS, which is the focus of our work. At 50 % SOC, however, the BCB intensity is strong and visible down to ∼100 meV above the DP. Apart from the 4 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -1) 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 E-ED (eV) -0.2 0.0 0.2 -1) 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 E-ED (eV) -0.2 0.0 0.2 -1) 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 -0.2 0.0 0.2 -1) SOC 100 % SOC 50 % SOC 100 % SOC 50 % (c) (d) (a) (b) TSS SRS BCB DP max 0 Γ–K Γ–M max 0 (a),(b) Calculated E vs. k photoemission intensity distribution along the ΓK direction for s-polarized 10.8 eV photons, upon varying the SOC strength from 100% (panel a) to 50% (panel b). The energy scale is referenced to the energy ED of the DP. The sketch in the lower left part of panel (a) shows the direction of k∥ (yellow line) both with re- spect to the Brillouin zone (outer hexagon) and to the Fermi surface. Panel (a) also indicates the relevant features for our discussion: TSS, topological surface state; BCB, bulk conduc- tion band; SRS, surface resonance state (highlighted by the dashed blue box); DP, Dirac point (dashed red box). (c),(d) Same as (a),(b), but along the ΓM direction (see low left part of panel (c)). Boxes in panel (c) highlight the point at which the band strongly bends outwards and severely broadens (vi- olet box) and the vicinity of the Dirac point (red box). broadening, the dispersion of both the TSS and the SRS along ΓK undergoes minimal changes, and the TSS re- mains linear for the whole energy region above the DP. The dependence on the SOC of the dispersion along ΓM is strikingly different. Panel (c) shows the dispersion for the full value of the SOC. Similarly to panel (a), also here the TSS below the DP is bending upwards (dashed red box). The dispersion, while being approximately lin- ear in the energy range between 100 and 300 meV, is strongly bending outwards around 400 meV (dashed vio- let box). We stress that it is this downward bending along ΓM, along with the preserved linearity along ΓK, that determines the warping. In the same energy range, the bands start to broaden until they are very diffuse. Also in this case the surface state is visible around ∼800 meV above the DP, although the contrast with respect to the TSS is markedly weaker. Moreover, in panel (d) no in- tensity appears at ∼800 meV above the DP, where the SRS is expected. Comparing calculations with experiment Dispersion of the occupied band structure The occupied band structure is investigated with equi- librium ARPES measurements. Figure 3 shows the com- parison between the experimental and the theoretical dis- persions along the two high-symmetry directions ΓK (top row) and ΓM (bottom row). In order to compare the ex- perimental results with the ab initio calculations, a com- mon energy scale is needed, since in general the Fermi levels in the calculations and in the experiment might not coincide. The energy scales are thus aligned at the Dirac point, which is an unambiguous feature common to both, and referenced to the experimental Fermi en- ergy EF (see Supplemental Material ). In the measured dispersion along ΓK (Fig. 3(a)), the DP is located ∼ 410 meV below EF , hence signaling an n-doping of the system due to aging . This is advantageous for our investigation since it allows probing a larger part of the band structure with ARPES. The dispersion below the DP is monotonic and almost linear. Above the DP, the intensity of the two TSS branches becomes asymmetric. While the branch at negative k values (left branch) is weak and broad, the one at positive k values (right branch) is sharply defined. In between the TSS branches, the signature of a 2D electron gas (2DEG), already reported for Bi2Se3 , is visible as a narrow feature at positive k. The presence of the 2DEG confirms the aging of the surface also revealed by the relatively large distance between the DP and EF . Also for this feature, the dispersion at negative k is weaker and broader, which makes it hard to distinguish the TSS and the 2DEG. The contribution of the BCB is small due to the unfavorable matrix element cited above . The dashed blue lines mark the energies at which the momentum distribution cuts (MDC) have been ex- tracted, i.e. at intervals of ∼ 100 meV from the DP to EF and integrated in an energy window of 10 meV. The MDCs are reported in panels (b-e) in light-blue and com- pared to the MDCs extracted from the calculated maps at 85 %, (e),(j) 100 %. Comparison of the dispersion in the vicinity of the DP evidences the inadequacy of the full SOC (red MDC) to account for the measured dispersion, where the TSS shows no “M”-like shape: its linearity is instead best re- produced at 50 % SOC (Fig. 2(a) and (d)). Above the DP, the MDCs show a discrepancy between experiment and calculations. In particular, the calculated MDCs seem to underestimate the cone aperture, hence predict- ing a higher band velocity than the one actually observed, 5 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Exper. SOC 50% SOC 70% SOC 100% SOC 85% (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) Exper. SOC 50% SOC 70% SOC 100% SOC 85% TSS 2DEG DP BCB Γ–K Γ–M Energies are referenced to the experimental EF , i.e. shifting down the energy scale of the calculations by ∼410 meV. and the discrepancy increases with the distance from the DP. This can be explained as a shortcoming of the local spin-density approach, as already reported in . For the MDCs ∼ 100 meV and ∼ 200 meV below EF , the 50 % SOC seems to give a better agreement, due to the higher population of the BCB with respect to the other SOC values. The intensity measured in this region, how- ever, is more correctly attributable to the 2DEG, since its two branches get close and due to their broadening they partially merge. Overall, the measured relative in- tensity between the left and right branch of the TSS is well reproduced by all the SOC values, demonstrating that the spectroscopic calculations correctly account for the matrix element effects in our experimental geometry. Panel (f) shows the measured dispersion for the ΓM direction. The intensity distribution is more symmetric than in panel (a), both for the TSS and for the 2DEG. Along this direction also the dispersion in the vicinity of the DP for a SOC of 85 % is evidently inadequate, since the bands are bending upwards (see the bump in the MDC at k ≃ −1 ̊A−1). Upon approaching the Fermi level, the difference among the theoretical dispersions becomes more evident. Due to the same overestimation of the band velocity commented above, the 100 % SOC seems to agree better with the experimental dispersion at the Fermi level, since the effect of the warping is a detectable reduction of the band velocity along ΓM. The experimental dispersion, however, is not reflecting the strong warping experienced by the 100 % SOC case (Fig. 2(e)). The comparison between measurements and calcula- tions for the occupied part of the spectrum constitutes a first benchmark for the SOC fraction transferred to the TSS. The 100 % SOC calculation does not satisfactorily reproduce the dispersion deduced from the experiments below the DP, for both directions. In addition, the full SOC predicts at EF a warping larger than the one ob- 6 served in the experiment. This leads to the first conclu- sion that the effective fraction of the SOC transferred to the surface states is smaller than the full atomic value. Dispersion of the unoccupied band structure Since the warping increases with the distance from the DP , access to larger portions of the band structure above EF is beneficial to compare the experiments and the calculations in an energy interval where the influence of the SOC on the warping is more pronounced. Fig- ure 4 shows the comparison between measured and cal- culated photoemission maps following the same arrange- ment of Figure 3. The measured maps are reported as a difference between the pumped map and the equilib- rium one, as customary in time-resolved ARPES mea- surements to emphasize the change in the photoemission intensity. The measurement along ΓK (panel (a)) shows that the linear dispersion of the TSS is also observed above EF . The branch at negative k values remains broad and weaker, but the one at positive k values is well distinct from the 2DEG and allows discerning that the latter disperses roughly parallel to the TSS. Access- ing the dispersion above EF is also beneficial for circum- venting the unfavorable coincidence of a broad 2DEG and a small BCB contribution to the intensity. As discussed above for the region close to EF , the parabolic dispersion of the 2DEG causes its branches to be well separated in momentum, hence allowing the attribution of the inten- sity detected in between to the sole BCB. This is better visible in the MDC cuts taken at ∼55 meV and ∼110 meV above EF and shown in subsequent panels. The calcula- tion for 50 % SOC (b) clearly shows an excessive intensity in correspondence of the BCB. The 70 % and 85 % SOC cases, (c) and (d), are instead closer to the data for the experimental dispersion, while the calculation for 100 % SOC in (e) shows no significant BCB intensity. The measurement along ΓM is shown in panel (f). The right branches of the TSS and of the 2DEG display a larger intensity, which is also reflected in the presence of a red signal up to higher energies. This might be due to a delay-dependent matrix element effect , although the depopulation of the TSS below EF is more symmetric. The right branch clearly shows that the dispersion is deviating from linearity. Incidentally, the 2DEG population drastically decreases beyond ∼100 meV above EF , at variance with what is observed along ΓK. The intensity of the BCB population instead follows a behavior similar to the other direction, and is well reproduced for 70 % and 85 % SOC, as proven by the MDCs in panel (h). The magnitude of the warping agrees well with the prediction for the 85 % and even 100 % of the SOC. Since for lower SOC values the TSS is severely smearing out at higher energies, also the sharpness of the features is better accounted for at higher SOC values. The inspection of the pumped E vs. k maps proves that the intensity from the BCB is small compared to the TSS and the 2DEG. It also allowed to confirm that the dispersion along ΓK is linear also above EF . The dispersion along ΓM instead shows a strong warping that is compatible with the highest values of SOC. Comparison of constant-energy surfaces The inspection of CESs makes it easier, with respect to the E vs. k dispersion, to visualize the symmetry and the degree of deformation of the CESs, so to evaluate which strength of the SOC is more appropriate in describing the shape of the experimental CESs. The result of this procedure is shown in Fig. 5(a-e) for the CES measured with p-polarized light. The cuts are taken at five energies: at the DP, between the DP and EF , at EF , and at the two energies above EF already considered in Fig. 4. The TSS contour at the DP (panel (a)) is circular as expected from the vertex of a cone broadened by the experimental resolution. No intensity is detected outside this circular area, apart from a sharp line at ky ∼ 0.12 ̊A−1. This spurious intensity is probably the result of the probe beam impinging on a flake edge during the tilt angle scan. The cut at -210 meV (panel (b)) has a round shape with some larger broadening at negative ky values, where also the photoemission inten- sity is larger. The TSS contour at EF (panel (c)) is also broader at negative ky. At this energy there is a clear deformation towards a hexagon. The small discontinu- ity at positive ky values is likely due to a change in the position of the probe on the sample due to the angular motion of the latter, as suggested by the strong spurious strike of intensity commented above. The CES at 50 meV above EF (panel (d)) shows a larger deformation of the TSS, going towards the snowflake-like shape. The case of panel (e) is analogous, with the deformation particularly visible on the right edge of the snowflake at kx ∼ 0 and in the top left edge. We also emphasize that the contrast between the TSS and the region inside it confirms that the BCB photoemission intensity is very weak. The CESs were calculated for the sole SOC values of 70 % and 85 %, i.e. those that yield the best agreement with the experimental E vs. k data. Panels (f-j) show the 85 % SOC case. The “M” shaped dispersion commented in Fig. 3(f),(i) close to the DP here appears as a star-like contour of intensity, in contrast with the experimental ob- servation in (a). Panel (g), showing an already deformed contour, agrees well with the experimental counterpart of panel (b), notwithstanding the broadening of the latter. The following CESs (h-j) also show a good agreement with the experiment, in particular correctly accounting for the intensity asymmetries. In fact, the most intense regions of the hexagon are towards negative ky values. 7 (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) Exper. SOC 50% SOC 70% SOC 100% SOC 85% (f) (g) (h) (i) (j) Exper. SOC 50% SOC 70% SOC 100% SOC 85% Γ–K Γ–M reported in (a) and (g) as a difference map between the one acquired at ∆t = 1 ps and the equilibrium one, to evidence the population of the band structure above EF . (b-e),(g,j) MDC cuts extracted from the measurement and from the calculations above EF . Energies are referenced to the experimental EF , i.e. shifting down the energy scale of the calculations by ∼410 meV. A better agreement is found for 70 % SOC (k-o). The DP (k) is properly reproduced as a small circular area. The CES at -210 meV shown in (l) is still circular, in partial disagreement with the measurement in (b), and becomes hexagonal only at EF (m). Another shortcoming of this SOC value is that the warping is less severe, and thus the size of the contours above EF (n-o) is slightly smaller than what actually measured. Also at this SOC the intensity asymmetry is reproduced, being the CES more intense in the negative ky portion. We stress the fact that for both SOC values, the snowflake deformation above EF comes along with an intense smearing of the TSS, as already commented for Fig. 4(f), with the result that the tips of the snowflake along ΓM are almost vanishing. The comparison between the measured and the calcu- lated CESs gives indications in agreement with what is found from the analysis of the E vs. k maps. The shape of the CES close to the DP suggests a SOC value lower that 85 %. On the other hand, the hexagonal deforma- tion of the 70 % SOC occurs closer to EF than the exper- iment suggests, and the size of the CES contour above EF is smaller, pointing to a value of the SOC closer to 85 %. The CESs also further show that the calculations correctly account for matrix element effects. CONCLUSIONS The present study combines state-of-art ab initio one- step photoemission calculations with equilibrium and pump-probe ARPES measurements, to investigate the physics of the SOC at the surface of the model TI Bi2Se3. Our study proves that the influence of the SOC on TSSs can be modeled within a theoretical framework capable of taking into account the partial transfer of the atomic SOC to the surface states, which occurs via hybridization with the surface resonance states. The calculations show that the most severe changes in the TSS dispersion upon changing the fraction of trans- ferred SOC occur along the ΓM direction, where the TSS branches bend outwards for higher SOC values. At the same time, they remain linear at all SOC strengths along ΓK. Therefore, a stronger SOC induces a stronger warp- ing, in qualitative agreement with the prediction of the k · p model. The comparison of the SOC-dependent calculations for the surface states with the ARPES measurements shows that the highest values of SOC are incompatible with the experimental evidence in the vicinity of the Dirac point. In addition, the bare atomic SOC predicts a warping in excess of the one found in the experiment. Instead, the unoccupied part of the spectrum shows that the warping is compatible with the highest values of SOC, hence indi- cating a transferred SOC fraction larger than 70%. The comparison between measured and calculated CESs con- firms that a SOC value between 70% and 85% correctly accounts for the shape and intensity distribution of the CESs. In conclusion, the agreement of our ARPES data with the calculations performed for a reduced value of the SOC proves that our model correctly accounts for the physics of the transfer of SOC to the surface states of 8 (a) (f) (b) (c) (d) (e) (g) (h) (i) (j) (k) (l) (m) (n) (o) x 1.5 x 2 (a-e) Experimental CES for the selected values of energy indicated above: (a) at the DP, (b) between the DP and EF , down the energy scale of the calculations by ∼410 meV. The intensity of (d) and (e) the last two is multiplied by a factor of 1.5 and 2 for better visibility. (f-j) CESs calculated for 85 % SOC at the same energies. (k-o) CESs calculated for 70 % SOC at the same energies. a topological insulator. Moreover, it allows estimating the fraction of transferred SOC between 70% and 85% of its bare atomic value. This indicates that, in order to correctly model the physics of topological surface states, the hybridization with surface resonance states is a cru- cial ingredient. This accounts for the proven weak cou- pling between bulk and surface states and offers a way to model the partial SOC transfer from the former to the latter, hence leading towards a clearer understanding of the electronic mechanisms that ultimately shapes the surface band structure of Bi2Se3. ∗ fulvio.parmigiani@elettra.eu C. L. Kane and E. J. Mele, Quantum spin Hall effect in graphene, Physical Review Letters 95, 226801 (2005). L. Fu, C. L. Kane, and E. J. Mele, Topological insulators in three dimensions, Physical Review Letters 98, 106803 J. E. Moore and L. Balents, Topological invariants of time-reversal-invariant band structures, Physical Review D. Hsieh, D. Qian, L. Wray, Y. Xia, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, A topological Dirac insulator in a quantum spin Hall phase, Nature 452, 970 (2008). M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Colloquium: Topological insulators, Reviews of Modern Physics 82, 3045 (2010). H. Zhang, C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S.- C. Zhang, Topological insulators in Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3 and Sb2Te3 with a single Dirac cone on the surface, Nature Physics 5, 438 (2009). X.-L. Qi and S.-C. Zhang, Topological insulators and superconductors, Reviews of Modern Physics 83, 1057 A. Bansil, H. Lin, and T. Das, Colloquium: Topologi- cal band theory, Reviews of Modern Physics 88, 021004 P. Roushan, J. Seo, C. V. Parker, Y. S. Hor, D. Hsieh, 9 D. Qian, A. Richardella, M. Z. Hasan, R. J. Cava, and A. Yazdani, Topological surface states protected from backscattering by chiral spin texture, Nature 460, 1106 D. Pesin and A. H. MacDonald, Spintronics and pseu- dospintronics in graphene and topological insulators, Na- ture Materials 11, 409 (2012). B. Hamdou, J. Gooth, A. Dorn, E. Pippel, and K. Nielsch, Surface state dominated transport in topolog- ical insulator Bi2Te3 nanowires, Applied Physics Letters A. Pandey, R. Yadav, M. Kaur, P. Singh, A. Gupta, and S. Husale, High performing flexible optoelectronic devices using thin films of topological insulator, Scientific Re- N. V. Leppenen and L. E. Golub, Nonlinear optical absorption and photocurrents in topological insulators, Phys. Rev. B 105, 115306 (2022). M. Yang, H. Zhou, and J. Wang, Topological insulators photodetectors: Preparation, advances and application challenges, Materials Today Communications 33, 104190 Y. Huang, J. D. Querales-Flores, S. W. Teitelbaum, J. Cao, T. Henighan, H. Liu, M. Jiang, G. De la Pe ̃na, V. Krapivin, J. Haber, T. Sato, M. Chollet, D. Zhu, T. Katayama, R. Power, M. Allen, C. R. Rotundu, T. P. Bailey, C. Uher, M. Trigo, P. S. Kirchmann, E. D. Mur- ray, Z.-X. Shen, I. Savi ́c, S. Fahy, J. A. Sobota, and D. A. Reis, Ultrafast measurements of mode-specific deforma- tion potentials of bi2te3 and bi2se3, Phys. Rev. X 13, C. Cacho, A. Crepaldi, M. Battiato, J. Braun, F. Cilento, M. Zacchigna, M. Richter, O. Heckmann, E. Springate, Y. Liu, S. Dhesi, H. Berger, P. Bugnon, K. Held, M. Gri- oni, H. Ebert, K. Hricovini, J. Min ́ar, and F. Parmigiani, Momentum-resolved spin dynamics of bulk and surface excited states in the topological insulator Bi2Se3, Physi- cal Review Letters 114, 097401 (2015). C. Jozwiak, J. A. Sobota, K. Gotlieb, A. F. Kemper, C. R. Rotundu, R. J. Birgeneau, Z. Hussain, D.-H. Lee, Z.-X. Shen, and A. Lanzara, Spin-polarized surface res- onances accompanying topological surface state forma- tion, Nature Communications 7, 10.1038/ncomms13143 H. Hedayat, D. Bugini, H. Yi, C. Chen, X. Zhou, G. Cerullo, C. Dallera, and E. Carpene, Ultrafast evolu- tion of bulk, surface and surface resonance states in pho- toexcited Bi2Te3, Scientific Reports 11, 10.1038/s41598- M. Bianchi, D. Guan, S. Bao, J. Mi, B. B. Iversen, P. D. King, and P. Hofmann, Coexistence of the topological state and a two-dimensional electron gas on the surface of Bi2Se3, Nature Communications 1, 10.1038/ncomms1131 C. Chen, S. He, H. Weng, W. Zhang, L. Zhao, H. Liu, X. Jia, D. Mou, S. Liu, J. He, Y. Peng, Y. Feng, Z. Xie, G. Liu, X. Dong, J. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Peng, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, F. Yang, C. Chen, Z. Xu, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and X. J. Zhou, Robustness of topological order and for- mation of quantum well states in topological insulators exposed to ambient environment, Proceedings of the Na- tional Academy of Sciences 109, 3694 (2012). K. Kuroda, M. Arita, K. Miyamoto, M. Ye, J. Jiang, A. Kimura, E. E. Krasovskii, E. V. Chulkov, H. Iwasawa, T. Okuda, K. Shimada, Y. Ueda, H. Namatame, and M. Taniguchi, Hexagonally deformed Fermi surface of the 3D topological insulator Bi2Se3, Physical Review Letters J. S ́anchez-Barriga, M. R. Scholz, E. Golias, E. Rienks, D. Marchenko, A. Varykhalov, L. V. Yashina, and O. Rader, Anisotropic effect of warping on the life- time broadening of topological surface states in angle- resolved photoemission from Bi2Te3, Physical Review B M. Nomura, S. Souma, A. Takayama, T. Sato, T. Taka- hashi, K. Eto, K. Segawa, and Y. Ando, Relationship between Fermi surface warping and out-of-plane spin po- larization in topological insulators: A view from spin- and angle-resolved photoemission, Physical Review B 89, M. Nurmamat, E. E. Krasovskii, Y. Ishida, K. Sumida, J. Chen, T. Yoshikawa, E. V. Chulkov, K. A. Kokh, O. E. Tereshchenko, S. Shin, and A. Kimura, Ultrafast dynam- ics of an unoccupied surface resonance state in BiTe2Se, Physical Review B 97, 115303 (2018). S. Basak, H. Lin, L. A. Wray, S.-Y. Xu, L. Fu, M. Z. Hasan, and A. Bansil, Spin texture on the warped Dirac- cone surface states in topological insulators, Physical Re- view B 84, 121401 (2011). Y. H. Wang, D. Hsieh, D. Pilon, L. Fu, D. R. Gard- ner, Y. S. Lee, and N. Gedik, Observation of a warped helical spin texture in Bi2Se3 from circular dichroism angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, Physical Re- view Letters 107, 207602 (2011). L. Fu, Hexagonal warping effects in the surface states of the topological insulator Bi2Te3, Physical Review Letters C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, H. Zhang, X. Dai, Z. Fang, and S.- C. Zhang, Model hamiltonian for topological insulators, Physical Review B 82, 045122 (2010). A. Nuber, J. Braun, F. Forster, J. Min ́ar, F. Reinert, and H. Ebert, Surface versus bulk contributions to the Rashba splitting in surface systems, Physical Review B A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder, and K. A. Persson, Commentary: The Materials Project: A materials genome approach to accelerating materials innovation, APL Materials 1, 10.1063/1.4812323 (2013). The Materials project, accessed: February 2024. K. Momma and F. Izumi, VESTA: a three-dimensional visualization system for electronic and structural analy- sis, Journal of Applied Crystallography 41, 653 (2008). G. Malmstr ̈om and J. Rundgren, A program for cal- culation of the reflection and transmission of electrons through a surface potential barrier, Computer Physics Communications 19, 263 (1980). J. Braun, J. Min ́ar, and H. Ebert, Correlation, tempera- ture and disorder: Recent developments in the one-step description of angle-resolved photoemission, Physics Re- ports 740, 1 (2018). A. Bendounan, K. A ̈ıt-Mansour, J. Braun, J. Min ́ar, S. Bornemann, R. Fasel, O. Gr ̈oning, F. Sirotti, and H. Ebert, Evolution of the Rashba spin-orbit-split Shock- ley state on Ag/Pt(111), Physical Review B 83, 195427 H. Ebert, et al., The Munich SPR-KKR package, version 8.6, accessed: February 2024. 10 J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Physical Review Letters 77, 3865 (1996). J. Braun, K. Miyamoto, A. Kimura, T. Okuda, M. Do- nath, H. Ebert, and J. Min ́ar, Exceptional behavior of d-like surface resonances on W(110): the one-step model in its density matrix formulation, New Journal of Physics M. Grass, J. Braun, G. Borstel, R. Schneider, H. Durr, T. Fauster, and V. Dose, Unoccupied electronic states and surface barriers at Cu surfaces, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 5, 599 (1993). C. Datzer, A. Zumb ̈ulte, J. Braun, T. F ̈orster, A. B. Schmidt, J. Mi, B. Iversen, P. Hofmann, J. Min ́ar, H. Ebert, P. Kr ̈uger, M. Rohlfing, and M. Donath, Un- raveling the spin structure of unoccupied states in Bi2Se3, Physical Review B 95, 115401 (2017). S. Peli, D. Puntel, D. Kopic, B. Sockol, F. Parmigiani, and F. Cilento, Time-resolved VUV ARPES at 10.8 eV photon energy and MHz repetition rate, Journal of Elec- tron Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena 243, 146978 A. Crepaldi, B. Ressel, F. Cilento, M. Zacchigna, C. Grazioli, H. Berger, P. Bugnon, K. Kern, M. Grioni, and F. Parmigiani, Ultrafast photodoping and effective Fermi-Dirac distribution of the Dirac particles in Bi2Se3, Physical Review B 86, 205133 (2012). A. Crepaldi, F. Cilento, B. Ressel, C. Cacho, J. C. Jo- hannsen, M. Zacchigna, H. Berger, P. Bugnon, C. Grazi- oli, I. C. E. Turcu, E. Springate, K. Kern, M. Grioni, and F. Parmigiani, Evidence of reduced surface electron- phonon scattering in the conduction band of Bi2Se3 by nonequilibrium ARPES, Physical Review B 88, 121404 See Supplemental Material at (insert URL) for the cal- culations at intermediate SOC values and the procedure followed to determine the binding energy of the Dirac point. D. Hsieh, Y. Xia, D. Qian, L. Wray, J. H. Dil, F. Meier, J. Osterwalder, L. Patthey, J. G. Checkelsky, N. P. Ong, A. V. Fedorov, H. Lin, A. Bansil, D. Grauer, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava, and M. Z. Hasan, A tunable topological insu- lator in the spin helical Dirac transport regime, Nature I. Aguilera, C. Friedrich, and S. Bl ̈ugel, Many-body cor- rected tight-binding Hamiltonians for an accurate quasi- particle description of topological insulators of the Bi2Se3 family, Physical Review B 100, 155147 (2019). S. Ponzoni, F. Paßlack, M. Stupar, D. M. Janas, G. Zam- borlini, and M. Cinchetti, Dirac bands in the topologi- cal insulator Bi2Se3 mapped by time-resolved momen- tum microscopy, Advanced Physics Research , 2200016 F. Boschini, D. Bugini, M. Zonno, M. Michiardi, R. P. Day, E. Razzoli, B. Zwartsenberg, M. Schneider, E. H. da Silva Neto, S. dal Conte, S. K. Kushwaha, R. J. Cava, S. Zhdanovich, A. K. Mills, G. Levy, E. Carpene, C. Dallera, C. Giannetti, D. J. Jones, G. Cerullo, and A. Damascelli, Role of matrix elements in the time- resolved photoemission signal, New Journal of Physics Supplementary Material for: Unveiling the physics of the spin-orbit coupling at the surface of a model topological insulator: from theory to experiments D. Puntel,1 S. Peli,2 W. Bronsch,2 F. Cilento,2 H. Ebert,3 J. Braun,3 and F. Parmigiani1, 4, 5, ∗ 1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit`a degli Studi di Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy 2Elettra - Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Strada Statale 14, km 163.5, 34149 Trieste, Italy 3Department Chemie, Ludwig-Maximilians-University M ̈unchen, Butenandtstr. 5-11, 81377 M ̈unchen, Germany 4Elettra - Sincrotrone Trieste S.C.p.A., Strada Statale 14, km 163.5, Trieste, Italy 5International Faculty, University of Cologne, Albertus-Magnus-Platz, 50923 Cologne, Germany I. PHOTOEMISSION CALCULATIONS FOR 100%, 85%, 70%, 50% SURFACE SOC Additional calculations for the bandstructure of Bi2Se3 performed at intermediate values of the surface SOC, as referenced to in the main text, are shown in Fig. S1. We report the cases of 100%, 85%, 70% and 50% SOC for the ΓK for the discussion in the main text are indicated in panel (a). Note, for both directions, the gradual smearing-out of the “M”-like shape around the Dirac point as the SOC is reduced from 100%, persisting at 85% SOC but no longer at 70% SOC. Due to the contrast with the topological surface state (TSS) and the bulk conduction band (BCB), along ΓM the surface resonance state (SRS) is more visible at 85% SOC than at the other values. SOC strength (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) (g) (h) max 0 Γ–K Γ–M max 0 TSS SRS BCB DP features relevant to our study: TSS, topological surface state; BCB, bulk conduction band; SRS, surface resonance state; DP, Dirac point, to which the energy scale is referenced. (e-h) Same as (a-d), along the ΓM direction. arXiv:2403.01029v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 1 Mar 2024 2 II. DETERMINATION OF THE DIRAC POINT BINDING ENERGY We illustrate the procedure followed to determine the binding energy of the Dirac point, as outlined in the main text. Figure S2(a) shows an equilibrium measurement along ΓM with s-polarized photons, in the vicinity of the Dirac point. In order to identify the binding energy of the Dirac point, we extracted momentum distribution curves (MDC) integrating the intensity over 10 meV-windows above and below the estimated Dirac point energy. The black dashed lines in panel (a) show the central position of three of them. Owing to the convergence of the two TSS branches, we fit them with a single Lorentzian peak, with Gaussian broadening to account for the experimental resolution. The result is reported in Fig. S2(b) for the three cuts indicated in (a), along with the corresponding fit in blue. The Dirac point is assumed to be located at the energy where the MDC of minimum width has been extracted. The width obtained from the fit is shown in Fig.S2 as FWHM of the Lorentzian peak versus the binding energy, for all the seven MDCs we extracted. The three representative cuts already reported in panel (a) and (b) are here marked by an additional black marker. The lowest-width one, at ∼-0.44 eV, is identified as the Dirac point. E-EF (eV) 0.1 0.0 -0.1 -1) 6 4 2 0 Int (arb. unit) -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 -1) Data Fit 68 64 FWHM x10 3 (Å -1) E-EF (eV) (a) (b) (c) in correspondence of the black dashed lines in panel (a). The blue line is the fit of the data to a Gaussian-broadened Lorentzian peak. (c) Lorentzian FHWM of the MDC cuts extracted from the fit, as a function of the binding energy. The values for the cuts reported in panel (b) are overmarked in black.