La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb): a demonstration of antagonistic pairs as a route to quasi-low dimensional ternary compounds Tyler J. Slade1∗, Nao Furukawa1,2, Matthew Dygert1,3, Siham Mohamed,1,4 Atreyee Das1,2, Weiyi Xia1,2, Cai-Zhuang Wang1,2, Sergey L. Bud’ko1,2, Paul C. Canfield1,2∗ 1Ames National Laboratory, US DOE, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 2Department of Physics and Astronomy, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA 3Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA 4Department of Chemistry, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa 50011, USA Abstract We outline how pairs of strongly immiscible elements, referred to here as antagonistic pairs, can be used to synthesize ternary compounds with low or quasi-reduced dimensional motifs intrinsically built into their crystal structures. By identifying third elements that are mutually compatible with a given antagonistic pair, ternary compounds can be formed in which the third element segregates the immiscible atoms into spatially separated substructures. Quasi-low dimensional structural units, such as sheets, chains, or clusters are a natural consequence of the immiscible atoms seeking to avoid close contact in the solid-state. As proof of principle, we present the discovery, crystal growth, and basic physical properties of La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb), a new family of intermetallic compounds based on the antagonistic pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi. La4Co4X adopts a new orthorhombic crystal structure (space group Pbam) containing quasi-2D Co slabs and La-X polyhedra that stack in an alternating manner along the a-axis. Consistent with our proposal, the La atoms separate the Co and X substructures, ensuring there are no direct contacts between the members of the immiscible (antagonistic) pair. Within the Co slabs, the atoms occupy the vertices of corner sharing tetrahedra and triangles, and this bonding motif produces flat electronic bands near the Fermi level that favor magnetism. The Co is moment bearing in each La4Co4X compound studied, and we show that whereas La4Co4Pb behaves as a three dimensional antiferromagnet with T N = 220 K, La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb have behavior consistent with low dimensional magnetic coupling and ordering, with T N = 153 K and 143 K respectively. In addition to the Pb, Bi, and Sb based La4Co4X compounds, we also were likely able to produce an analogous La4Co4Sn in polycrystalline form, although we were unable to isolate single crystals. We anticipate that identifying and using mutually compatible third elements together with an antagonistic pair represents a novel and generalizable design principle for discovering new materials and new structure types containing low-dimensional substructures. 1 Introduction A foundational aspiration of solid state chemistry is to develop general design principles for producing materials with targeted structural motifs and physical properties. Here, we demonstrate how strongly immiscible pairs of elements can be leveraged to synthesize ternary com- pounds with reduced or quasi-reduced dimensional mo- tifs such as 2D sheets, 1D chains, or 0D clusters intrinsi- cally built into their crystal structures. To introduce the basic idea, consider the two binary phase diagrams for Co-Pb and Co-Bi displayed in Figures 1a and 1b. The di- agrams show that Co is extraordinarily immiscible with Pb and Bi at temperatures up to at least 1400°C, and extrapolating to higher temperatures, remain immiscible as liquids even at thousands of degrees. We use the term “antagonistic pairs” to refer to such pairs of elements with similarly extreme levels of immiscibility,1 of which other examples include, but are not limited to, Ba-Fe and La-Cr. The heart of this work is the question: for any given immiscible pair of elements, what third element can be introduced to produce stable ternary compounds? Re- markably, a survey of crystallographic databases reveals that for many ternary compounds that contain an an- tagonistic pair, the strong immiscibility of the antago- nistic elements often remains preserved in the crystal structure, with the third element separating the im- miscible elements into distinct, quasi low dimensional substructures.1 As an example, the pair Co-Pb forms ternary compounds with most rare earth elements, and La6Co13Pb, and La12Co6Pb, which span the known structure types found in the broader R-Co-Pb (R = rare earth atom) phase space.4–6 The crystal structures each clearly reflect the immiscibility of the Co and Pb atoms. 1 arXiv:2403.00204v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 1 Mar 2024 (a) Binary phase diagram for Co and Pb (ASM Diagram #900732,2). (b) Binary phase diagram for Co and Bi (ASM Diagram #900429,3). The diagrams demonstrate the extreme immiscibility of Co with Pb and Bi La5CoPb3 contains quasi-1D chains of Co atoms that extend down the c-axis and are separated from the Pb by sheaths of La. The structure of La6Co13Pb can be envisioned as 2D slabs of Co and sheets of Pb that stack along the c-axis and are separated by layers of La atoms. Finally, in La12Co6Pb, single, “zero-dimensional,” Pb atoms are fully encapsulated by La such that there are no nearest neighbor Pb-Co contacts. The key insight from Figure 2 is that in each structure, the addition of the mutually compatible third element, La, to the immiscibile pair, Co-Pb, produces ternary compounds in which the La atoms segregate the Co and the Pb, giving materials in which at least one of the atoms occupies a quasi-reduced dimensional substruc- ture like the 1-D Co chains in La5CoPb3, 2-D Co slabs in La6Co13Pb, or 0-D Pb atoms in La12Co6Pb. Other examples based on different antagonistic pairs, such as LaCrGe3 and the AEFe2As2 (AE = alkali earth) su- perconductors, display similar structural segregation and quasi-low dimensional motifs in their crystal structures (the immiscible pairs are in bold). Importantly, in sys- tems containing magnetic, or potentially moment bear- ing atoms, such as 3d transition metals, the reduced dimensionality may lead to enhanced fluctuations and emergent, correlated phases with exotic physical prop- erties such as the unconventional superconductivity in the iron-arsenides7,8 or fragile, itinerant, magnetism in LaCeGe3.9–11 We propose here that searching for ternary compounds based upon a strongly immiscible pair of elements consti- tutes a very general design principle for identifying and discovering novel materials with low dimensional struc- tural motifs favorable for exhibiting emergent quantum properties. As a proof of principle, we outline the discov- ery of a new family of ternary compounds La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb) that are based on the antagonistic pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi. The La4Co4X adopt a new struc- ture type with an orthorhombic Pbam arrangement. Like the compounds discussed above, the La4Co4X structure reflects the strong Co-X immisicibility, and consists of staggered, quasi-2D slabs of Co separated by layers of La-encapsulated X atoms. The Co slabs can be visu- alized as chains of corner sharing tetrahedra that run down the c-axis and are linked along the b-direction by corner sharing triangles. The Co is moment bearing in each compound, with La4Co4Pb showing behavior typ- ical of a three dimensional antiferromagnet with T N = 220 K, whereas La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb have temper- ature dependent magnetization characteristic of low di- mensional coupling and ordering, with T N = 153 K and 143 K respectively. This work demonstrates that the extreme immiscibility of antagonistic element pairs can be overcome and exploited using a mututally compati- ble third element to produce new quantum materials and new structure types with built-in quasi-reduced dimen- sionality. 2 Experimental Details 2.1 Crystal Growth Whereas Co is strongly immiscible with Pb and Bi, all three elements, Co, Pb, and Bi, mix readily with La.12 The Co-La binary phase diagram shows a relatively deep eutectic near ≈ 70 % La, and compositions near the eu- tectic point allow for access to single phase liquid at tem- peratures below 750°C for ≈ 45-85 % La,12 and there- fore are attractive solvents from which to grow La-Co-X ternary compounds. We grew the La4Co4X single crystals by adding small quantities of X = Pb, Bi, Sb to Co-La based melts as follows. Elemental La (Ames Laboratory, 99.9+ %) Co pieces (American Elements, 99.99 %), and Pb (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %), Bi (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %), or Sb (Alfa Aesar, 99.99 %) were weighed in molar ratios of La45Co45Pb10, La51Co46Bi3, and La43Co53Sb4 and 2 Crystal structures of the previously reported ternary compounds containing La, Co, and Pb. (a) La5CoPb3, La6Co13Pb, and (c) La12Co6Pb. (d) shows the local coordination environment of the Pb atoms in La12Co6Pb (pannel (c)), emphasizing the complete encapsulation of Pb by La with no Pb-Co contacts. placed in a Ta crucible set with home made Ta caps and filter.13,14 The Ta crucibles were sealed under an Ar atmosphere using an arc melter, and then the crucibles were flame sealed under vacuum in fused silica ampoules. The ampoules were heated in a box furnace to 1150°C. After dwelling at 1150°C for 10 h, the furnace was cooled to 775°C over 100-200 h after which the samples were re- moved from the furnace and the excess flux was decanted in a centrifuge with metal cups and rotors.1 After cooling to room temperature, the tubes were opened to reveal a mixture of plate-like crystals and smaller, thin blade-like rods for samples containing Pb and Sb, whereas the Bi containing samples only yielded the blades. The inset to tals. We emphasize that the above compositions were those used to grow the specific crystals whose data is presented in the following sections. Other, similar, ra- tios of La, Co, and X were also used in an attempt to in- crease the crystal size and/or phase purity. These other attempts generally produced qualitatively similar mix- tures of plates and blades. EDS and powder x-ray diffraction indicated the larger plates to be the known ternary La6Co13X (X = Pb or Sb)5 and the blade-like rods to be a new ternary com- pound with the chemical formula La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, or Sb). The crystals were found to be oxygen and/or moisture sensitive, and the bright, metallic luster of the as-grown samples darkened even after several minutes of air exposure. Therefore, the samples were stored in a nitrogen glovebox until needed for characterization. We also attempted to grow a X = Sn member. Although we were unable to isolate suitable crystals for further characterization, our polycrystalline samples had clear evidence of a La4Co4Sn phase. More details on our at- tempts to grow La4Co4Sn are outlined in the supporting information. 2.2 Elemental analysis The composition of the blade-like samples was deter- mined by Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) quan- titative chemical analysis using a ThermoFisher (FEI) Teneo Lovac FE-scanning electron microscope (SEM). The data was analyzed using an Oxford Instruments Aztec System with X-Max-80 detector, attached to the Teneo. The measurements were conducted with an accel- eration voltage of 20 kV, current of 1.6 nA, working dis- tance of 10 mm, and a take off angle of 35°. We analyzed three separate crystals from each batch, respectively cor- responding to Pb, Bi, and Sb containing samples, and the composition of each crystal was measured at 4-8 differ- ent spots, revealing good homogeneity in each case. The standards used for reference are internal to the Oxford software. The EDS data for each sample is summarized in Tables S1-S3 in the supporting information. 3 Chemical formula La4Co4Pb La4Co4Bi La4Co4Sb Formula weight (g/mol) Temperature Wavelength ( ̊A, Ag Kα) Crystal system orthorhombic orthorhombic orthorhombic Space group Pbam (# 55) Pbam (# 55) Pbam (# 55) Unit cell dimensions a = 21.9909(3) ̊A, α = 90° a = 22.1952(10) ̊A, α = 90° a = 22.0031(4) ̊A, α = 90° b = 8.28370(10) ̊A, β = 90° b = 8.3236(3) ̊A, β = 90° b = 8.2780(2) ̊A, β = 90° c = 4.74940(10) ̊A, γ = 90° c = 4.7224(2) ̊A, γ = 90° c = 4.71320(10) ̊A, γ = 90° Volume (cm3) Z 4 4 4 Calculated density (g/cm3) Absorption coefficient (mm−1) Absorption Correction Face indexed multi-scan Face indexed F(000) 1672 1676 1548 Crystal size (mm) 0.26 x 0.19 x 0.08 0.2 x 0.17 x 0.13 0.16 x 0.13 x 0.1 theta range for data collection Index ranges (min/max, h, k, l) [-32/30, -11/11, -6/6] [-35/34, -13/13, -7/8] [-36/35, -13/13, -8,7] Reflections collected Independent reflections 1454 (Rint = 0.0708) 2411 (Rint = 0.0625) 2366 (Rint = 0.0528) Completeness 99.9 99.8 99.8 Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 Full-matrix least-squares on F2 Full-matrix least-squares on F2 Data / restrains / parameters GOF Final R indices [I > 2σ(I)] Robs = 0.0272, wRobs = 0.0652 Robs = 0.0233, wRobs = 0.0429 Robs = 0.0198, wRobs = 0.0385 R indices [all data] Rall = 0.0279, wRall = 0.0655 Rall = 0.0263, wRall = 0.0434 Rall = 0.0221, wRall = 0.0390 Extinction coefficient Largest diff. peak and hole (e−/ ̊A3) 2.907 and -3.117 1.834 and -1.683 1.266 and -1.484 CSD Number 2.3 X-ray diffraction Single crystal X-ray diffraction was performed using a Rigaku XtaLab Synergy-S diffractometer with Ag radia- tion (0.56087 ̊A ) operating at 65 kV and 0.67 mA. The samples were held in a nylon loop with vacuum grease, and the data was collected at room temperature. The to- tal number of runs and images was based on the strategy calculation from the program CrysAlisPro (Rigaku OD, 2023). The data integration and reduction were also per- formed using CrysAlisPro, and a numerical absorption correction was applied based on Gaussian integration over a face-indexed crystal. For La4Co4Bi, the crystal was irregularly shaped and we were unable to index the faces, so we employed an empirical multi-scan absorption correction using spherical harmonics, implemented in the SCALE3 ABSPACK scaling algorithm. The structures were solved by intrinsic phasing using the SHELXT soft- ware package and were refined with SHELXL. The crys- tallographic data and refinement results are given Tables 1, and the atomic positions and thermal displacement parameters are listed in Tables S4-S9 in the supporting information. Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were obtained using a Rigaku Miniflex-II instrument operating with Cu-Kα radiation with λ = 1.5406 ̊A (Kα1) and 1.5443 ̊A (Kα2) at 30 kV and 15 mA. The samples were prepared by grinding a representative number of crystals (5-10) to a fine powder. The powder patterns were refined us- ing the Rietveld method with GSAS-II software.15 To address air sensitivity, we also measured the powders on a Rigaku Miniflex-I instrument (same Cu-radiation and wavelength) contained in a nitrogen filled glovebox. The patterns are shown in Figures S1 and S2 in the supplemental information and were not found to be sig- nificantly different when comparing measurements con- ducted in air or nitrogen environments. 2.4 Physical property measurements Temperature dependent resistance measurements were performed between 4-300 K in a closed-cycle cryostat (Janis SHI-950). The AC resistance was measured using LakeShore AC resistance bridges (models 370 and 372), with a frequency of 17 Hz and a 3 mA excitation current. The temperature was measured by a calibrated Cernox 1030 sensor connected to a LakeShore 336 controller. As the crystals naturally grew with a blade-like morphol- ogy, we measured the resistances along the long-axis of the blade, which was determined with a Laue camera to be the c-crystallographic axis. To prepare the sam- ples, the surfaces of the crystals were lightly polished, and contacts were made by spot welding 25 μm thick annealed Pt wire onto the (100) faces of the crystals in standard four point geometry. After spot welding, a small amount of silver epoxy was painted onto the con- tacts to ensure good mechanical strength, and typical contact resistances were ≈ 1 Ω. Magnetization measurements were performed in a 4 (b) Extended view of the structure in the same orientation as (a) emphasizing the alternating stacks of Co-slabs and La-X polyhedral layers along the a-direction. (c) Unit cell viewed down the b-axis. (d) Extended view of the orientation in (c) showing the face-sharing connectivity of the La-X polyhedra along the b-direction and the quasi- layered, distinct Co- and La9X -based structrual units. (e) Isolated coordination environment of X surrounded by La to form tri-capped trigonal prisms. (f) Corner sharing tetrahedra and triangle sub-units that make up the Co slabs. (g) Connectivity of the two structural sub-units shown in (f) into extended Co-slabs that span the bc-plane. Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement Sys- tem (MPMS-classic) SQUID magnetometer operating in the DC measurement mode. The measurements were performed with the field applied along the a, b, and c crystallographic directions, and the samples were ori- ented with a Laue camera. For La4Co4Pb and La4Co4Bi, the samples were mounted between two straws for mea- surements in the H ∥ b and H ∥ c orientations. To measure with H ∥ a (perpendicular to the thinnest di- rection of the blade-like crystals), the samples were glued to a Kel-F disc, which was then placed inside of a straw. Prior to measuring, the blank disc was first measured at the same temperatures and fields to use as a background subtraction. For La4Co4Sb, the sample was mounted to the disc to measure all orientations. 2.5 Electronic structure calculations Density functional theory (DFT) was used to calcu- late the electronic structure of La4Co4X with X = Pb, Bi, and Sb. The DFT calculations were performed by using the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange- correlation functional within the framework of GGA16 as implemented in the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Pack- age (VASP).17,18 A plane-wave cutoff energy was set to 520 eV, the experimental lattice parameters were used, and the positions of atoms were fully optimized with the force tolerance of 0.01 eV/ ̊A ̇The accuracy of the electron self-consistent field is set to 10−4 eV, and the Brillouin zone is sampled using a set of gamma-centered uniform 2 × 8 × 16 grids with tetrahedron method for the density of states calculations. 3 Results and Discussion The La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, or Sb) compounds adopt a new orthorhombic structure type with space group Pbam. The crystal structure is illustrated in Figure 3, and information regarding the structural refinements is given in Table 1. The atomic positions and thermal dis- placement parameters are summarized in Tables S4-S9 in the supporting information. As shown in Figures 3a and 3b, La4Co4X adopts a quasi-layered structure fea- turing striking segregation of the immiscible Co and X atoms into two distinct structural sub-units, Co slabs and slabs formed from La9X polyhedra. The Co and La-X slabs each span the bc-plane and stack in an alter- 5 for La4Co4Pb, (d-f) the data for La4Co4Bi, and (g-i) the data for La4Co4Sb. The inset in (a) shows a picture of typical La4Co4Pb crystals on a mm grid. nating manner along the a-axis. Within the La-X slabs, the X atoms are nine-fold coordinated at the center of tr- icapped trigonal prisms (see Figure 3e), and the polyhe- dra have face-sharing connectivity that extends linearly down the c axis and is staggered along the b-direction, as emphasized in Figures 3c and 3d. of two structural sub-units within the greater Co-slabs: pairs of corner sharing tetrahedra and corner sharing tri- angles. The tetrahedra extend in chains down the c-axis and are linked in the b-direction by the corner sharing triangles to give the network shown in Figure 3g. An alternative way to view the Co-slabs is as a corrugated Kagome lattice that is bent in a zig-zag fashion along the b-axis with additional Co atoms (Co3, see atomic posi- tions listed in Tables S4, S6, and S8 supporting infor- mation) sitting above and below the corrugated kagome layers. The existence of stable ternary compounds containing the pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi demonstrates that the ex- treme immiscibility of Co with Pb and Bi may be over- come by using a third element that is mutually com- patible with the antagonistic elements. In this case, Co and Pb/Bi are all soluble in excess La at temperatures above 800° C.12 Within the La4Co4X crystal structure, the La clearly acts to spatially segregate the Co and X, as the complete encapsulation of X into the La9X poly- hedra ensures the X atoms are chemically isolated from the Co slabs. As the La4Co4X family are new mate- rials that adopt a new structure type, this work serves as a proof-of-principle that highly immiscible pairs of atoms can be leveraged to form new materials with quasi- reduced dimensional motifs intrinsically built into their crystal structures, which we suggest naturally form as immiscible atoms continue to avoid close contact in the solid-state. In La4Co4X, the most interesting structural motifs are the quasi-2D slabs of Co the span the bc-plane. As de- scribed above, these slabs are composed of corner shar- ing tetrahedra that form chains along the c-axis and that are linked by pairs of corner sharing triangles along the b-direction. Such networks of corner sharing tetrahdra or triangles form the basis of pyrochlore and Kagome lattices, both of which are currently attracting immense interest as potential platforms for studying many-body topological physics.19–27 In simplified models for metals with pyrochlore and Kagome lattices, frustrated hopping from adjacent sites leads to quenching of the electron ki- netic energy and electronic localization. This produces flat electronic bands in momentum space and increases 6 Field dependent magnetization isotherms measured at T = 2 K for (a) La4Co4Pb, (b) La4Co4Bi, and (c) La4Co4Sb. the relative strength of the Coulomb interaction between electrons, potentially providing a driver for correlated states including itinerant magnetism,28 charge density waves,28–31 and unconventional superconductivity.32–36 To determine if the La4Co4X family shows interest- ing physical properties, we measured the temperature and field dependence of the resistivity and magnetiza- tion of each. The data is presented in Figure 4. The top row, Figures 4a, 4d, and 4g show the resistivity (ρ, left axis, in red) and its derivative dρ/dT (right axis, in blue) of each La4Co4X compound. The La4Co4X ma- terials all show metallic behavior where the resistivity decreases with cooling between 4-300 K. The residual resistivity ratios, ρ(300 K)/ρ(4 K), are reasonably high, spanning 10-25, indicating good crystal quality. At high temperatures, the resistivity of each material has a mod- est slope, but each shows a kink on cooling that suggests a loss of spin disorder scattering as the samples enter a magnetically ordered state. The peaks in the resistance derivatives were used to assign the transition tempera- tures of T N = 219 K for La4Co4Pb, 153 K for La4Co4Bi, and 145 K for La4Co4Sb,37 and we find that the dρ/dT peak is substantially stronger in La4Co4Pb than either La4Co4Bi or La4Co4Sb. We will return to this point when discussing the magnetic data. perature dependent magnetization, shown as M/H. The magnetic data confirm that Co is moment bearing and orders in each La4Co4X compound. Like in the resis- tivity data, the transition is most apparent (sharpest) in La4Co4Pb. As shown in Figure 4b, the H ∥ b and H ∥ c magnetization of La4Co4Pb first increases on cooling and reaches a peak near 220 K, characteristic of anti- ferromagnetic order in which the moments are aligned along the b-axis. Above the transition, M/H increases in a Curie-Weiss like manner, with substantial anisotropy between different orientations. Curie-Weiss fits, shown in Figure S6 in the supporting information, to the the M /H data suggest an effective moment of μeff = 3.5(1) μB/Co and Weiss temperatures θ = 166(3) K, which is slightly smaller than, but in reasonable agreement with the 3.87 μB expected for Co2+ moments. In the Bi and Sb containing compounds, Figures 4e and 4h show that M/H first increases with cooling but with a non Curie-Weiss like, essentially linear, temper- ature dependence. Likewise, instead of a sharp peak like that observed in La4Co4Pb, the magnetization of La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb reaches a very broad maximum centered respectively at 195 K and 170 K in each mate- rial. Below the maximum, M/H decreases rapidly when H ∥ b, but only subtly in the H ∥ a and H ∥ c orienta- tions before settling into a relatively weak, slightly pos- itive temperature dependence. The fact that the M/H is smallest for the H ∥ b orientation in each sample sug- gests that the ordered moments may be aligned primarily along the b-axis within the antifferomagnetic state. We also note that the small downturn in M/H observed for La4Co4Sb is an artifact from subtracting the disc (see ex- perimental details), and is likely apparent owing to the small, ≈ 0.5 mg, sample mass and resulting weak signal. To estimate the Neel temperatures from the magnetic 7 show the calculated density of states for the corresponding band structures in (a-c). data, we calculated the polycrystalline average of the anisotropic data (shown in Figures 4c, 4f, and 4i, left axis in orange), where M avg/H = 1/3(M a + M b + M c)/H. The Neel temperatures were then determined using the derivatives d[(Mavg/H)T]/dT,38 which are pre- sented in Figures 4c, 4f, and 4i (right axis, in light blue). The inferred T N agree well with the transi- tion temperatures determined from the resistivity deriva- tives, with T N = 220 K, 155 K, and 146 for respec- tive X = Pb, Bi and Sb samples. Like in the dρ/dT data, the d[(Mavg/H)T]/dT behaves differently at T N for La4Co4Pb, in which d[(Mavg/H)T]/dT has a sharp step/discontinuity corresponding to the maximum in M/H. Instead of a discontinuity, the d[(Mavg/H)T]/dT curves for La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb have peaks at the re- spective temperatures that Mavg/H reaches its greatest decreasing slope, approximately 20 K below the respec- tive broad M/H maxima. lected at a base temperature of 2 K for each compound. Corresponding data collected at 300 K is shown in Figure S5 in the supporting information and is consistent with paramagnetic behavior of the bulk, La4Co4X. At 2 K, the low-field magnetization is smallest for all samples when the field is applied along the b-axis. In the H ∥ a and H ∥ c orientations, the magnetization isotherms for each ma- terial have a near linear field dependence up to at least 70 kOe, and the samples all show metamagnetic tran- sitions when H ∥ b. Like the M/H data, the isotherms shown in Figure 5 again demonstrate that La4Co4Pb be- haves qualitatively different than X = Bi and Sb sam- ples, with a much sharper feature in the M (H ) isotherm. In La4Co4Pb, the b-axis magnetization is extremely flat, and essentially independent of field up to 35 kOe, upon which it undergoes a step-like transition to a high-field state in which the magnetization is again nearly indepen- dent of field, with a saturated value of 0.53 μB/Co. In La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb, the H ∥ b isotherms also show a field induced transition beginning near 55-60 kOe that is incomplete at our maximum field of 70 kOe. How- ever, the transition in the X = Bi and Sb compounds appears substantially broadened compared to that ob- served in La4Co4Pb. Finally, we note that for La4Co4Sb, the small upturn in each isotherm below 5 kOe indicates this sample contains a small quantity of a ferromagnetic impurity (likely La6Co13Sb with T C = 490 K5), and a similar feature is observed in data collected at 300 K for this sample (see Figure S5 supporting information). Taken together, La4Co4Pb exhibits distinct magnetic behavior from that of La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb. The magnetization of La4Co4Pb, with Curie-Weiss like M/H in the high temperature paramagnetic regime and a well defined maximum at the Neel temperature, is typical of an intermetallic antiferromagnet with three dimensional coupling and ordering. La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb differ on both accounts, showing a broad maximum in M/H instead of a sharp peak and non Curie-Weiss like temper- ature dependence in the paramagnetic regime. Further- more, at the temperatures and fields applied here, the overall magnitude of M for X = Bi and Sb members is substantially smaller than that measured for La4Co4Pb. All of these characteristics are similar to the behavior of low dimensional systems, such as chains or sheets of coupled spins.39,40 8 More generally, the La4Co4X family contains at least three new Co-based intermetallic compounds in which the Co is moment bearing. Compared to the rare-earth atoms, which provide robust magnetism associated with their well-localized 4f orbitals, transition metals are con- siderably less likely to possess a magnetic moment in in- termetallic compounds. Instead, the stronger hybridiza- tion between d-orbitals (compared to 4f ) and the s- and/or p-like conduction electrons often leads to elec- tronic delocalization and Pauli-paramagnetic behavior. In further contrast to the local moment physics found in rare-earth based materials, the magnetism of metals con- taining 3d elements is often itinerant. In these cases, the on-sight Coulomb interaction and density of states at the Fermi level (E F) must be sufficient to spin-slit the bands near E F, leading to a net magnetic moment associated with the delocalized conduction electrons.41,42 In La4Co4X it is possible that the bonding within the quasi-2D Co network, consisting of chains of corner shar- ing tetradedra linked by corner sharing triangles, pro- duces flat electronic bands near the Fermi level that fa- vor itinerant magnetism, similar to what is observed in some metals with an ideal kagome or pyrochlore sublat- tice.20,25,27,28,43 To explore this possibility, we calculated the nonmagnetic electronic band structure and density of states (DOS) of each La4Co4X material, which are shown in Figure 6. The calculations reveal each com- pound has relatively flat electronic bands very close to the Fermi level. Figures 6d-6f show that the flat bands near E F are derived from Co atoms. Whereas the cal- culations suggest all three La4Co4X compounds have an enhanced DOS near E F, both the band structures and DOS features are different between La4Co4Pb and La4Co4Pn (Pn = Bi, Sb). The band structures of the two pnictogen containing compounds are very similar, and feature a very narrow spike in the density of states at E F. The bands of La4Co4Pb qualitatively differ, and the local maxima in the density of states is broader. These differences likely reflect the greater chemical sim- ilarity between La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb compared to La4Co4Pb, and are at least consistent with the experi- mental transport and magnentic data, in which behav- ior of La4Co4Pb is distinct. Finally, we emphasize that whereas our calculations indeed show flat, Co-based, bands in each La4Co4X material, at present, we are un- able to distinguish between the cases of trivial narrow bands, coming from poor orbital overlap or topological flat bands arising from destructive, out of phase hop- ping within the Co slabs. We will pursue this distinction in future work, with an eye towards understanding the conditions under which frustrated lattices which deviate from the perfect kagome or pyrochlore arrangement may still produce topological flat bands. In either case, the narrow bands and local maxima in the density of states near E F are both consistent with the expectations for an intermetallic magnet based on 3d elements. Overall, our measurements show that La4Co4X is a new family of Co based itinerant magnets in which quasi- 2D slabs of Co produce magnetic behavior that is likely sensitive to the band filling. It will be worthwhile to pur- sue deliberate substitution work, i.e. La4Co4Pb1−xBix to carefully study how the magnetism changes as a func- tion of the electron count. Furthermore, we intend to also search for isostructural analogues containing mo- ment bearing rare earth atoms to study the more com- plex magnetic phases likely accessible in such systems. 4 Summary and Conclusions We highlighted how immiscibility can be exploited to tar- get ternary compounds with low dimensional substruc- tures, such as sheets, chains, or clusters intrinsically built into their crystal structures. As a demonstration, we present the discovery of a new family of intermetallic compounds, La4Co4X (X = Pb, Bi, Sb), that are based on the immiscible pairs Co-Pb and Co-Bi. La4Co4X adopts a new orthorhombic structure with space group Pbam. The La atoms divide the crystal structure into spatially separated Co and X sub-units, where the Co atoms form quasi-2D slabs that span the bc-plane and stack along the a-axis, where they alternate with slabs of face sharing La9X polyhedra. Co is moment bearing in each material, and La4Co4Pb behaves as a three di- mensional antiferromagnet with T N = 220 K, whereas La4Co4Bi and La4Co4Sb both show behavior more con- sistent with low dimensional magnetic coupling and or- der marked by a broad maximum in the magnetization above their respective transitions at 153 K and 143 K. We also have been able to tentatively identify isostruc- tural La4Co4Sn in polycrystalline form but have not yet isolated single phase samples. This work opens the door to a generalizable strategy of exploiting strongly immisci- ble pairs to target materials with low dimensional struc- tural motifs. By further studying the chemistry dictating what third elements can be introduced to any given an- tagonistic pair to produce stable ternary compounds, we believe this concept represents a new design principle for the discovery of new materials and new structure types favorable for exhibiting emergent quantum behavior. 5 Acknowledgements Work at Ames National Laboratory was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Ba- sic Energy Sciences, Materials Sciences and Engineer- ing Division. Ames National Laboratory is operated for the U.S. Department of Energy by Iowa State Uni- versity under Contract No. DE-AC02-07CH11358. All electron microscopy and related work were performed using instruments in the Sensitive Instrument Facility at Ames National Laboratory. M.D. was supported by 9 the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Workforce Development for Teachers and Scientists (WDTS) under the Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internships (SULI) program. We especially thank Prof. Kirill Kovnir for valuable advice and discussions regard- ing the structure solutions and refinements. *corresponding authors’ email: slade@ameslab.gov, can- field@ameslab.gov Conflicts of Interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.