Points defects produced by irradiation: influence of boundary conditions on their biased elimination J.L. Bocquet 1 Centre Borelli, ENS-Paris-Saclay 4 Avenue des Sciences, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette - France Introduction The discovery of swelling of steels in power nuclear reactors launched a huge amount of research trying to explain the root of this damage. The consensus of the community hit rapidly the main reason. The elastic interaction energy of point defects (PD) with PD sinks, mainly dislocations, is not identical for interstitials ‘I’ and vacancies ‘V’; the relaxation volume of I is indeed much larger than that of V (+2.0 atomic volume versus -0.22 atomic volume, respectively). Due to this elastic bias (EB), the interstitials I are more strongly attracted than vacancies by the long ranged elastic field; the dislocation will thus drain and absorb more I than V and give rise to an absorption bias (AB), characterized by Ji > Jv. The remaining highly supersaturated V, which are less mobile, condense eventually on the spot while building 2D and 3D clusters. The latter expand the material, make it swell and deteriorate its mechanical properties. Many studies were devoted to establish the link between the EB and the AB , using mean field approaches (a lossy medium with an absorption term uniformly sprayed over the volume ) or an atomic scale modelling of individual sinks in cells with various boundary conditions (zero flux condition or continuity of concentration through the boundary). In the cell method a single sink is embedded in a volume surrounded by an outer surface of radius ext r without any other competitor; rext is set to match the corresponding sink density and the defect concentration along this surface is the average concentration far from the sink in the medium <C>. The sink is surrounded by an inner surface of radius int r with int ext r  r ; this inner surface is the one through which the incoming defects will be counted to measure the elimination flux. After solving a Laplace diffusion equation (no source term together with a fixed <C> at the outer surface) for each defect separately, an elastic bias (EB) is 1 Corresponding author: jean-louis.bocquet@ens-paris-saclay.fr calculated after evaluation of the flux crossing the internal surface at int r with and without interaction , with Jd rint and , zero Jd rint respectively. An elastic bias (EB) is then defined by , , 1 / with zero d d rint d rint X J J   . The elimination of the defects in the whole system can then be partitioned between the different types of sinks . Many papers debated about the last pending question, namely, the average defect concentration <C> to be chosen far from the sinks . The absorption bias proposed by this approach is then defined for each type of sink by 1 V / I AB X X   . However, the diffusion field used to calculate the defect fluxes is the field around one type of sink considered as alone and defects are introduced separately without recombining with each other. A revisited version of the cell method was proposed more recently . A single primary sink with its inner and outer surfaces was considered together with a zero flux condition on the outer surface. The two types of defects I and V are introduced simultaneously through a homogeneous source term G ; the recombination events I + V were taken into account through a homogeneously spread recombination rate . Solving numerically a Poisson equation for each type of sink (dislocation, cavity, grain boundary) yields the two elimination fluxes for I and V, namely , , with , with I rint V rint J J which are measured simultaneously on the system under the same boundary conditions. The absorption bias was then defined by: , , 1 / with with V rint I rint AB J J   . It was found that this bias was always equal to zero whatever the creation rate G and the elastic interaction of each defect with the primary sink. Indeed, the production and the recombination are symmetric processes and the zero-flux boundary condition is impermeable: thus, the incoming fluxes of I and V through the inner surface cannot be different from each other, whatever their unequal interactions with this primary sink. This is the reason why the authors introduced in their balance equation another type of sink (called secondary sink) through a uniformly spread absorption term, the latter reflecting the intensity of the absorption by this other competing sink and changing the surroundings into a lossy medium. The authors could show that the partition of the eliminated defects between the various types of sink was evaluated consistently: a cavity embedded in a lossy medium containing dislocations as a secondary sink yielded the same partition of eliminated defects as a dislocation embedded in a lossy medium containing cavities as a secondary sink. Recently, the transport of PD in the elastic field of dislocations has received considerable improvements. Ab initio packages are widely used to calculate in detail the migration barriers of the defects, while taking a full account of their anisotropy: at the saddle point for the vacancy, at the stable and saddle point for the dumbbell interstitial with the help of their dipolar tensors in the two configurations . Recent contributions studied sink networks made of parallel dislocations and highlighted interesting details about the shape of the flow lines in the neighborhood of the dislocations for each defect . But despite this improvement in the quantitative treatment, the very definition of the absorption bias remains partially unsatisfying because the result depends always on the boundary conditions; the calculations are mainly done for PD which are separately introduced into the cell and which do not interact (when solving a diffusion equation or when using an Object-Kinetic-Monte-Carlo code), which remains far from experiments where the PD are created simultaneously and can recombine with each other. From the reviews of the previous authors quoted above who compared at length the various ways of evaluating the AB, it is concluded that: *the absorption bias AB calculated in a model system with a single primary sink is probably of limited relevance, since the root of the absorption bias (AB) lies in the simultaneous presence of sinks having different elastic properties (EB); *a complete balance sheet of all the defects produced and eliminated must be done, including recombination, which ensures the simultaneous evaluation of absorption fluxes for the two defects, in the same system and under the same boundary conditions. These are the reasons why the model system presented below contains two primary sinks with different elastic properties. It is restricted to be 1D in order to obtain rapidly concentration profiles for the two defects I and V which are created throughout the medium via a homogeneous source term. Without claiming to describe an actual material under irradiation, the purpose is to explore the link between the elastic bias (EB) and the observed absorption bias (AB) in a model system and to determine the sensitivity of this link to the boundary conditions. We detail hereafter: the model system in section I, the elastic interaction of PD with sinks in section II, the irradiation contribution in section III, the diffusion model for the two defects in section IV, the procedure yielding the numerical results together with the control of the solution in section V, the results in section VI and the final discussion in section VII. At the end of the main contribution, appendices A to C often paired with the sections enumerated above, gather together useful details. I Geometry of the model system The 1-D system is a matter slab made of N parallel (100) crystalline planes of a BCC lattice, which are perpendicular to Ox axis and numbered from 1 to N (Fig. 1). The inter-plane distance is a/2 where a is the lattice parameter. The system is bounded by to additive planes (numbered ‘0’ on the left and ‘N+1’ on the right) playing the role of PD source-and-sink: their role consists in pinning down the PD concentrations to fixed values which depend on the temperature and on the elastic interaction associated with each sink. The concentrations are assumed to be uniform in each atomic plane ‘i’. Each site of plane ‘i’ (called afterwards site ‘i’ for short) has 4 neighbors on plane ‘i-1’ and 4 neighbors on plane ‘i+1’. The sink-and-source planes are assumed to have the same crystalline structure as the bulk planes. It is assumed that a defect jumping on plane ‘0’ (L sink) or ‘N+1’ (R sink) is immediately and irreversibly absorbed by the sink. The concentration , Cd i of each defect on plane ‘i’ associated with the jump frequencies between adjacent planes yield the PD fluxes at the two boundaries, namely , Jd L and , Jd R on the left and right boundary respectively. With our notations and plane numbering, these outward fluxes correspond to , ,1/2 d L d J  J and , , 1/2 d R d N J J   . During a sustained irradiation, the fluxes arriving on the left sink L are expected to be negative, while those on the right sink R are expected to be positive. The two absorption biases are historically expressed as: , , , ( ) / L I L V L I L AB J J J   together with , , , ( ) / R I R V R I R AB J J J   . (1) This historical choice yields very high values of the bias whenever the interstitial flux is small. Alternative and more symmetrical definitions could be defined to describe this imbalance. Definition of the model system The production of PD takes place via two channels in parallel, namely by thermal emission from the surface of the planar sink-and-sources and by the creation under irradiation. The elimination of PD takes place via three channels in parallel: namely, by recombination occurring immediately after creation (or aborted creation), by recombination occurring after diffusion (or diffusive recombination) and by absorption on the two sinks. Then the obvious constraint must be satisfied: , , , , I R I L V L V R eff Rec G J J J J       . (2) where eff Rec G   are the net creation rate in the system and the sum of mutual diffusive recombination events respectively. As a consequence, the imbalance of the fluxes (i.e. the numerator of each absorption bias) is equal in magnitude and takes opposite signs at the two sinks. II Elastic interaction of PD with planar sinks The chosen elastic interaction of the planar boundary L or R with the PD mimics that of a dislocation in α Fe while ignoring its angular dependence for sake of simplicity. Only the volume contribution is retained while dropping the effect of shears which are known to be of smaller magnitude. The expression combining the interactions between a defect ‘d’ located on plane ‘i’ with the two planar boundaries is given below:     , (1 ) ,0, ,0, 3 (1 ) / 2 ( 1 ) / 2 rel d L R d i L R V b b E kT ia N i a                          (3) where μ, ν are the shear modulus and Poisson ratio respectively, bL and bR the magnitude of the Bürgers vector on the left or on the right sink, Vdrel the relaxation volume of the defect ‘d’ measured in units of atomic volume. The ‘+’ and ‘-‘ sign define the sign of the interaction of defect ‘d’ with the L and R sink : a minus sign ‘-‘ for an attraction denoted hereafter by the capital letter A and a plus sign ‘+’ for a repulsion hereafter denoted by the capital letter R. The first term in the parenthesis accounts for the interaction of the defect with the left sink, which can be chosen > 0, = 0 or < 0; the second term accounts for the interaction of the defect with the right sink. The decrease of the shear modulus μ with temperature can be accounted for and amounts roughly to 18% between 300K and 1200K . The above formula includes two distances L , R which stand for the capture distance of the left (L) and of the right (R) sink respectively. They were set arbitrarily equal to bL , 4 R b . Below this distance, the interaction does not follow the macroscopic elastic theory and the incoming defect is supposed to be immediately absorbed. The signs of the interaction can be changed at will to account for different physical configurations:  a wall of parallel edge dislocations with their tensile regions oriented toward the center of the slab will attract I and repel V; it is denoted by ‘AR’;  a wall of parallel edge dislocations with their compressive regions oriented toward the center of the slab will attract V and repel I; it is denoted by ‘RA’;  a cavity surface will be assumed to have no elastic interaction; it is denoted by ‘00’. Each system is thus referenced by a quadruplet made of ‘A’, ‘R’ together with ‘0’, naming first the L sink and its interactions with I and V in this order, and then the R sink and its interactions with I and V. For instance, AA | AA represents a L sink and a R sink attracting I and V, while AR | AA represents a L sink attracting I but repelling V together with a R sink attracting the two. 00 | AR mimics a neutral wall like a cavity on the left facing a dislocation wall on the right. A further numerical value ‘x’ is added to the left part of the symbol only, if the strength of the elastic interaction at the left side is not identical to the strength of the interaction at the right side: for instance, AR2 | AA indicates that L R b   b . The absence of any numerical value means that the interactions are produced by Bürgers vectors of equal magnitude, i.e. a/2. All the configurations explored hereafter use always the same right sink R with a Bürgers vector equal to a/2. III Irradiation model The irradiation is modelled by a uniform source term G (expressed in dpa s-1) which creates isolated Frenkel pairs (FP). Only two values were probed, namely 10-2 and 10-4 dpa s-1, with emphasis on the first one which yields more pronounced effects. *the spatial correlation between the two partners of the FP upon creation is ignored, as well as their elastic interaction before recombining; *notwithstanding the fact that only the component of the fluxes along the x-axis is considered, the recombination volume VRec is however modelled as a true 3D object. The number NVrec of atomic volumes it contains was set equal to 113: it encompasses up to 8 neighbor shells and is roughly spherical . But it can be arbitrarily set equal to any other value (a few trials with a smaller value will be presented below). We give in Appendix A all the ingredients used to describe its geometry together with the quantities which introduce the recombination events into the balance equations. IV Jump frequencies and flux formulation The net defect flux from plane ‘i’ to plane ‘i+1’, is measured between the two planes and is defined by   , 1/2 , , 1 , 1 , 1 4 4 2 d i d i d i i d i d i i a J C W C W         (4) where ‘d’ stands for the type of defect (I or V), , Cd i , , Cd i 1  are the defect concentrations expressed in atomic fractions on site ‘i’ and ‘i+1’, , 1 d i i W   , , 1 d i i W   are the defect jump frequencies between one atomic site belonging to plane ‘i’ and one atomic site belonging to plane ‘i+1’. The diffusion model consists in defining the energy barriers to be crossed by each PD to reach a neighbor plane. The energies at the stable positions E ,d i and , Ed i 1  are determined by the elastic interaction; the energy at the saddle position , 1/2 sadd Ed i  is defined through the quantity , 1/2 sadd d i depicted on Fig. 2 according to:   , 1/2 , , 1 , 1/2 / 2 sadd sadd d i d i d i d i E E E        . (5) The above description is not restrictive. The quantities , 1/2 sadd d i can be chosen with more or less sophistication. In the present case, for sake of simplicity, they will be equated to a fixed value, namely the migration barrier for each defect in the bulk without any elastic interaction , 1/2 , sadd m d i Ed bulk    . They can however be replaced by more precise values which are obtained with empirical potentials, or better, with ab initio calculations, while taking account of the shear components of the sink strain field. This improvement has been brought by numerous authors in a recent past . We explain in Appendix B the reason why a discrete formulation of the flux must be adopted instead of the continuous expression deduced from the Nernst-Einstein approximation. Indeed, in the immediate neighborhood of the absorbing surface, where the elastic interaction hits its maximum, the drift component of the flux is no longer simply proportional to the elastic driving force. Ignoring this point may change the relative weights of the drift and gradient terms in the total flux to such an extent that it changes the sign of the flux. This modification of the terms entering the evaluation of fluxes, although never implemented in practice, was formerly suggested by previous authors . Several barrier evaluations are compared in Appendix C. The interaction energy of the dumbbell defect with the strain field of a dislocation depends on the orientation of its dissociation axis. Including this feature would require a distinct diffusion equation for each orientation of the dumbbell, which is beyond the scope of the present contribution since our model remains basically one- dimensional. Fortunately, the major part of the interaction stems from the volumetric component; it is shown that the brute evaluation given in Eq. 3 is not too far from the most sophisticated ones, if conveniently modified. Thus, it can be reasonably expected that the qualitative conclusions of our calculations will not be drastically impacted by the crudeness of the description. General model for jump barriers in the presence of a driving force V Rates equations at stationary state and the resulting equations systems The starting global balance equation is written for a site belonging to plane ‘i’ and contains a diffusion term, a recombination term and a defect production term. The boundary conditions connect the last atomic plane of the matter slab (‘1’ and ‘N’) with the L and R sink-source plane (‘0’ and ‘N+1’) respectively. , ( ) d i eff i i i d C div J G Rec t       (6) where ‘d’ stands for the defect type, Gi eff is the effective source term taking into account the loss of defect due to aborted creation (see below Eq. 7) and i Rec the loss due to diffusive recombination. This global equation is translated at the atomic level, resting only on the jump frequencies between adjacent planes which were defined earlier and on the site occupation probabilities. The matter balance per unit time is calculated for each site ‘i’, taking account of all the events which change its occupancy: departures and arrivals of the defect on the site due to diffusion, production by irradiation flux together with the elimination by a newly created anti-defect, diffusive recombination on the spot. The Laplacian term is then discretized for each site ‘i’ according to:   , 1/2 , 1/2 , 1 , 1 , , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 ( ) 4 4 ( ) 4 d d i d i d i d i i d i d i i d i i d i d i i i div J J J a C W C W W C W                    where the multiplying factor 4 is the number of neighbors on an adjacent plane. The recombination term i Rec is no longer calculated through the homogeneous approach : the latter becomes highly questionable in the vicinity of sinks where concentration gradients are steep and where the jump frequencies, which vary rapidly from one site to the next one, are very different from the jump frequency in the bulk. This is the reason why it is calculated exactly by listing, one after the other, all the jumps producing a recombination event. The contribution of the recombination appears as a relative probability which decreases the net result of each jump: a jump from site ‘i’ to ‘i+1’ does transport the defect from ‘i’ to ‘i+1’, provided the arrival site does not belong to the recombination volume of a nearby anti-defect. The details were reported in Appendix A. The effective source term Gieff due to irradiation is expressed in units of dpa s-1. It is not equal to the nominal creation rate G , because the creation process is self-limited: indeed, no new defect can be created on some site ‘i’ as soon as this site belongs to the recombination volume Vrec of a nearby pre-existing anti-defect. A first order correction replaces merely the nominal creation rate G by an effective one defined by:   , , 1 ( ) eff i Rec V i I i G G V C C    . (7) This effective creation rate depends now on the local concentrations of PD and accounts for this “aborted creation event” which is a non-thermal process. It could be improved further to allow for some overlap of the recombination volumes: as a result, the same corrective factor appears, but now squared . The limiting concentration of FP is equal to 1/Vrec in the two approximations and we retain only the first order (and linear) correction term for sake of simplicity. This self-limitation effect was observed during irradiation below 10K and was used in the past to measure experimentally the recombination volume. The inclusion of this aborted creation event during the calculations can be switched on and off at will with convenient flags; it will be indicated by 1 Rc or 0 Rc , respectively. Departures from site ‘i’ Jumps from site ‘i’ to a first neighbor ‘i-1’ or ‘i+1’ , 1 , 1 , (4 4 ) I i i I i i CI i W W       Jumps of a vacancy reaching the recombination volume Vrec(i) of I sitting on ‘i’ , 2 ( ) CI i V I i  Creation of an anti-defect (V) on any site belonging to the re- combination volume of I , * * I i Vrec C G N  Arrivals on site ‘i’ Jumps from site ‘i-1’, provided ‘i’ does not belong to the recom- bination volume of a nearby V   , 1 , 1 4 1 2 ( ) I i i CI i W I V i       Jumps from site ‘i+1’, provided ‘i’ does not belong to the recom- bination volume of a nearby V   , 1 , 1 4 1 2 ( ) I i i CI i W I V i       Creation on site ‘i’ by irradiation flux   , , 1 ( eff i Rec I i V i G G V C C    The effect of recombination is thus spread among the coefficients of the three concentrations , , 1 , 1 , I i , I i I i C C C   .The expressions 2 ( ), 2 ( ), 2 ( ) V I i I V i I V i   were given in Appendix A. The following remarks are worth to be mentioned: *the recombination event takes place when I and V, initially separated by a distance larger than the recombination radius, jump in the direction of each other. It takes account of the jumps of the two partners (jumps of I approaching V and the reverse) but the corresponding jump frequencies are evaluated at different locations in the system (i.e. in the energy gradient of the elastic force). As a consequence, a given recombination event is not seen to take place at the same location in the system by each partner: * “from the point of view of I”: I (and thus V, too) vanishes on site ‘i’ (1rst and 2nd line of Table Ib); * “from the point of view of V”: V (and thus I, too) vanishes at some distant site belonging to the recombination Vrec(i) of I. In the same way, I disappears from site ‘i’ because a vacancy V arrived at some distant site of its recombination volume Vrec(i) (2nd line of Table Ia). This is the reason why the recombination events in the whole system, which rest on the knowledge of locally varying jump frequencies, cannot be summed up under the form of a unique term on each plane ‘i’ as it was in the continuous and homogeneous approach using bulk diffusivities ; * the creation event does not account of the fact that I and V are created on different lattice sites; *the irradiation source Gieff contains a first order self-limitation term describing the creation process in the presence of pre- existing defects (last line of Table Ib) and the correction uses the PD concentrations on plane ‘i’ only. This is also an approximation because it should include the recombination volumes of pre-existing defects centered on sites ‘k’ lying at some distance from ‘i’; but this point was ignored in order to simplify the formulation and the numerical solution. Including these recombination events due to diffusion in the calculations can be switched on or off at will with convenient flags; they will be mentioned by 1 Rd or Rd0 , respectively. Merging together the two pieces of information about the recombination events gives rise to a single symbol , {0,1} Rcjd i i j  which will also appear in the figures displayed afterwards. Since only the stationary state is looked for, the time derivative is set to zero. The starting equation can be split into a system of quasi-linear equations, containing as many equations as the number of atomic planes for each PD. The terms which do not contain the concentration of the defect under consideration are shifted to the RHS of the equations. For the interstitial species:   1 1 , , , , , 1 , 1 (1 ) ( ) ( ) (1 ) ( ) 1 (1) ( ) i iN Vrec i iN eq eq I i V i I L I R I i I i ail i C aid i C aiu i C G N C ail C aiu N C i N             (8) The Kronecker symbols i 1 , iN  are used to take account of the concentrations at the left (L) and right (R) boundaries, namely , eq CI L and , eq CI R , which do not belong to the set of unknowns. With the help of Table Ia and Ib, the coefficients of the lower, main and upper diagonals are easily defined by:     , , 1 1 , 1 , 1 ( ) 4 1 2 ( ) ( ) (4 4 ) 2 ( ) * ( ) 4 1 2 ( ) I i i I i i Vrec I i i I i i ail i W I V i aid i W W V I i G N aiu i W I V i                      (9) The major contribution comes from the jump frequencies; the recombination jumps appear under the form of a correction, which remains small at the higher temperatures and becomes more important at lower ones. Similar expressions for the vacancy species are deduced by exchanging the symbols I and V and yield the system of equations below:   1 1 , , , , , 1 , 1 (1 ) ( ) ( ) (1 ) ( ) 1 (1) ( ) i iN Vrec i iN eq eq V i I i V L V R V i V i avl i C avd i C avu i C G N C avl C avu N C i N             (10) together with:     , 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 ( ) 4 1 2 ( ) ( ) (4 4 ) 2 ( ) * ( ) 4 1 2 ( ) I i i V i i Vrec V i i V i i avl i W V I i avd i W W I V i G N avu i W V I i                      (11) Each system of equations is then alternately solved as if it were truly tri-diagonal. The solution of system (8) for I is first solved and used as an input for the solution of system (10) for V, and conversely at the next iteration. The nonlinear terms, which represent the effect of the recombination events, modify only slowly the coefficients of the three diagonals and a limited number of iterations is necessary, from several tens at higher temperatures up to several thousand around room temperature. Fortunately, solving a tri-diagonal system remains always an easy task and the back and forth procedure keeps its efficiency above room temperature. The convergence basin is large and any starting point is convenient. The iterations are stopped when the following empirical criterion was met: 1 ( ) ( ) ( ) N i RHS i LHS i RHS i      (12) where RHS and LHS stand for the values of the right and left-hand-sides of each equation and ε is set arbitrarily equal to 10-10. It was found that the solution could no longer be noticeably improved when performing more iterations. For the case of thermal equilibrium ( 0 Gieff  ), the ratio in Eq. 12 above is replaced by the numerator. The recombination events happening per unit time in the whole system are counted exactly through two independent procedures:  “from the point of view of I” by summing the quantities V2I, I2V+, I2V- which enter the coefficients of system (8):   1 2 ( ) 2 ( ) 2 ( ) N i V I i I V i I V i       ; (13)  “from the point of view of V” by summing the quantities I2V, V2I+, V2I- which enter the coefficients of system (10):   1 2 ( ) 2 ( ) 2 ( ) N i I V i V I i V I i       . (14) It is checked throughout the calculations that the two summations (13) and (14) yield strictly equal quantities (within round-off errors), since each pair of sites (‘i’, ’j’) which is a candidate for a recombination event is scanned in the two systems of equations (but not in the same order), either through a jump of I approaching V or a jump of V approaching I. The three processes working in parallel for defect elimination are * the self-limited or aborted creation (AC) which is a non-thermal process, * the diffusive recombination losses which imply thermally activated jumps * the absorption fluxes on the sinks. Their relative weights are expressed below as proportions of the total nominal defect production N G  and by construction always sum up exactly to unity for each defect. The convergence is slowed down around room temperature where diffusion to sinks becomes less efficient and where the elimination of PD happens mainly by diffusive recombination or aborted creation. The terms connected to diffusive recombination in the coefficients are no longer a small correction and represent progressively an overwhelming part, which requires a larger number of iterations. VI Results All the calculations presented below were done with jump barriers evaluated through the brute hydrostatic approximation (Eq. 3) or the modified interaction discussed in Appendix C. Results are displayed with the notation ‘brute’ and ‘modif’. Voigt-and-Reuss’ (V+R) averaged expressions of μ and ν (Equation C4 in Appendix C) are used throughout the calculations. The temperature dependence of the elastic constants is included or not at will with a convenient flag through the notations ‘CijT’ or ‘Cij0’ respectively. The calculations can switch on or off the irradiation flux and/or the diffusive recombination events as explained above; thus concentration profiles will be obtained for all configurations with or without recombination. It is worth noticing that the non-thermal recombination event upon creation, due to the overlap of recombination volumes, is a channel for elimination which must always be kept: at room temperature, for large systems and large production rates, point defect concentrations were found to reach unrealistic values larger than unity. Indeed, the equations which are used above do not include any upper limit for the value of the solution. The system configurations explored below will be of the following types: 00 | AR, AR2 | AR, RA | AR. The first system will be studied in more detail and considered afterwards as a reference to which the others will always be compared for highlighting the differences. The symmetric configuration AR | AR will be briefly commented first. VI-1 Symmetric configurations The system is made of two sinks with identical elastic properties and has a symmetry plane passing through the center of the slab. Along this plane, the elastic forces and the fluxes vanish and the concentrations of the two defects reach their maximum. It is the only configuration in which the zero-force surfaces (ZforceS) and the zero-flux surfaces (ZfluxS) coincide. This configuration assigns an equal strength to the two sinks and no bias can be observed of course, as already noted by former authors : the latter worked with a single dislocation in a cylinder with a zero-flux boundary condition, the latter playing the same role as the symmetry plane at the center of the slab in the present system: *the fluxes of I and V at the sinks are always equal and do not depend on the elastic interaction; *when recombination is ignored, they do not depend further on temperature and amount to N G / 2 (Eq. 2) *the dependence on temperature and on the type of interaction is observed only if recombination is allowed, but the two defect fluxes remain equal anyway. At last in thermal condition (G = 0) calculations find that two non-vanishing inward fluxes coming from both ends (positive at L sink and negative at R sink) show up in order to compensate the consumption of defects produced by the recombination events in the bulk at that temperature. Even without irradiation, the system is no longer in equilibrium but rather in a stationary state. The point does not quantitatively matter in the present situation where the defect and anti-defect have very high formation energies; but it might have some influence in materials where I and V bring contributions to matter transport of comparable magnitude (like silicon). VI-2 Configuration 00|AR (N=101) The distance between the two sinks corresponds to the distance between parallel dislocations in a 3D system with a density close to 1016 m-2. The calculations are performed with the elastic constants at 0K (denoted by ‘Cij0’) unless otherwise indicated, together with the brute and modified interactions. The fluxes are measured as the number of atoms crossing the lateral facet of the system (area = a2/2) during the unit time. The L sink is elastically neutral whereas the R sink attracts I and repels V. The elastic forces produced by the two sinks never compensate each other and there are no ZforceS. The fluxes are evaluated in two different ways: the so-called ‘lattice flux’ is calculated with Eq. B3 of Appendix B, whereas the so-called ‘NE flux’ is evaluated with Eq. B5. IV-2-1 Influence of recombination on concentration profiles and absorption bias On Fig. 3 are displayed the relative contributions of different elimination channels for the two species and for the brute interaction; as already mentioned, the contributions sum up to unity for each species at any temperature. The role of recombination events can be clearly detected up to 500K: the purple crosses indicate the amount of aborted creation whereas the red crosses indicate the amount of diffusive recombination. This threshold temperature depends on the size of the system (see below for N = Eliminated fractions of I and V species as a function of temperature with the brute interaction and taking the recombination into account Rc1d1. Due to the sustained homogeneous production of PD, the concentrations in the slab are always larger than the thermal concentrations at the absorbing boundaries; as a consequence the ZfluxS always exist. On Fig. 4-5 are displayed the I and V concentration profiles at 300K and 800K calculated with the brute interaction, when evaluated with or without recombination (Vrec = 113). Aborted creation plays a weak role: when switching from Rc0 to Rc1 the change of the profiles is much smaller than the change brought by switching from Rd0 to Rd1. Concentration profiles for I and V at 300K, with or without recombination, together with the ZfluxS. Neglecting the recombination overestimates the concentrations by one order of magnitude at 300K; but the difference nearly vanishes above 800K. At last the ZfluxS have different locations for the two defects and their positions change with temperature. Concentration profiles for I and V at 800K, with or without recombination, together with zero-flux planes. The L and R absorption biases, when evaluated with expression (1), exhibit a general decreasing trend with increasing T as expected, but this decrease is not monotonous. The absolute value of the negative L bias and positive R bias start with an initial increase between 300K and 450K (Fig. 6-7). Absorption bias at the L sink with lattice and NE fluxes with or without recombination The sign change of the derivative is connected to the amount of recombination in the system. Indeed, more recombination decreases the two fluxes by an equal amount but change their ratio. For the L sink having no elastic force, the lattice and NE evaluations of the fluxes coincide nearly everywhere but at the lower temperatures. For the R sink developing a stronger interaction, the two evaluations depart markedly from one another over a large temperature domain. Absorption bias at the R sink with lattice and NE fluxes with or without recombination. IV-2-2 Influence of the flux formulations on the gradient and drift terms to the R sink where the interaction is noticeable. The correction on the gradient term shows up on the departure of the two blue curves; the correction between the two drift terms (NE and lattice) shows up between the yellow and green curves, respectively. The resulting fluxes (NE and lattice) are displayed with the orange and purple curves, respectively. The corresponding curves for the vacancy, which experiences an elastic force roughly ten times smaller show that the departure between the two evaluations can be hardly perceived (Fig. 9), for the negative drift component (since V are repelled by the R sink) as well as for the positive gradient component. On Figure 10 are displayed the lattice and NE evaluations of I and V total fluxes close to the R sink. The NE evaluation of the I flux and of the V flux (green and blue curve, respectively) exhibit a cross-over around plane n° 100, producing an absorption bias of the wrong sign (already detectable on Fig. 7), whereas the lattice expressions (purple for I and blue for V) yield an absorption bias AB with the correct sign. Spatial zoom on I flux components at the R sink with lattice and NE expressions and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. Spatial zoom of V flux components at the R sink with lattice and NE expressions and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. Spatial zoom on I and V fluxes at the R sink with lattice and NE expressions and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. IV-2-3 Influence of the interaction on the absorption bias AB The AB changes slightly with the detail of the interaction (brute interaction versus modified). Since our modified interaction is always softer than the brute one, the bias is slightly decreased (roughly by 20%) over the whole temperature range, as can be seen on Fig. 11. Absorption bias at the L and R sink with brute and modified interaction together with elastic constants at 0K and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. IV-2-4 Influence of temperature dependent elastic constants If the temperature dependence of the elastic constants is taken into account, the resulting softening of the interaction is detectable only at the higher temperatures: the decrease of the absorption bias is small (compare Fig. 7 above and 12 below). Absorption bias at the R sink with lattice and NE fluxes with or without recombination. The elastic constants are reduced by 18% (denoted with ‘CijT’) at the higher temperatures where the resulting softening of the interaction starts to be detectable. The absorption bias AB is slightly decreased (compare Fig. 11 above and 13 below). Absorption bias at the L and R sink with the brute and modified interaction together with temperature dependent elastic constants and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. IV-2-5 Influence of the creation rate When the creation rate is lowered down to 10-4 dpa/s, the above outlined trends still hold. The effects of recombination events are now detectable on a smaller temperature range and vanish around 350K instead of 450K. The fluxes are approximately divided by a factor of 102, but the biases displayed on Fig. 14 are of comparable magnitude with those displayed on Fig. 11. Absorption bias at the L and R sink with the brute and modified interaction with a reduced creation rate and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1. VI-2-6 Influence of system size (N=1001) The system is now made of 1001 planes. The distance between the two sinks corresponds to the distance between parallel dislocations in a 3D system with a density equal to 1014 m-2. The system experiences the creation of ten times more defects. However, detailed inspection of the data shows that the I and V fluxes at both ends are slightly smaller than the fluxes measured on the small system by at most 50%. Fig. 15-16 display the concentration profiles for the vacancy V and for the interstitial I in the slab. The size of the system is such that the two sinks, in the absence of recombination, cannot eliminate defects at a sufficient rate to maintain the concentration level at an acceptable level, mainly for the vacancies: indeed, when recombination is not taken into account (Rc0d0), the maximum concentration for V is around 0.4 which is physically unreasonable. It is observed that including successively all the contributions of the recombination events lowers gradually the curve from the starting curve obtained with Rc0d0 down to Rc1d0, Rc0d1 and finally to Rc1d1. The contribution of the diffusive recombination (i.e. the change from Rd0 to Rd1) is as already noted before more important than the contribution of aborted creation (i.e. the change from Rc0 to Rc1). The overshoot beyond unity suggests that the equation system is inadequate because nothing prevents the solution from Fig.17 compares the two curves obtained with Rc1d1 but with different recombination volumes; the value of the latter apparently does not matter much since Vrec=9 is nearly as efficient as Vrec=113. Concentration profiles for vacancies V at 300K, with or without recombination. Rc1 includes the recombination through aborted creation; Rd1 includes the recombination after diffusion jumps. Concentration profiles for vacancies I at 300K, with or without recombination. Rc1 includes the recombination through aborted creation; Rd1 includes the recombination after diffusion jumps. Concentration profiles for vacancies V and interstitials I at 300K, with full recombination Rc1d1 but two different recombination volumes. On Figure 18 are displayed the relative contributions of the various elimination channels. The recombination events play a detectable role up to 1000K, against 500K for the smaller system. The initial increase of diffusive recombination between 300K and 350K is due to the simultaneous decrease of the aborted creation process. Eliminated fractions of I and V species as a function of temperature with the brute interaction and taking full recombination into account Rc1d1 The L and R bias are definitely smaller for the larger system. At 300K the R bias is decreased by a factor of 8 down to 0.035 (Fig. 19) against 0.275 for the smaller system (Fig. 11). Absorption bias on R sink with the brute and modified interactions and the lattice expressions of the fluxes. Recombination fully included Rc1d1. VI-4 Configuration AR2|AR1 (N=101) In the small system the L sink is now replaced by a wall with an interaction energy with PD of the same AR type (attracting the I defects and repelling the V ones) but twice larger. ZforceS now exist; they coincide with the ZfluxS only for the interstitials. They are displayed on Fig. 20. Concentration profiles for I and V species with recombination fully taken into account Rc1d1. ZForceS and ZfluxS are indicated for the two profiles. The resulting absorption bias at the L and R sinks are displayed on Fig.21. The new feature is the fact that the R sink exhibits now a reversed negative absorption bias, while the L sink absorbs more interstitials than vacancies (compare with Fig. 11). Absorption bias on the L and R sink with the brute and modified interactions and the lattice expression of the fluxes. Recombination fully included Rc1d1. VI-5 Configuration RA|AR (N=101) For this last case, the L sink is supposed to repel interstitials and attract vacancies. The interstitial is repelled by L sink as hard as it is attracted by the L sink (the reverse holds for the vacancy); therefore, there are neither ZforceS nor ZfluxS. The relative weights of the elimination channels for the two defects are displayed below on Fig. 23. In the temperature range above 600K where the recombination plays no longer a noticeable role, the interstitials are mainly absorbed at the R sink (empty blue circles) at the expense of the absorption at the L sink (filled blue squares). At the L sink, the I flux is minimum while the V flux is maximum; due to the arbitrarily non symmetric definition of the absorption bias AB, its value at the L sink hits skyrocketed values (up to several hundreds) which are displayed on Fig. 24. The AB on the R sink is displayed on Fig. 25. Eliminated fractions of I and V species as a function of temperature with the brute interaction and taking full account of the recombination Rc1d1. Absorption bias at the L sink with the brute and modified interaction and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1 Absorption bias at the R sink with the brute and modified interaction and inclusion of full recombination Rc1d1 VI-6 Comparison of the obtained absorption bias with the standard evaluation by the Laplace method The method has been extensively explained by previous authors. The flux of each defect ‘d’ at the R sink, when taken separately, is evaluated twice with a set of two Dirichlet boundary conditions: *a first evaluation is done without any elastic interaction and with , max Cd L at the L sink, , therm Cd R at the R sink. The L and R sinks are assumed to be neutral. While the concentration at the R sink is set equal to the thermal one , therm Cd R , , max Cd L is set to a value much larger than , therm Cd R (typically 10-8 for V and 10-10 for I). Because of the large formation energies for the two defects I and V, , therm Cd R can be numerically set equal to zero. The defect flux is constant throughout the slab and it is given by: , , , , ( 1) / 2 ( 1) / 2 max therm max d L d R d L zero bulk bulk d R d d C C C J D D N a N a      (15) It was checked that the numerical evaluation of our code reproduces this result exactly with no source term. *a second evaluation is done with an elastic field produced by the R sink only. The L sink is still assumed to be neutral with the same concentration , max Cd L . The concentration at the R sink takes now into account the interaction of the defect ‘d’ with the R sink. However this interaction remains weak when compared with the formation energies of the defects and the corresponding value can be once more set equal to zero. The flux obtained while taking into account the interaction of the PD with the R sink is denoted by , with Jd R . Analytical solutions are available only if the diffusion coefficient is independent of the spatial coordinates . It is not the case in the present problem for the modified interaction since the local and average diffusivities , loc Dd i and , av Dd i are no longer equal to the constant bulk Dd (refer to Appendix B). The evaluation of the fluxes is done numerically. With the usual notation, the two elastic bias (EB) are then defined by , , , with / zero d R d R d R X J J  and the proposed absorption bias AB at the R sink is calculated according to: , , 1 / R V R I R AB X X   . (16) This corresponding AB (purple line) is displayed together with all the AB collected above for the preceding cases for the smaller system (N=101) for the brute (Fig. 26) and modified interaction (Fig. 27). The horizontal black line stands for the AB of the symmetric configuration AR | AR in which the AB vanishes by construction. The modification brought by the change of the interaction is of small extension. Comparison of the AB obtained through our calculations in the small system with the Laplace method for the brute interaction. The recombination is fully taken into account (Rc1d1). Comparison of the AB obtained through our calculations in the small system with the Laplace method for the modified interaction. The recombination is fully taken into account (Rc1d1). The same conclusion is drawn for the larger system (N=1001) and the corresponding AB are displayed on Fig. 28-29. Comparison of the AB obtained through our calculations in the large system with the Laplace method for the brute interaction. The recombination is fully taken into account (Rc1d1). Comparison of the AB obtained through our calculations in the large system with the Laplace method for the modified interaction. The recombination is fully taken into account (Rc1d1). VI-7 Discussion The stress is not to be laid on the absolute value of the bias, because the model used here is too rough for describing realistic situations. Moreover, because of the geometry chosen for the system, the overlapping of the diffusion fields for two sinks facing each other exacerbates their mutual influence: a defect which is not absorbed on a given sink is automatically absorbed by the other. This implies an imbalance between the I and V fluxes equal in magnitude but opposite in sign on the two sinks according to Eq. 2. The important conclusion points toward the following fact: if the details of the elastic interaction (dipolar tensor against volume approximation for instance) do bring a detectable change to the AB, the boundary conditions involved in the examined cases (RA | AR, 00 | AR, AR | AR, AR2 | AR) play an overwhelming role on the result as illustrated on the AB reversal detected in the last configuration at the R sink. This should not be a surprise for a diffusion problem where the boundary conditions have always a leading contribution. The interesting case of AB reversal obtained above for one situation was recently enlightened on a much more realistic case. A recent and sophisticated calculation took a full account of the elastic fields generated by the loops and the free surfaces in a thin foil film . During a sustained irradiation, the loops in the foil were generally found to grow since they elastic bias EB tends to attract more interstitials than vacancies. It was however not the case for the loops located close to the free surfaces; the latter are viewed under a large solid angle by the migrating interstitial and become the dominant sink. As a result, the interstitials are locally absorbed mainly by the surfaces, which explains the corresponding shrinking of the nearby loops which was experimentally observed. This shading effect produced by a neighboring sink is also at work in our AR2 | AR case. The partition of the space between the different diffusion fields was also questioned recently, suggesting that a first improvement could be the use of a Voronoi polyhedron around each type of sink . This is a purely geometrical criterion and the choice of zero flux surfaces would probably yield a more appropriate partition of the volume. Unfortunately, as displayed above, the ZfluxS are not necessarily identical for the vacancies and the interstitials and, worse, their positions change with temperature; they cannot be determined without a thorough calculation of concentration profiles throughout the medium. The good point is the fact that at the higher temperatures the ZfluxS tend to merge together and to approach the faces of Voronoi polyhedron. VII Conclusions The purpose of the contribution was focused on the link between the elastic bias (EB) and the absorption bias (AB) at the root of swelling and on the stiffness of this link with respect to a change of boundary conditions. The R sink was kept unmodified throughout the calculations of all configurations (attracting I and repelling V with an unmodified interaction) whereas the elastic properties of the L sink were changed in order to mimic different boundary conditions. After inspection of the results the following observations about the absorption bias (AB) can be made. * the use of the atomistic expression of the flux is mandatory: ignoring this point may even lead to a sign change of the AB due to an incorrect evaluation of the gradient and drift terms; * the AB is not very sensitive to the modification of the barrier profiles; the sophisticated evaluations yield slightly different values of each flux but their imbalance is only modestly affected; * the AB is sensitive to the recombination of defects only below 500K; at higher temperatures, between 600K-1000K where swelling is expected to take place, it becomes independent of recombination; * the AB is much more sensitive to a change of the elastic properties of the neighboring L sink than to the changes brought by the modifications listed above; we could evidence a reversal of the AB at the R sink which dragged more I than V. This crude modelling suggests that the interaction of the diffusion fields of neighboring sinks can become dominant and exceed the effect of the elastic bias. The final consequence implies that pairing a priori one value of the AB with a sink of known EB is not possible if the surroundings of this sink are not known. Data availability The author confirms that the data supporting the findings reported in this study are available within the article. Raw data that support the results are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Declaration of competing interest The author is freely and graciously hosted by the Centre Borelli ENS Paris-Saclay and declares to have no competing financial interest or personal relationship that could influence the data reported here. Aknowledgements I thank my former colleagues at CEA, namely L. Wang, T. Schuler, M. Nastar, F. Soisson and T. Jourdan, for their interesting remarks and stimulating discussions.