Atomic-scale effect of 2D π-conjugated metal-organic frameworks as electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction reaction towards highly selective products Ran Wang ab, Chaozheng He b*, Weixing Chenb*, Qingquan Kong a*, Thomas Frauenheimac a Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, P. R. China b Institute of Environmental and Energy Catalysis, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Functional Materials and Devices, School of Materials Science and Chemical Engineering, Xi'an Technological University, Xi'an 710021, P. R. China c School of Science, Constructor University, Bremen 28759, Germany *Corresponding authors. E-mail addresses: hecz2019@xatu.edu.cn (C. He); chenwx@xatu.edu.cn (W. Chen); kongqingquan@cdu.edu.cn (Q. Kong); Abstract Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction technology is key to mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and the energy crisis. However, controlling the selectivity of CO2RR products at low overpotential remains a challenge. In this paper, we predicted five high-performance CO2RR electrocatalysts with different product-specific selectivities at the theoretical level based on the advantages of the compositional structure and the tunable pore size of 2D π-conjugated MOFs. In addition, through the reaction mechanism and electronic structure analysis, we found that the synergistic interaction between metal atoms and organic linkers of 2D MOFs can effectively regulate the electronic structure of the active center. Their pore size as well as the diversity of carbon materials can regulate the spin magnetic moments of the metal atoms, thus affecting the improvement of their catalytic performance. Meanwhile, the oxygen or carbon affinity of the catalyst surface determines the differences in the formation of key intermediates, which ultimately determines the reaction path and product selectivity. These insights we present will be useful for the development and design of highly active CO2RR electrocatalysts. Keywords: CO2 reduction; electrocatalysis; two-dimensional metal-organic framework design; multicomponent modulation; product selectivity; 1 Introduction Large emissions of CO2 gas exacerbate environmental problems, such as the greenhouse effect and ocean acidification. Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) can drive the production of high value-added chemicals and fuels, which can effectively alleviate energy stress and environmental degradation by using these renewable energies. However, the actual yields of final products from CO2RR are not satisfactory, because of the stable C=O bonds in linear non-polar CO2 molecule resulting in the slow reaction kinetics, the low Faraday efficiency due to competing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and many by-product outputs. Therefore, finding and designing an efficient CO2RR electrocatalyst with high activity and specific selectivity remains a challenge. The carbon-based single-atom catalysts (SACs) have promising applications in a variety of electrochemical reactions due to their high electrical conductivity, large atomic utilization and low costs. The performance of active metal centers can also be controlled by adjusting the local coordination environment, such as changing the coordination atoms and the number of coordination sites and inducing defects. He et al. reported that an N-doped carbon-based Pd SACs could reduce CO2 to CO, in which Pd-N4 as an active center was more favorable than that of a single Pd. Yang et al. found that the difference in coordination number formed by Cu embedded in C3N4 could significantly modulate the selectivity of CO2RR, in which the Cu- N4 active center effectively improved the selectivity of CH3OH by up to 95.5%. In addition, Sun et al. investigated a series of TM-X4 (X=S and N) as active centers in carbon-based SACs for CO2RR, where CoS4 could selectively reduce CO2 molecules to form HCOOH molecules, with a low limiting potential of -0.07 V. Although the TM-X4 as active centers in carbon- based SACs is efficient for CO2RR, the role of TM, X, and C configurations in determining CO2RR activity and product selectivity remains elusive and unclear. Moreover, achieving large- scale accurate preparation of TM-X4 SACs remains a major challenge due to the lack of precise and controllable synthetic methods and characterization tools. Two-dimensional (2D) metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are composed of metal ions and organic ligands and have well-defined structural features. 2D MOFs have been extensively studied in catalysis due to their well-defined structures, high thermal stability, and fascinating physical and chemical properties. In particular, 2D conjugated MOFs have a scalable π-d conjugated structure, giving them high electrical conductivity, and tunable composition, morphology, and porosity also provide a simple means to manipulate their catalytic properties. Therefore, the specific active centers and coordination environments in 2D conjugated MOFs could provide a viable research platform for understanding the catalytic mechanisms of CO2RR. Liu et al. designed and synthesized a highly symmetric hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATNA)-Cu-based conjugated MOFs with Cu-O4 active centers, which exhibits the high selectivity of 78% for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to form CH4. Moreover, Majidi et al. reported that the Cu-O4 active center in 2D conjugated MOFs of copper tetrahydroxyquinone could achieve a Faraday efficiency of 91% for the reduction of CO2 to form CO. Zhong et al. found that the Zn-O4 active center formed by Zn atom-doped phthalocyanine-Cu-O8 could effectively improve the selectivity of CO2 reduction to CO. Although these works demonstrate that 2D conjugated MOFs could be used as the electrocatalytic candidates for CO2RR, their atomic-scale effect of the active center in determining catalytic activity and product selectivity remains unclear. Therefore, understanding the key factors that influence the catalytic efficiency of 2D conjugated MOFs will greatly facilitate screening and designing electrocatalysts for CO2RR. We herein investigated the CO2RR performance of TM-X4 (TM = Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu; X =N, O, S and Se) active centers in three types of 2D conjugated MOFs with different porous sizes by performing density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Some 2D conjugated MOFs were confirmed as high-performance electrocatalysts with specific selectivity for CO2RR by tuning metals, ligands and porous sizes. Meanwhile, the structure– activity relationships of 2D conjugated MOFs for CO2RR were illustrated by analyzing their electronic properties. Our results provide theoretical insights for the development of 2D conjugated MOFs as efficient electrocatalysts for CO2RR. 2 Results and discussion 2.1 Geometric stability Based on the experimentally prepared 2D MOFs, we investigated three types of 2D MOFs with the TM-X4 active centers but different pore sizes, as shown in Figure 1. Metal ions and phenyl-like molecules (including HIB, HHB, HTB, and HSB) can couple to form two types of 2D MOFs with different pore configurations, namely TM3HXB and TM3HXB2 (X = I, H, T, and S), respectively. And the triphenyl organic ligands (including HITP, HHTP, HTTP, HSTP) can couple metal ions to form the larger pore configurations of 2D MOFs, TM3HXTP2. Although these 2D MOFs have the homogeneous distribution of TM-X4 active centers, the densities of TM-X4 active centers are different due to different organic ligands bonding TM to form pore sizes. Eight 3d metals, including Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni and Cu atoms, were chosen as the targets, based on recent experimental studies. Therefore, we would study the CO2RR performance of 96 2D MOFs from eight metals combined with eight organic ligands. The lattice parameters of these 2D MOFs were optimized, as shown in Table S1. types of 2D MOFs with the TM-X4 active centres. The blue, red, grey and white spheres represent transition metal (TM), coordinated atom (X), carbon atom and hydrogen atom respectively. The unit cell is denoted by black dotted line. The stability of the catalyst is the first important factor in catalytic reactions. 2D MOFs are easily susceptible to metal agglomeration during their preparation due to the high surface energy of the metal atoms. Therefore, the structural stability of these 2D MOFs was first assessed by calculating the formation energies of metal atoms and ligands, as shown in Figure 2a. The results show negative formation energies for all structures, indicating that the coupling of metal atoms and ligands is more thermodynamically favorable compared to the formation of metal clusters. In addition, as an electrocatalyst not only thermodynamic stability but also electrochemical stability is required. Therefore, the electrochemical stability of these 2D MOFs have to be considered. The negative dissociation potential of the metals indicates that the metal atoms tend to precipitation and then lead to structural instability under electrochemical conditions. The following studies of the CO2RR electrochemical process only considered those thermodynamically and electrochemically stable 2D MOFs. metals. Gibbs free energy of the first hydrogenation of CO2 to form COOH and HCOO and HER for (b) TM3HXB, (c) TM3HXB2, (d) TM3HXTP2. 2.2 Electrocatalytic CO2RR mechanisms The reaction mechanisms of CO2 reduction involve are complicated and their products are diverse, due to multiple electron processes and various intermediates. Therefore, the investigation of CO2RR mechanisms on 2D MOFs is important for further controlling and improving the catalytic activity of 2D MOFs. Because the CO2 molecule is non-polar and has strong thermodynamic stability, the first hydrogenation process in CO2RR is regarded as the key step, which takes place in the electrolyte solution in the proton-coupled electron transfer ligands in 2D MOFs, the NH coordination in these 2D MOFs is more favorable for the first hydrogenation of CO2 than that of the O, S, and Se coordination. From the view of the metals in 2D MOFs, the first hydrogenation of CO2 is more difficult with the increased valence electrons in the metal outer layer, as shown in Figure 2b-2d. Moreover, for the competing HER, TM3HXB2 and TM3HXTP2 are more favorable for HER than that of TM3HXB, due to the unsaturated coordination environment of ligands in TM3HXB2 and TM3HXTP2. Therefore, the catalytic activity of these 2D MOFs could be controlled by metallic atoms, ligands, and their coordination environment. The proton-electron pair (H+ + e) is involved in each elementary step of the CO2RR. The different hydrogenation pathways will lead to various products. Moreover, the competitive selectivity exists between HER and each hydrogenation of CO2RR under the same reaction conditions, these factors will affect the Faraday efficiency of CO2RR. We first studied HER and the first three hydrogenation processes of CO2RR on 76 stable 2D MOFs as CO2RR electrocatalysts with specific selectivity and high performance, as shown in Figure 3. comparision of Gibbs free energy between HER and (b) the first hydrogenation, (c) the second hydrogenation, and (d) the third hydrogenation for CO2RR. The lower Gibbs free energy is more selective, based on the Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi relationship. We screened 26 2D MOFs by comparing the first hydrogenation of CO2 and HER, as shown in Figure 3b. The formation of HCOO on 25 2D MOFs are favorable, except for Co3HIB, which was favorable to form COOH. We then screened 17 2D MOFs by comparing the hydrogenation of HCOO and COOH, as well as HER, as shown in Figure 3c. The H atom combines with either the O atom of HCOO or the C atom of COOH to form HCOOH, while the H atom combines with OH of COOH to form CO and H2O. The strong adsorption of HCOOH and CO can be as intermediates on 2D MOFs for the next hydrogenation processes. In particular, the hydrogenation of HCOO on Cu3HIB2 and Cu3HITP2 forms HCOOH, which is directly released and there are no by-products, as shown in Figure 4a and 4b. Meanwhile, the hydrogenation of COOH on Co3HIB favorably forms CO. Previous works demonstrated *CO is a key intermediate for the formation of C-C coupling into multi-carbon products, which is difficult for most SACs. Therefore, we only considered single carbon products in this work. We finally screened five 2D MOFs, including Ni3HHB, Co3HIB, Cr3HTB, Ti3HITP2, and V3HITP2, by comparing the hydrogenation of HCOOH and CO and HER, as shown in Figure 3d. This hydrogenation process on these 5 2D MOFs favorably forms CHO. Firgure 4 The change of Gibbs free energy of CO2RR mechanisms on (a) Cu3(HIB)2, (b) adsorption. The CO2RR mechanisms on Ni3HHB, Co3HIB, Cr3HTB, Ti3HITP2 and V3HITP2 were further investigated, as shown in Figure 4c-4e and Figure S1. The H atoms favorably bond to the C atom of the intermediate than that of the O atom on Ni3HHB. In the formation of CH2O by CHO hydrogenation, CH2O as the final product will be released due to its weak physical adsorption on Ni3HHB, as shown in Figure 4c. The first hydrogenation of CO2 is the rate- limiting step and its limiting potential is -0.62 V. The most favorable reaction path is CO2 → *HCOO → *HCOOH → *CHO → CH2O. Our results show that the final products on Co3HIB, Cr3HTB, Ti3(HITP)2 and V3(HITP)2 are CH4 by eight hydrogenation steps, but their most favorable reaction pathway and rate-limiting step were different. The formation of CHOH by the CHO hydrogenation on Co3HIB is rate-limiting step and its limiting potential is -0.62 V. The most favorable reaction pathway for CO2RR on Co3HIB is CO2 → *COOH → *CO → *CHO → *CHOH → *CH2OH → *CH3OH → *CH3 → CH4. The formation of *HCOOH by the *HCOO hydrogenation on Cr3HTB, Ti3HITP2 and V3HITP2 is rate-limiting step and their limiting potential are -0.29V, -0.69V, and -0.44 V, respectively. The most favorable reaction pathway for CO2RR on Cr3HTB, Ti3HITP2 and V3HITP2 is CO2 → *HCOO → *HCOOH → *CHO → *CH2O → *CH3O → *O+CH4 → *OH → H2O. In particular, a strong adsorption of H2O on Ti3HITP2 and V3HITP2 results in the deactivation of TM-X4 active centers, thus reducing the catalytic efficiency of these 2D MOFs. In consequence, the C1 products on five 2D MOFs and their limiting potentials (UL) of their rate-limiting steps are summarized in Figure 5a. Ni3HHB has the highest selectivity of the CH2O product with a UL of -0.62V. Co3HIB has excellent catalytic activity and selectivity with a small UL of -0.24V. Cu3HIB2 has the best performance for the production of HCOOH with the lowest UL of -0.03 V. five 2D MOFs as electrocatalyst candidates. (b) The linear relationship between the Bader charge of 2D MOFs and the change of Gibbs free energy of the first hydrogenation of CO2 into COOH/HCOO. (c) Relationship between the adsorption energies of O and C on 2D MOFs and the selectivity of the first hydrogenation of CO2 into COOH/HCOO. Linear relationship between the number of electrons involved in the CO2 reduction reaction and the (d) C or (e) O adsorption energy on the catalyst surface. 2.3 Catalytic activity and selectivity of CO2RR The charge transfer occurs between the valence electrons of the TMs active center and the reactants or adsorbed intermediates play an important role in elementary reaction. In order to study the origin of the catalytic performance of 2D MOFs for CO2RR, the relationship between the Bader charge of TMs and the change of Gibbs free energy of the first hydrogenation of CO2 into COOH/HCOO was calculated, as shown in Figure 5b. The positive charge of the transition metal is regulated by the metal atom and the coordination environment. With the increase of the positive charge of the metal atom, the energy required for the CO2RR protonation process decreases and the catalytic performance is improved. However, it is worth noting that the more positive charges carried by the metal will also lead to stronger adsorption with the product and increase the difficulty of product release. In summary, too large or too small charge of metal atoms will reduce the catalytic efficiency. Interestingly, the five high-efficiency catalysts screened by high-throughput have similar metal charge of about -1.0e. Although these five high-performance catalysts have similar metal charge, the selectivity of their CO2RR products is quite different. In the first step of CO2RR protonation, the more positively charged the active metal is the more favorable it is for CO2 protonation to form *HCOO and vice versa for CO2 protonation to form *COOH as shown in Figure 5b. The key factor for the formation of different intermediates is the difference in the adsorption of O and C by the catalyst; when the adsorption strength of O on the catalyst surface is much stronger than that of C, the active centers preferentially bind to O atoms and vice versa, as shown in enhance the strength of adsorption on the reaction intermediates, pushing the CO2RR towards a multi-electron reaction, as shown in Figure 5d-e. In order to further understand the origin of catalytic activity, we studied the partial density of states of the five 2D MOFs candidate catalysts, as shown in Figure S2. In all of these catalysts, the partial-wave DOS crosses the Fermi energy level (0 eV), thus all of these candidate catalysts have metal properties and are capable of transporting electrons faster in the electrocatalytic process. In addition, the d orbitals of metals near the Fermi energy level show higher peaks compared to the p orbitals of other coordination atoms and carbon atoms, suggesting that metal atoms are more reactive. As a result, the role of the five d orbitals of the metal center in the first step of CO2 protonation was comparatively analyzed, as shown in Figure 6a-e. The results show that the d orbitals of the metal atoms are acted upon by the crystal field of the coordination environment to form different splitting energy levels. Among them, Co3HIB, Cr3HTB and Ni3HHB split metal d orbitals with strong hybridization near the Fermi energy level. Among them, the vertical orbital dz2 is the highest energy orbital. Whereas the Cu-d orbitals of Cu3HITP2 and Cu3HIB2 split into discrete energy levels compared to Cu3HIB, this change mainly depends on the long-range interactions of the carbon materials. Comparison of the changes in the metal d orbitals before and after COOH/HCOO adsorption reveals that all d orbitals are involved to some extent in the catalytic process, but the decisive role is played by the vertical orbital dz2. We believe that this is due to the spatial structure of the dz2 orbitals which is vertically oriented with a large number of wavefunctions concentrated at the two ends, which is more conducive to the adsorption and activation of the reaction intermediates. (f)Cu3HIB. (g) The fitting relationship between the magnetic moment of metal atoms and the change of Gibbs free energy of the first hydrogenation of CO2 into COOH/HCOO. The interaction of different metals and organic linkers can effectively modulate the electronic structure of metal atoms and thus affect the adsorption behavior of reaction intermediates at the active center. In order to understand the reason for having the same active center but different catalytic activities, the study compared the PDOS of Cu3HIB, Cu3HIB2, and Cu3HITP2 with the same Cu-N4 catalytic active center as shown in Figure 6d-f. The first step protonation of all three is more inclined to produce HCOO, but the energy required for the reaction varies widely 1.20 eV, 0.03 eV, and 0.55 eV, respectively. It can be seen from the PDOS results that Cu3HITP2 and Cu3HIB2 have a strong spin polarization, and the 3d orbitals of metal Cu cleave at the Fermi energy level to form a portion of the spin-up occupied and a partially spin-down unoccupied orbital. The ability to activate CO2 is attributed to the synergistic interaction between the unoccupied and occupied d-orbitals in the metal, resulting in an "accept and donate" mechanism between the metal and the reactants. In the "accept" process, electrons from the reactants are transferred to the empty d orbitals of the metal. Subsequently, the electrons in the occupied d-orbitals of the metal atom return to the antibonding orbitals of the reactants. Thus, the metal atom in the "accept and donate" process can act as an active site to weaken the C-O bond of the CO2 molecule and strengthen the bonding process between the metal and the reaction intermediate. The incompletely occupied orbitals near the Fermi energy level of Cu3HITP2 and Cu3HIB2 are more conducive to the acceptance and transfer of electrons, thus improving the catalytic activity. It can also be seen that the peak at the Fermi energy level on Cu3HIB2 is shifted to the left compared to Cu3HITP2 resulting in partial occupation of the spin-down unoccupied orbitals, indicating that the Cu atoms of Cu3HIB2 are more prone to provide electrons to the reaction intermediates to promote the catalytic reaction. Comparing the five high-performance catalysts screened above, it is found that they all have strong spin polarization phenomenon, and in order to explore the effect of spin polarization on the catalytic performance, the relationship between the catalytic activity and the spin magnetic moment of these five different pores with the same active center was further comparatively analyzed as shown in Figure 6g. The results show that the catalytic activity is lower for catalysts with zero magnetic moment of transition metal atoms in the active center. The catalytic activity increases exponentially with the increase of the spin magnetic moment of the metal atom. In previous studies, it has been demonstrated that spin state changes have a significant effect on adsorption and catalytic properties. However, spin modulation is usually realized by heteroatom doping and surface modification. Our study found that changes in pore and carbon material size also significantly affect the spin state of 2D MOFs, which will suggest new ideas for spin state modulation. 3 Conclude In summary, we explored the CO2RR catalytic activity and selectivity on three types of 2D MOF materials including TM3HXB, TM3HXB2, and TM3HXTP2 (TM=Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu; X=I, H, T, S) with different pores of TM-X4 active center. By tuning the composition of the metal and ligand molecules, five high-performance CO2RR catalysts with different selectivities were found, Cu3HIB2 and Cu3HITP2 with HCOOH products, Ni3HHB with CH2O products, and Co3HIB and Cr3HTB with CH4 products. Synergistic interactions between the metal and ligand atoms can efficiently tune the electronic structure of the active metal. In addition, the diversity of carbon structures can modulate the spin states of metal atoms, which can affect not only the magnetic moments but also the catalytic properties of the materials. Differences in O or C affinity on the catalyst surface determine the CO2RR pathway and product selectivity. Our insights will be useful for the development and optimization of highly active CO2RR electrocatalysts. 4 calculation method All spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed by using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) code. The Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) within generalized gradient approximation (GGA) was adopted for the exchange-correlation functional and the plane-wave cutoff energy of 500 eV was employed. The projector augmented wave (PAW) method was used to model the ion-electron interaction. The convergence criterion for the energy and force were set to 10-5 eV and 0.02 eV/Å, respectively. The DFT-D3 correction was adopted to illustrate the dispersion correction for the van der Waals (vdW) weak interactions. To avoid the interactions between two adjacent periodic units, the vacuum thickness of 15 Å in the z-direction was inserted. For TM3HXB, TM3HXB2, and TM3HXTP2, the Brillouin zone of geometric optimizations was sampled by a Γ-point grid of 3×5×1, 3×3×1, and 2×2×1 and the Brillouin zone of electronic properties calculations was sampled by a Γ-point grid of 7×9×1, 7×7×1, and 5×5×1, respectively. An implicit solvent model is used to the effects of the water solvent environment using VASPsol with the dielectric constant set to 78.54 F/m. Calculation details for the formation energy (Ef), the dissolution potential (Udiss), adsorption energies, Gibbs free energy, and limiting potential can be found in Supporting Information. Conflicts of interest There are no conflicts to declare. Acknowledgments The authors acknowledge the helpful discussions with Dr. Shuo Li. This study was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21603109), the Henan Joint Fund of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1404216), the Scientific Research Program Funded by Shaanxi Provincial Education Department (No. 20JK0676). We gratefully acknowledge the National Supercomputing Center in Zhengzhou for providing computation facilities.