1 / 62 Layer-by-layer connection for large area single crystal boron nitride multilayer films Hui Shi1#, Mingyuan Wang1#, Hongying Chen2#, Adrien Rousseau3#, Junpeng Shu1, Ming Tian1, Ruowang Chen1, Juliette Plo3, Pierre Valvin3, Bernard Gil3, Jiajie Qi4, Qinghe Wang4, Kaihui Liu4*, Mingliang Zhang1, Guillaume Cassabois3*, Di Wu2*, Neng Wan1* 1, Key laboratory of MEMS of Ministry of Education, School of Integrated Circuits, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China 2, National Laboratory of Solid State Microstructures, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Artificial Functional Materials, and Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Microstructures, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, China 3, Laboratoire Charles Coulomb, UMR5221 CNRS-Université de Montpellier, 34095 Montpellier, France 4, State Key Laboratory for Mesoscopic Physics, Frontiers Science Center for Nano-optoelectronics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China 2 / 62 # Contributed equally *E-mail: khliu@pku.edu.cn; guillaume.cassabois@umontpellier.fr; diwu@nju.edu.cn; wn@seu.edu.cn 3 / 62 Abstract Boron nitride (BN) is today considered as one of the most promising materials for many novel applications including bright single photon emission, deep UV opto-electronics, small sized solid-state neutron detector, and high-performance two-dimensional materials, etc. Despite the recent successful fabrication of large-area BN single-crystals (typically ≤ 5 atomic layers), the scalable growth of thicker single- crystalline BN films still constitutes a great challenge. In this work, we demonstrate an approach to grow large-area multilayer single-crystal BN films by chemical vapor deposition on face-centered cubic Fe-Ni (111) single crystal alloy thin films with different stoichiometric phases. We show that the BN growth is greatly tunable and improved by increasing the Fe content in single-crystal Fe-Ni (111). The formation of pyramid- shaped multilayer BN domains with aligned orientation enables a continuous connection following a layer-by-layer, “first-meet-first- connect”, mosaic stitching mechanism. By means of selected area electron diffraction, micro-photoluminescence spectroscopy in the deep UV and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, the layer-by- layer connection mechanism is unambiguously evidenced, and the stacking order has been verified to occur as unidirectional AB and ABC stackings, i.e., in the Bernal and rhombohedral BN phase. 4 / 62 Keywords: boron nitride; chemical vapor deposition; multilayer; single-crystal; thin film 5 / 62 Introduction Two-dimensional boron nitride (BN) materials have been attracting extensive attention in recent years due to their novel properties and potential applications in many fields including bright single photon emitters in the visible and ultraviolet regions ; high efficient deep UV emission matrix ; small-sized solid state neutron detectors ; it also works as excellent two-dimensional material substrate and protective capping layer , , for achieving outstanding device performance . One of the most important prerequisites for these applications is the scalable fabrication of high-quality single-crystal BN films. Recent studies have found ways to grow large-area single-crystal BN monolayers using chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods. However, monolayer CVD-grown BN tends to be defective (thus leading to high current-leakage and poor screening in electronic devices), and still easy to be ruptured or polluted during the mandatory transfer process for any practical use. This hinders the final application of the single layer CVD-grown BN. Alternatively, multilayers of single-crystal BN with a large-area uniformity are highly desirable for most applications in order to reduce leakage, enhance screening, and increase mechanical stability , with a potential surface cleaning process by simply removing the first few polluted layers. Reminding the long-reported near-perfect epitaxy relationship 6 / 62 between BN and a single crystal nickel , also quite similar to the mechanism of monolayer BN growth on single-crystal copper , BN single-crystals with a thickness ≤ 5 atomic layers were recently reported . A mechanism with individual nucleation followed by mosaic stitching (INMS) is observed. The multilayers are shown as 2, 3, 5-layered BN with AA’-type stacking, indicating a hexagonal BN phase (hBN) as the lowest energy state. However, single-crystal multilayers thicker than 5 atomic layers (~ 2 nm film thickness) are reported to be still very hard to be synthesized even at relatively high growth temperatures. In reports by H. Ago group , BN multilayers with thickness of 2 - 10 nm were fabricated by using Fe-Ni alloys. The BN films showed good uniformity. However, the single crystallinity and the stacking structure were not evidenced. The growth of multilayer BN based on the INMS mechanism faces several difficulties. First, successful implementation of the INMS mechanism requires that all isolated nucleated domains have the same orientation, as also demonstrated for the monolayer BN growth . Second, specifically for multilayer BN, the adjacent BN domains have to connect their layers correctly, in order to achieve a single-crystal multilayer (Figs. 1 (a), (b)). Otherwise, detrimental grain boundaries or broken edges form between the randomly encountered nucleated islands (Fig 1(a)). In order to fulfill these two conditions, the alignment, the 7 / 62 shape and the stacking order of individual BN domains have to be well controlled. We here demonstrate a strategy for achieving large-area multilayer BN single-crystal films. It is known that multilayer BN domains tend to grow following a “bottom nucleate” habitation/ mechanism , where the new BN layer (that beneath the as-grown layers) nucleates at the interface between the as-grown BN layer and the metal (Fig. 1 (c)) at the spire of the pyramids . This growth habitation normally leads to two different structures according to previous reports, with different stacking order, e.g., either the AA’ stacking, or the AB (or ABC) stacking, which finally appeared as two different structures as hexagram (AA’, Fig. 1 (a)) or pyramid (AB or ABC, Fig. 1 (b)) shapes, respectively . It is then realized that a hexagram might not be a suitable shape for the formation of single-crystal BN multilayers following INMS due to the high possibility of forming anti-domain boundaries (Fig. 1 (a)), even considering that adjacent domains are geometrically aligned. Instead, we here consider that a pyramid is to be more suitable for the formation of single-crystal BN multilayers from well-aligned adjacent BN domains (Fig. 1 (b)). Our measurements by atomic force microscopy (AFM) show a very small bottom angle (β ~ 6.73°, Figs. 1 (c) - (e), also seen in the cross-sectional high-resolution transmission electron microscopy 8 / 62 (HRTEM) image, Fig. S1) of the pyramid, translating into a ~ 2.8 nm/5.6 nm separation between two adjacent layers edges (Fig. 1 (c)). These two values are also added (2.8 nm + 5.6 nm, Fig. 1 (c)) when two domains meet and proceed to connect. This mechanism imposes a steric separation that effectively reduces the competitive connection of approaching BN layers, thus eliminating the possible misconnection (that by various kinds of grain boundaries, e.g., 5-7 rings ) among adjacent layers, or the formation of broken layer edges (see Fig. 1 (a)). The pyramid structure (Figs. 1 (f) – (j)) is thus superior in the sense that it enables a “first-meet- first-connect” mechanism and it finally leads to a continuously connecting single-crystal multilayer (CSM, Fig. 1 (k)). An AB or ABC (viz. the unidirectional stacking) -stacked BN multilayer will thus finally be obtained following this mechanism by the observation of effective layer connection at the domain boundary. This growth mode also leaves part of the pyramid, seen as the pyramid apex, as a residue non- connecting island (RNI, Fig. 1 (k)), which might also be realized as an indicator of the current mechanism. From another aspect, as the orientation of the pyramidal domains is defined by the first layer of the BN islands, to use a single-crystal metal substrate helps effectively to achieve a unidirectional orientation of the BN islands. The pyramidal BN domains that grown aligned on a single-crystal metal substrate are mandatory to enable the subsequent growth of the single-crystal 9 / 62 multilayer BN films with large area. The above strategy is then verified successfully based on our experiment observations. It is shown that a predominant alignment of multilayer BN pyramids grown on a single-crystal Fe-Ni (111) surface is appropriate for the successful connection of the BN layers. Large-area single-crystal multilayer BN thin films with AB (Bernal) and ABC (Rhombohedral) stackings were observed. The full surface coverage as well as the single-crystal structure of the BN thin films are evidenced by various techniques. Fig. 1 | Growth mechanism of multilayer boron nitride (BN) films on Fe- Ni (111). (a) Hexagram structure (AA’ stacking) of BN domains connecting with grain boundaries. (b) Pyramidal structure (AB stacking) of BN domains connecting without grain boundary. (c) Schematic diagram of the atomic model of the pyramidal structure. (d) Atomic force microscopy of BN backside structure, and (e) height profile along the blue dashed line in (d). (f) High resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) image of the BN film. The inset shows the fast Fourier transform of the whole image. The d-spacings of (101 _ 0) and (112 _ 0) planes of BN are 0.22 and 0.13 nm, respectively. (g) Scanning electron microscope images of BN grown on Fe-Ni (111) with the Fe content of with the Fe content of 31%. (j) X-ray diffraction pattern of BN grown on Fe-Ni (111) with the Fe content of 31%. (k) Schematic of the growth mechanism of single-crystal multilayer BN films on Fe-Ni (111) alloy film. The continuously connecting single-crystal multilayer (CSM) and residue non-connecting island (RNI) are marked with different colors. Results and discussions Single-crystal Fe-Ni alloy (111) substrates were deposited on commercial c-plane sapphire by combining magnetron sputtering and thermal evaporation (Fig. S2). Doping a Ni film with an appropriate amount of Fe improves the solubility of boron and nitrogen in the catalyst, which is beneficial for the growth of multilayer BN . We found a stable face-centered cubic structure of the Fe-Ni (111) thin films up to 51% Fe (Fe/(Fe+Ni) in at %) (Fig. S3) . According to the XRD results, the lattice constant increases slightly from 3.55 Å to 3.59 Å, which roughly matches the BN lattice. A control of the BN morphology upon increasing the Fe content in the alloy was observed (Figs. S4, S5). Basically, increasing the Fe content enhances the BN growth by increasing the density of nucleation sites, the BN domain size, and the BN coverage and/or thickness, as evidenced by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and also by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Raman electron microscopy (TEM) further confirmed the formation of a well- crystallized BN lattice (Fig. 1 (f)). At medium Fe content (23 % typically, Fig. 1 (g)), BN pyramidal domains with well-shaped triangular basis were seen, with domain size of ~ 1.34 μm and an areal density of 0.4 μm-2 (Figs. S4 (g), (j)). A statistical analysis shows that 83.5% of the BN domains are unidirectionally aligned (for 31% Fe-Ni sample, some local statistical results are shown in Fig. S7, see also Fig. S4 (j) for statistics on other samples). Comparing with conventional ~ 1:1 ratio (50% unidirectional alignment) of oppositely aligned BN domains grown by the CVD method observed on single-crystal substrates , we conclude on the pronounced unidirectional alignment in our samples, which is highly beneficial for the effective connection of BN layers from adjacent BN domains (as displayed in Figs. 1 (b), (k)). The interconnection of the BN multilayers among adjacent BN pyramids and the formation of a continuous BN layer (the CSM region) are first evidenced by an enhanced resistance to oxidation of the Fe-Ni (111) surface. We compared the surface morphology of as-deposited samples and samples stored in ambient air for a long period (~ 1 year) by AFM. For the as-deposited samples on 23% Fe-Ni, clean surfaces with clear BN triangles were seen on the metal alloy surface (Fig. 2 (a)). After ~ 1-year storage, it was profoundly oxidized at regions in-between BN triangles by showing many abrupt particles with a size of several tens to hundreds of nanometers (Fig. 2 (b)). We note also that the regions covered by BN triangular domains were still well-protected without any oxidation. This reveals that the 23 % Fe-Ni (111) substrate is not fully covered by multilayer BN. In contrast, the samples with higher Fe content, e.g., 31% Fe, were not oxidized as seen from the smooth surface structure seen in both as-deposited and long-time stored (~ 1 year) completely protected by a full BN coverage. The same situation was also more evidently observed on the surface of samples with still higher (41% and 51%) Fe content (Figs. S8 (a) - (d)). However, it is worth mentioning that the BN domains of the inverted pyramid structure grow by sinking into the metal substrate, so the AFM can only obtain part of the surface information. The inverted pyramid structure or the layer connection between adjacent domains might not be resolved by AFM. To further showcase the large-area coverage and uniformity of the grown multilayer BN film, wafer-scale BN (~ 2 inches) on the 51% Fe sample was transferred onto SiO2/Si (300 nm SiO2) (Fig. S9). Intact and homogeneous BN multilayers can be visually observed, either from optical photograph (Fig. S9 (d)) or from low-magnification microscope (Fig. S9 (e)). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was also used to study the BN thin films upon increasing Fe content (Fig. S10). Two samples were measured for the moment, in which the 31% Fe sample is estimated to have lower surface coverage comparing with the 51% Fe one. Considering the analyze depth of the XPS technique and long storage time, we anticipate Ni, Fe, B, N, O, C elements to be observed on both samples, while the 51% Fe samples should show evidently lower O/N ratio (or O/Ni ratio). The XPS results fit well to this anticipation (as seen in Fig. S10 (b)), indicating the increased coverage in high Fe content samples. The observation of metal oxide related XPS peak in the 31% Fe sample (while not observed in the 51% Fe sample) also verifies the change of BN coverage. This observation is also in well accordance with the AFM results. In addition to the full surface protection by BN layers at high Fe content samples, we clearly observed CSM and RNI regions, which are the two types of BN deposits involved in the growth mechanism shown in Fig. 1 (k). These regions are easily seen in Figs. 1 (g), (h) and Figs. S4 (e), (f), and are also observable with an optical microscope (Figs. 2 (e) - (h)) in the sample that was transferred onto SiO2(285 nm)/Si substrate. Such structure was also verified by AFM (Figs. 2 (a) - (d) and Fig. S8). The size of the RNI regions varies upon increasing Fe content: while the 41% Fe-sample shows an RNI size reduction compared to 31% Fe (Figs. S4 (e), (j)), probably due to an enhanced layer connection that consumes more layers from the pyramid bottom side, the increased RNI size in the 51% Fe-sample (Figs. S4 (f), (j)) indicates an enhanced growth of the pyramids under this high Fe content. A selected area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis performed around and inside the RNI region (Fig. 2 (i)) indicates that the CSM and RNI regions are well aligned without any misorientation, again supporting the mechanism showing in Fig. 1 (k), and further discussed below. Fig. 2 | Atomic force microscopy images of transferred multilayer BN films grown on alloy film: as-deposited samples (a), samples stored for 1 year (b), for a Fe content of 23% in the Fe-Ni substrate; as-deposited samples (c), and samples stored for 1 year (d), for a Fe content of 31%. (e), (f) Optical microscope images of the transferred BN films on SiO2/Si substrates. AFM image of the transferred BN film (g), and height profiles (h) along the lines shown in (g). The thickness of connecting single- crystal multilayer (CSM) and residue non-connecting island (RNI) are 21 nm and 69 nm, respectively. (i) TEM morphology images and selected area electron diffraction patterns (1~3) at different positions indicated in the triangular BN domain. We performed detailed cross-sectional HRTEM observations in order to confirm the effective edge connection as predicted in Fig. 1(k). A location of the connection site (selected randomly under SEM observation) was accurately confirmed via the focused ion beam (FIB) process (see Figs. 3 (a) - (e)) and the layer connection is confirmed directly by analyzing the edge-type dislocation distribution with Burgers vector b= . The projected areal density (count to be edge-type dislocation. It is worth to note that one screw-type might count to be more than one edge-type under such geometry , however it does not bias the comparison) is found to be 0.047/nm2 at the site (Fig. 3 (e)) where the two BN domains connect, comparing with the density of 0.036 ~ is observed in other randomly chosen regions inside individual BN domains, as shown in Fig. S11. It is thus concluded that the dislocation density at the site to connect is comparable or even lower to that in individual domain regions, which unambiguously confirms the effective layer connection between two adjacent multilayer BN domains. We also made another FIB sample in another randomly chosen site (results shown in Figs. S12 and S13). The dislocation density at the site to connect (0.048/nm2) is also found identical to the dislocation density (0.050/nm2) in individual domain regions. To this end, it is thus quite convincing to conclude on the effective edge connection in the multilayer BN domains. Fig. 3 | Focused ion beam (FIB) preparation process and statistical analysis of dislocation density of boron nitride (BN) multilayers. (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of the area chosen for the cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy (TEM) sample, in which the bule line frames the area for Pt deposition, the orange line frames the two triangular BN domains for the cross-sectional observation, and the yellow arrow mark the site to connect of two triangular domains. (b) The SEM image after Pt deposition. (c-e) Cross-sectional TEM image of the site to connect at increasing magnifications. The dislocations (b= ) are marked with the green symbols, as also indicated in (f) and (g). (f), (g) The cross-sectional high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images in individual domain region, and the relative positions are shown in (e). (h) Statistical histogram of dislocation density (b= ) of the site to connect and inside individual BN domain region. The error bar is the standard deviation. We further investigated the alignment and stacking of the synthesized BN multilayers with detailed TEM and SAED measurements. An area of ~ 2 mm × 2.2 mm was used for SAED survey (Fig. 4 (a), also see all of the SAED results in Fig. S14), in which 67 points are selected randomly for a detailed inspection. The parallel blue lines in the different SAED patterns prove that the BN orientation is the same over a large area (note that oppositely-aligned pyramids are not distinguishable using SAED). SAED surveys performed at the CSM regions give also the same orientation (Fig. S15 (a)). The existence of anti-domains naturally creates grain boundaries that then constitute weak points and induce film fractures. We thus anticipate the presence of such anti-domain boundaries in our sample, considering the non-perfect ~ 80% unidirectional orientation of the RNI. However, our detailed TEM observations did not resolve any evident crack lines in the 2 mm ⨯ 2.2 mm region. It was found that the whole film is crack-free with just some regions displaying some contrast variation (Fig. S16). We could not resolve if these structures are anti-domain boundaries. It is suggested that the anti-domains might be effectively merged via grain boundary structures . The large-area orientation and the coverage of the multilayer BN films was also verified by large scale low energy electron diffractions (LEED) survey over a region of ~3 mm × 2 mm. We observed sharp diffraction spots on the 51% Fe sample (Fig. S17) in total of 116 spots. All these diffraction patterns are completely consistent, confirming that the crystalline lattice of the BN multilayers is well aligned along the same direction. This observation intensified the observation using SAED (Fig. 4 (a) and Fig. S14). An intensity variation of the LEED spots from site to site could be possibly raised by the thickness variation across the BN domains, e.g., the CSM and RNI regions (Fig. 1 (k)). As a comparison, however, we observed vague diffraction on the 31% Fe sample (no meaningful diffraction was recorded), which could be due to the lower surface BN coverage and also the rough sample surface (see the AFM image in Figs. 2 (c) (d)). Fig. 4 | TEM and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) of the synthesized BN films. (a) Global map of the randomly selected points in a large area, 2 mm⨯2.2 mm. TEM images and SAED patterns for ten points (labelled from 1 to 10). (b) The cross-sectional high resolution transmission electron microscope image of BN films. There are both AB and ABC stacking, but no AA’. (c) Typical electron diffraction intensity distribution. (d)-(f) Statistical analysis of the stacking orders of BN with three different criteria. The stacking of the BN films was examined by comparing the intensity of first-order and second-order diffraction peaks in SAED (Fig. 4 (a)) and HRTEM (Fig. 4 (b)), in order to verify the AB or ABC parallel- type stackings, as given by the mechanism shown in Fig. 1 (k). Theoretically, the ratio of first- and second-order diffraction peaks is calculated to be 0.3 for AB stacking, 1.1 for AA’, and 0 for ABC . Our typical electron diffraction intensity distribution is shown in Fig. 4 (c). Due to the intensity variations in our SAED measurements (possibly due to the film deformation that was caused by the non-ideal wet-transfer process and rough TEM grid surface), we calculated in three different (d) - (f)). We see a constant trend that the diffraction intensity of first order (inner peaks) is always lower than that of second order (outer peaks) (Fig. 4 (c)) regardless of the calculation methods. Thus, the AA’ stacking is largely excluded. Our detailed statistical analysis (data from 54 random positions) indicates that the BN multilayer is dominated by the AB stacking, with a part of ABC stacking, while the AA’ phase is unlikely (Fig. 4). The cross-sectional HRTEM results also confirm the conclusion of our statistical analysis (Fig. 4 (b)). According to our detailed HRTEM observations (see Fig. 4 (b)), both AB and ABC stackings are observed, while AA' stacking is not. Such an observation meets the estimation following the proposed growth mechanism and observed pyramidal structures (Figs. 1 (b), (c), (k)). The optical properties of multilayer BN (on Fe-Ni single crystal substrate with 31% Fe) were further studied by spatially-resolved photoluminescence (PL) microscopy in the deep ultraviolet, performed at cryogenic temperatures (T ~ 6 K) . Figs. 5 (a), (b), (c) display the PL intensity maps recorded on the exact same region of the BN multilayer, but integrated in three different spectral domains represented in red on Figs. 5 (d), (e), (f). The three maps are quite similar, and they display three hot spots that we attribute to BN pyramids. Because the thickness of the deposited BN is the largest at the RNI pyramidal islands (Fig. 1 (k)), a brighter PL signal is expected at these positions. The number and the few μm-extension of the PL hot spots in Figs .4 (a), (b), (c) are fully consistent with the density and size of the RNI islands characterized by AFM and SEM experiments in the sample (Fig. 2 and Fig. S4). Second harmonic generation measurements (Fig. S18) further confirm the optical identification of the RNI pyramidal domains using our confocal scanning microscope operating in the deep ultraviolet. The PL spectrum of the brightest spot, averaged over the red square in three corresponding spectral ranges under investigation. For the sake of the comparison with the optical response of well-identified BN polytypes , we also plot the typical PL spectra of hBN in the AA’ stacking stacking (blue line in Figs. 5 (d), (e), (f)) . In contrast to the AA’ and AB stackings, there is so far no characterization by PL spectroscopy of BN monocrystals in the ABC stacking. Even though the PL signal of ABC-stacked BN was identified as lying in the 5.3-5.5 eV range , it spectrally overlaps with the emission of excitons localized at stacking faults, thus precluding here any investigation of BN in the ABC stacking by PL spectroscopy. We thus focus in the following on the comparison of the PL signal of our CVD-grown BN with the optical signatures of BN in the AA’ and AB stackings. Figs. 5 (a), (d) focus on the low energy range, around 4.1 eV (wavelength~300 nm), corresponding to the spectral domain of deep level emission in BN. The PL spectrum shows an asymmetric line centered at 4.14 eV, which is attributed to the well-known so-called “4 eV” defect in BN. Recent measurements have shown that the PL spectrum of this defect depends on the stacking order of the BN host matrix . While the zero-phonon line (ZPL) of this defect is typically found at 4.09 eV in pure AA’ stacking (hBN), it is blue-shifted with two components at energies 4.14 eV and 4.16 eV for the AB stacking (bBN) (Fig. 5 (d)) . The lack of any line at 4.09 eV indicates the absence of the AA’ stacking in our CVD-grown multilayer BN. Conversely, the PL signal centered at 4.14 eV matches with the blue-shifted ZPLs in the Bernal phase of BN in the AB stacking . The broadening of the PL line centered at 4.14 eV (red line, Fig. 5 (d)) does not allow to investigate the presence of different ZPL energies in our CVD-grown sample. Nonetheless, the 4.14 eV- energy of the broad ZPL is a first indication in PL spectroscopy of an AB stacking of our multilayer BN. The spectral range around 5.5 eV (wavelength ~ 225 nm) corresponds to the shallow defect emission band (Figs. 5 (b), (e)), which originates from extended defects and stacking faults. The PL spectrum of our CVD- grown BN shows two broad bands centered at 5.37 eV and 5.53 eV (red line, Fig. 5 (e)), that are again spectrally aligned with the ones recorded in bBN (blue line, Fig. 5 (e)) , but with a different intensity ratio. Noticeably, there is a local minimum of the PL spectrum in our CVD- grown BN at the energy of ~ 5.47 eV, for which the PL signal displays its absolute maximum in hBN, thus confirming the absence of the AA’ order and the existence of a predominant AB stacking. Fig. 5 | Spatially-resolved photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy in the deep ultraviolet for multilayer BN grown on the 31% Fe-substrate. (a), (b), (c) PL intensity maps recorded on the exact same region of the BN multilayer, but integrated in three different spectral domains represented the region indicated by the red square in panels (a), (b), and (c) (red line), Bernal BN (bBN) in the AB stacking (blue line), hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) in the AA’ stacking (black line). Finally, Figs. 5 (c), (f) address the intrinsic band edge emission in the 6 eV-range (wavelength ~ 200 nm). A unique signature of the Bernal phase of BN is the existence of an emission line around ~ 6.035 eV (Fig. 5 (f)), in a spectral domain where strictly no luminescence is detected in the case of hBN . The detection of an emission line around 6.035 eV in the present multilayer BN (red line, Fig. 5 (f)) is an additional signature for the preferential AB stacking order in our CVD-grown BN. Interestingly, the PL intensity map around 6 eV (Fig. 5 (c)) is no longer dominated by only three hot spots as for the deep (Fig. 5 (a)) and extended (Fig. 5 (b)) defects. This observation brings two important information. First, most of the defects are located in the RNI domains of multilayer BN (Fig. 1 (k)). Second, there is intrinsic band edge emission in between the RNI islands, thus demonstrating the quality of the CSM layers in the Bernal phase of BN. We thus conclude that, in the three investigated spectral domains of emission, our CVD-grown multilayer BN features the specific optical response of the Bernal phase of BN in the AB stacking, in agreement with the structural characterizations concluding to the presence of both AB and ABC stackings (Fig. 4), the investigation of the ABC phase being beyond reach here because of the spectral overlap of its PL signal with the stacking faults emission. Looking more deeply into our BN multilayers by complementary tools, conductive atomic force microscopy (cAFM) was used to map the leakage current distribution of the multilayer BN (Figs. 6 (a) – (c), also Fig. S19 and Fig. S20). The areas with the largest current levels (Figs. 6 (b), (c)) appear to be the thinner CSM regions, while the regions having lower current level are realized to be thicker RNI regions (to be interpreted by combining the morphologies in Figs. 6 (a), (b)). One also resolves triangular features with CSM and RNI regions as indicated both in the morphology and current maps (Fig. S19), in roughly agreement with the growth mechanism discussed above (Fig. 1 (k)). No evident weak leakage lines were detected among the CSM regions, consistently with an effective connection of the BN layers. This property ensures excellent screening of current leakage via defects in BN layers. Considering a typical leakage current on the order of ~ 10 nA under a bias of 6 V (electrical field ~ 108 V/cm, assuming a ~ 60 nm BN thickness), the BN multilayer appears to be of considerably high quality. More current mapping performed in randomly chosen areas over the sample surface (Fig. S19) shows similar features. No evident weak leakage lines among CSM regions were observed. Low current level is observed even in regions that are tentatively attributed to anti-domains (Fig. S20). This might benefit from the formation of non-coincident anti- domain boundary that also works for effective screening of possible leakage paths (Fig. S20 (c)). Fig. 6 | Conductive atomic force microscopy (cAFM) measurements of multilayer BN, under the bias voltage of 6 V. (a) cAFM height image. (b) cAFM current mapping. The residue non-connecting islands (RNI) are marked with the false-color (blue), with small leakage current (pA levels), and the other regions correspond to the continuously connecting single- crystal multilayer (CSM). (c) Current profiles along the two lines indicated in panel (b). Conclusion In summary, multilayer BN films were successfully grown on single- crystal Fe-Ni alloy by CVD, with 83% alignment of the pyramidal BN nucleation islands and a subsequent successful layer-by-layer connection leading to a continuous multilayer film. It is realized that the single crystal metal helps on achieving the unidirectional BN domain orientation; Fe is introduced in order to promote the multilayer growth; and the Fe content is to be designed and controlled carefully in order to maintain the phase stability of the metal single crystal. The Fe-Ni (111) single-crystal film, which has a stable face-centered cubic structure up to 51% Fe, and has stronger catalytic ability for the growth of BN multilayers, favors the alignment of BN domains in this novel growth mechanism following a “first meet-first connect” process of the stacked parallel layers. Our detailed TEM observation verified this mechanism by showing effective connection between BN domains. A statistical analysis of selective area electron diffraction and the cross-sectional HRTEM diagrams reveal the AB and ABC stacking of our multilayer BN films obtained by CVD, in agreement with the expected natural exclusion of the anti-parallel AA’ stacking in the present growth mechanism. AB and ABC stackings mean the fabrication of BN multilayers in the Bernal and Rhombohedral phase, in contrast to the most thermodynamically stable AA’ stacking routinely obtained in bulk hBN crystals. Spatially-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy in the deep ultraviolet reveals that the CVD-grown multilayer BN features the specific optical response of the Bernal phase of BN in the AB stacking, fully confirming the structural characterizations by electron diffraction and cross-sectional HRTEM. We believe that higher unidirectional alignment of domains on single- crystal Fe-Ni (111) could be achieved in the future with this CVD method, for a boundary-free single-crystal of multilayer BN film of large thickness, by careful control of the single-crystal metal surface structures and growth parameters. Acknowledgements This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61504030, 61370042, and 61006011). This work was financially supported by the BONASPES project (No. ANR-19-CE30- 0007), the ZEOLIGHT project (No. ANR-19-CE08-0016) and Université de Montpellier.