1 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < FDTD-based Inverse Design enables f/0.27 flat Microlens Array for Integral Imaging Tina M. Hayward, Robert Stewart, Rajesh Menon, and Apratim Majumder Abstract—We demonstrate a high-NA (0.88), ultra-low-f- number (f/0.2714), multi-wavelength (480nm, 550nm and 650nm) multilevel diffractive MicroLens Array (MLA) using inverse design. Each microlens in the array is close-packed with diameter of 70 μm and focal length of only 19 μm in air. The MLA was patterned on one surface of a polymer film via UV casting, such that the focal plane was located on the distal end of the film (n of polymer ~ 1.47, thickness = 28 μm, effective f/# (NA) inside polymer ~ 0.4 (0.78)). Each microlens focuses incident light at 3 design wavelengths into a focal spot with measured full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) < 1 μm. By placing this MLA directly on a high-resolution print, we demonstrated RGB integral imaging with applications in document security. Compared to refractive MLAs, our diffractive MLA reduces the thickness by > 3X, which is advantageous for manufacturability. Since these multi-level diffractive MLAs are fabricated using UV-casting, they have the potential for low-cost, high-volume manufacturing. Index Terms—Diffractive Optics, Microlens, Integral Imaging, Inverse Design, FDTD. I. INTRODUCTION N integral imaging, a microlens array (MLA) is used to capture as well as to reconstruct full light-field information , , , , , , , , . Light field cameras were typically implemented using refractive MLAs , , , , . 3D integral images were achieved by combining MLAs with parallax-integrated offset prints or displays , , , . A printed image (or a display), placed approximately one focal length away from the MLA produces 3D images due to multiple parallaxes when viewed from different angles, see Fig. 1(a). The observed image changes with viewing angle, which creates an impression of depth. Therefore, MLAs have an important role to play in anti- counterfeiting, for example in banknotes . Security increases with complexity of the optical features, number of colors used, and brightness and contrast of the images produced. Larger microlenses allow the incorporation of more views and thereby, more complex 3D images, enhancing security . The thickness of such a security feature is typically limited by the focal length of the microlens. Attaining large-diameter microlens with short focal length, i.e., a small f/# is very challenging due to the typical poor optical This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N6560-NV-ONR, and the National Science Foundation under Grant CMMI-222903. (Corresponding author: Apratim Majumder). Apratim Majumder and Tina M. Hayward are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 USA (e-mail: apratim.majumder@utah.edu). performance and manufacturing complexities. Thinner security features and therefore, ultra-low f-number MLAs are highly desirable. Refractive microlenses used in most cases , , , , , , , , suffer from chromatic aberration, low-NA (large f/#), and thus, low focusing resolution in addition to large device sag and focal length (therefore, thickness). Lastly, it is desirable to attain a large depth-of-focus (DOF) to compensate for the expected thickness variations in the print films (usually 2-3 μm). Some proposed solutions include holographic optical elements, which unfortunately suffer from poor broadband performance and multiple MLAs , which increase the thickness of the overall system, and require complicated alignment procedures. Low f/# Fresnel lenses have been demonstrated before, but these suffer from significant chromatic aberrations , and relatively low efficiency , . We note that metalens-based MLAs have been demonstrated recently, , , , but these generally suffer from poor efficiency and complex fabrication requirements (see Table S1 in supplement and related discussion) . Here, we demonstrate an approach to solving these problems via an inverse-designed multilevel diffractive MLA having diameter of 70 μm, and focal length (in air) of 19 μm that is achromatic over 3 design wavelengths of 480, 550 and 650nm. In addition, we use a high-volume manufacturing process to replicate our MLA. Multilevel diffractive lenses (MDLs) have been demonstrated for various applications , , , , , , , , , . Previously, we showed that inverse design via PSF engineering can be used to decouple the f/# from the NA, i.e., allow the microlens to form a focal spot larger than the diffraction limit without compromising its light- collection ability , . In all prior cases, scalar diffraction coupled with inverse design was used. However, when both ultra-low f/# and diffraction-limited performance are desired, then scalar theory falls short, which we address here. Specifically, we report three advances: (1) inverse design using rigorous finite-difference-time-domain (FDTD) to create microlenses with diameter = 70 μm and focal length (in air) = 19 μm (f/0.2714) as illustrated in Fig. 1(b); (2) master fabrication using grayscale lithography with minimum feature width of 700nm, which is then used for UV-casting replication into the top 1 μm of a ~29 μm-thick polymer film (the backing 28 μm thickness corresponds to focal length of MLA in the Robert Stewart is with Koenig and Bauer Banknote Solutions, Lausanne, Switzerland, CH1018. Rajesh Menon is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112 USA and Oblate Optics Inc., San Diego, CA 92130 USA. Supplemental materials and visualization are available at . I 2 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < polymer); and (3) full optical characterization including measurement of PSF and demonstration of integral-imaging under ambient white light, when coupled with an offset print. Fig. 1. (a) Illustration of 3D integral image generation by combining an MLA (f/0.27 in air) with a high-resolution print (notice the changing pattern at the center of the image based on the viewing angle (also see Visualizations 4 and 5). The MLA is placed ~one focal length, f, away from the print. (b) Each microlens imprinted on the front surface of a transparent polymer film focuses incident collimated light to a near- diffraction limited spot on its back surface (thickness = f = 28 μm). The polymer film has refractive index ~ 1.47, which leads to f/# ~ 0.4 and NA ~ 0.78 for the microlens. The MLA is composed of concentric rings of different heights (< 1 μm) and fixed ring width (W = 0.7 μm). The diameter of each microlens, D = 70 μm (50 rings). (c) Radial distribution of ring heights of one microlens. II. INVERSE DESIGN We implemented inverse design using the FDTD model in cylindrical coordinates to exploit rotational symmetry for computational efficiency. In inverse design, the desired optical function/response is first selected and an algorithm is applied to generate the optical design that can perform such function. Following this approach, the objective of inverse design, for our case (result in Fig. 1(c) and Fig. 2(c)) is to maximize a figure- of-merit (FOM) Fig. 2(a)), set as the ratio of power in the desired focal volume (defined as a cylinder of diameter of 5 μm x length of 2 μm) to the total power within the concentration volume centered at a nominal focal distance of 19 μm (in air) for 3 design wavelengths (480, 550, 650nm). Then we apply a modified version of the direct binary search (DBS) algorithm to generate the height distribution of the constituent concentric rings of the MDL that achieves this FOM. The electromagnetic fields after the microlens is simulated using FDTD via MEEP, an open-source FDTD solver . Rotational symmetry enables much faster computation using cylindrical coordinates as it reduces the computational domain as illustrated in Fig. 2(a) . Inverse design is performed using the modified binary search as described elsewhere , . Details are provided in section 3 of the Supplement . The microlens is discretized into 50 rings each of width, 700 nm. We allowed the ring heights to vary from 0 to 1 μm over 32 levels. The inverse design converges within ~10 iterations, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The optimized design is shown in Fig. 2(c) with the optimized ring heights, shown in Fig. 1(c). It is to be noted that a traditional Fresnel Zone Plate (FZP) lens, with the same diameter and f/# cannot achieve the same performance as it suffers from significant chromatic aberrations. We simulated the performance of an FZP to demonstrate this (Section 5 of the Supplement). Fig. 2. (a) We exploit rotational symmetry to efficiently compute the fields using FDTD. Inverse design maximizes a figure-of-merit (FOM), which is set as the ratio of power inside a desired focal volume near the optical axis (green cylinder with radius=5 μm and thickness=2 μm) to that in the total volume located at the focal plane (also see Supplement section 3) . (b) The FOM converges within ~10 iterations. (c) Top view of the optimized design. 3 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < Fig. 3. (a) Replicated MLA. (a) Photograph of the MLA film. (b-c) Optical micrographs at different magnifications. (d) Atomic force micrograph (AFM) of one of the μ-MDLs in the array. (e) Measured ring-heights (blue) compared to corresponding design values (orange bars). Black curve denotes the error in ring heights. Mean height error = 111.4 nm, Standard deviation of height error = 94.6 nm. III. FABRICATION We first fabricated a 200×200 μ-MDL array master (size = 14 mm × 14 mm) in photoresist (Shipley 1813, Microchem) on a 50 mm-diameter sodalime glass substrate using grayscale lithography via a laser pattern generator (DWL66+, Heidelberg Instruments GmbH) . The master was replicated using WaveFront Technology Inc.’s UV cast & cure process (see details in supplement section 4) . Fig. 3(a) shows a photograph of the flexible MLA on the polymer film, while optical micrographs of the replicated MLA are shown in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c). The microlenses are close packed with center-to- center spacing of 70μm. The thickness of the polymer film is ~ 28 μm, equal to the focal length of the microlens inside the polymer. The flexibility of the polymer MLA allows it to be readily integrated with high-resolution prints, to produce integral images. The ring heights of one of the microlenses in the array was measured using an atomic force microscope (AFM, Bruker Dimension Icon). The AFM data is shown in Fig. 3(d) along with a plot of the heights compared to the ideal design heights and the error in Fig. 3(e). The error is calculated as ∆Height = Measured height - ideal height. The average difference between the measured and designed heights was 111.4 nm, with standard deviation of 94.6 nm. This error is typical of master fabrication as evidenced in our prior works , , , , , , and is acceptable for device functionality. We also simulated the effect of the fabrication errors on the performance of the MLA, exhibiting PSF broadening and higher sidelobes, that is also observed in the experiments (see Section 5 of the Supplement). IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The simulated wavelength-averaged axial point-spread function of the microlens is shown in Fig. 4(a) and 4(c) for air and polymer behind the microlens, respectively. The nominal focal plane (white dashed lines) is located at the peak of the on- axis intensity (red line), 18.51 μm in air and 30.09 μm in polymer, away from the microlens. This is within the 2 μm target DOF from the target of 19 μm in air and ~ 28.5 μm in polymer. The wavelength-averaged point-spread function (PSF) at this plane is plotted in Fig. 4(b) and 4(c) for air and polymer, respectively. A collimated light source with a tunable wavelength filter and a magnification system with a monochromatic CMOS image sensor were used to measure the PSFs. In order to keep the polymer film rigid during measurements, it was mounted on a laser-cut acrylic holder with a window using Kapton tape (see section 5 of Supplement) . The wavelength-averaged measurements are shown in Figs. 4(e) and 4(f). There is some broadening of the PSF, and appearance of sidelobes in the measurements. We attribute this to the rounded corners of the rings resulting from our master fabrication (see Figs. 4g and h, and section 5, Supplement), which is similar to conclusions from other works . Next, we placed the MLA atop offset color prints to test integral imaging (patterned side faced the observer). The prints were generated using standard banknote plate making and offset printing equipment. Original designs were generated at 10,160 dpi (pixel size 2.5 μm), resolution losses in plate making and printing limit the minimum feature size to 10 - 15 μm. The feature designs incorporated both line and icon Moiré effects, which were selected for their tolerance to expected effective resolution reduction caused by the print process, and also for the simplicity of the resulting optical effects (see section 4 of Supplement and Visualizations 4 and 5). We tested the MLA with various print geometries and an example is shown in Fig. 5(a). Exemplary images observed at varying viewing angles and with different illumination conditions such as indoors and outdoors are shown in Figs. 5(c), 5(d), 5(e), and 5(f). The images agree well with simulations (Fig. 5(b)). Additional visualizations (1: print without MLA, 2: print with MLA, 3: print with MLA viewed in transmission and reflection, 6: print with MLA held together using Kapton tape) are also included. 4 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < Using the same rigorous method, we simulated the performance of a Fresnel Zone Plate (FZP) with diameter = 70 μm, focal length = 19 μm (air), and wavelength = 500 nm (center of our three design wavelengths). As expected, the FZP exhibits strong chromatic aberration and therefore, cannot be used for our application (see Section 5 of the Supplement). V. CONCLUSION We demonstrated the inverse design of an ultra-low f/# (0.27) 3-wavelength micro-MDL array, using a rotationally- symmetric FDTD model. The extremely short focal length, while preserving a large aperture allows easy integration onto security offset prints. The measured FWHM of the PSFs were Fig. 4. Focusing performance. (a) Simulated wavelength-averaged axial PSF in air and (b) polymer and (e) measured wavelength-averaged axial PSF. Simulated wavelength-averaged transverse PSF (b) in air and (d) in polymer, and (f) corresponding measurement in air (focal plane located at yellow dashed line at 18.7 μm, desired focal plane marked by white dashed line, and desired focal volume marked by dotted white lines). Magnified views (10 μm × 10 μm) and FWHM are shown in the corresponding insets. (g, h) Simulations, same as (a-d), but taking into account errors in fabrication, using height profile data shown in Fig. 3(e), showing presence of sidelobes as observed in the experiments. Fig. 5. Summary of integral imaging. (a) Photograph of the MLA on offset print held together using Kapton tape, exhibiting integral imaging. (b) Simulated images at two viewing angles from two exemplary prints. (c-f) Images at different viewing angles for two exemplary prints (also see Visualizations 2, 3, and 6). The illuminations used were (c, f) an LED flashlight, (d) fluorescent ceiling lights and (e) ambient sunlight, captured outside around 5 pm, on November 08, 2023 at Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 5 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < < 1 μm and readily produces high-quality integral images with print features of width 10 - 15 μm. We fabricated a master pattern (min. feature = 700 nm) using grayscale lithography, which was then replicated using UV casting (a high-volume, high precision manufacturing process) into a 28 μm thick polymer film. Using simulations, we show that our design outperforms a conventional FZP. Our demonstration lays the framework for diffractive optics to attain very low f/# imaging. Thus, in summary, the key contributions of this work are: (1) inverse design of flat multi-level diffractive microlenses with diameter = 70 μm and focal length (in air) = 19 μm (f/0.2714) using FDTD and DBS optimization, (2) master fabrication using grayscale lithography and replication into flexible polymer film using UV-casting, and (3) full optical characterization including measurement of PSF and demonstration of integral-imaging under ambient white light, when coupled with an offset print. ACKNOWLEDGMENT We thank Brian Baker and Joe Spencer (Utah nanofab), and Chris Kent and Kent Coulter (Wavefront Technologies) for assistance with fabrication. DISCLOSURE Rajesh Menon: Oblate Optics (I, E, P). REFERENCES G. Lippmann, “Épreuves réversibles donnant la sensation du relief,” J. Phys. Theor. Appl., 7(1), 821-825 (1908). J. Arai, H. Kawai, and F. Okano, "Microlens arrays for integral imaging system," Appl. Opt. 45, 9066-9078 (2006). Q. Xu, B. Dai, Z. Jiao, R. Hong, Z. Yang, D. Zhang, and S. Zhuang, "Fabrication of large micro-structured high-numerical-aperture optofluidic compound eyes with tunable angle of view," Opt. Exp. 26, 33356-33365 Z. Zang, X. Tang, X. Liu, X. Lei, and W. Chen, "Fabrication of high quality and low cost microlenses on a glass substrate by direct printing technique," Appl. Opt. 53, 7868-7871 (2014). S. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Xue, and L. Wang, "Design and simulation of a superposition compound eye system based on hybrid diffractive-refractive lenses," Appl. Opt. 56, 7442-7449 (2017). K. H. Jeong, J. J. Kim, and L. P. Lee, "Biologically inspired artificial compound eyes," Science, vol. 312, pp. 557-561 (2006). H. Jung and K.-H. Jeong, "Monolithic polymer microlens arrays with high numerical aperture and high packing density", ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, vol. 7, pp. 2160-2165 (2015). A. Lumsdaine, and T. Georgiev, “Full resolution lightfield rendering,” Adobe Technical Report, Adobe Systems, 1-12 (2008). M. Xu, Y. Xue, J. Li, L. Zhang, H. Lu, and Z. Wang, “Large-Area and Rapid Fabrication of a Microlens Array on a Flexible Substrate for an Integral Imaging 3D Display,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 15 (7) 10219– T. Adelson, and J. Y. A. Wang, “Single lens stereo with a plenoptic camera,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence R. Ng, et. al., “Light field photography with a hand-held plenoptic Camera,” Stanford Tech Report CTSR 2005-02 (2005). T. Georgiev and A. Lumsdaine, “Reducing plenoptic camera artifacts,” Computer Graphics Forum, 29, 1955-1968 (2010). N. Zeller, F. Quint, and U. Stilla, “Depth estimation and camera calibration of a focused plenoptic camera for visual odometry,” ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 118, 83–100 (2016). Y. Bok, H. G. Jeon, and I. S. Kweon, “Geometric calibration of micro- lens-based light field cameras using line features,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 39, 287–300 (2017). X. Zhou, Y. Peng, R. Peng, X. Zeng, Y. Zhang and T. Guo, “Fabrication of large-scale microlens arrays based on screen printing for integral imaging 3D display,” ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8(36), 24248–24255 S. Li, Q.-H. Wang, Y.-P. Xia, Y. Xing, H. Ren, H. Deng, “Integral imaging 3D display system with improved depth of field using a colloidal scattering layer,” Optics Communications, vol. 484 (2021). Q. Wang, H. Deng, T. Jiao, D. Li, and F. Wang, “Imitating micro-lens array for integral imaging," Chin. Opt. Lett. 8, 512-514 (2010). Y. Xing, et. al., “Integral imaging-based tabletop light field 3D display with large viewing angle,” Opto-Electronic Advances, 6 (6), 220178 https://www.uscurrency.gov/denominations/100 M. Dejean, V. Nourrit and J.-L. de Bougrenet de la Tocnaye, “Object kinetics perception in auto-stereoscopic vision,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 36(11) A. Karimzadeh, “Integral imaging system optical design with aberration consideration,” Appl. Opt. 54(7), 1765–1769 (2015) S. Lee, C. Jang, J. Cho, J. Yeom, and B. Lee, “Viewing angle enhancement of an integral imaging display using Bragg mismatched reconstruction of holographic optical elements,” Appl. Opt. 55(3), A95–A103 (2016). W. Wang, G. Chen, Y. Weng, et. al., “Large-scale microlens arrays on flexible substrate with improved numerical aperture for curved integral imaging 3D display,” Sci. Rep. 10, 11741 (2020). S. Lee, C. Jang, J. Cho, J. Yeom, and B. Lee, “Viewing angle enhancement of an integral imaging display using Bragg mismatched reconstruction of holographic optical elements,” Appl. Opt. 55(3), A95–A103 (2016). A. Karimzadeh, “Integral imaging system optical design with aberration consideration,” Appl. Opt. 54(7), 1765–1769 (2015). M. Moghimi, J. Fernandes, A. Kanhere, et al., “Micro-fresnel-zone-plate array on flexible substrate for large field-of-view and focus scanning,” Sci. Rep., 5, 15861 (2015). D. Chao, A. Patel, T. Barwicz, H. I. Smith, and R. Menon, “Immersion Zone-Plate-Array Lithography,” J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B, 23(6), 2657-2661 D. W. Prather, D. Pustai, and S. Shi, "Performance of multilevel diffractive lenses as a function of f-number," Appl. Opt. 40, 207-210 (2001). R. J. Lin, V. C. Su, S. Wang, et. al., “Achromatic metalens array for full- colour light-field imaging,” Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 227–231 (2019). Z. B. Fan, H. Y. Qiu, H. L. Zhang, et. al., “A broadband achromatic metalens array for integral imaging in the visible,” Light Sci. Appl. 8, 67 Z. Yang, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, et. al., “Generalized Hartmann-Shack array of dielectric metalens sub-arrays for polarimetric beam profiling,” Nat. Commun. 9, 4607 (2018). T. Hu, Q. Zhong, N. Li, Y. Dong, Z. Xu, D. Li, Y. H. Fu, Y. Zhou, K. H. Lai, V. Bliznetsov, H. Lee, W. L. Loh, S. Zhu, Q. Lin, and N. Singh, “A metalens array on a 12-inch glass wafer for optical dot projection,” Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. (OFC) 2020, OSA Technical Digest (Optical Society of America, 2020), paper W4C.3. (2020). Supplementary Information. S. Banerji, M. Meem, A. Majumder, F. Guevara Vasquez, B. Sensale- Rodriguez, and R. Menon, "Imaging with flat optics: metalenses or diffractive lenses?," Optica 6, 805-810 (2019). S. Banerji, M. Meem, A. Majumder, B. Sensale-Rodriguez and R. Menon, “Diffractive flat lens enables extreme depth-of-focus imaging,” Optica P. Wang, N. Mohammad and R. Menon, “Chromatic-aberration-corrected diffractive lenses for ultra-broadband focusing,” Sci. Rep., 6, 21545 (2016). S. Banerji and B. Sensale-Rodriguez, “A computational design framework for efficient, fabrication error-tolerant, planar THz diffractive optical elements,” Sci. Rep., 9, 5801 (2019). M. Meem, S. Banerji, A, Majumder, C. Pies, T. Oberbiermann, B. Sensale- Rodriguez & R. Menon, “Inverse-designed flat lens for imaging in the visible & near-infrared with diameter > 3mm and NA=0.3,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 117(4), 041101 (2020). S. Banerji, M. Meem, A. Majumder, F. Guevara Vasquez, B. Sensale- Rodriguez and R. Menon, “Ultra-thin near infrared camera enabled by a flat multi-level diffractive lens,” Opt. Lett. 44(22), 5450-5452 (2019). M. Meem, S. Banerji, A, Majumder, C. Pies, T. Oberbiermann, B. Sensale- Rodriguez and R. Menon, “Large-area, high-NA multi-level diffractive lens via inverse design,” Optica 7(3), 252-253 (2020). M. Meem, S. Banerji, A. Majumder, F. Guevara Vasquez, B. Sensale- Rodriguez and R. Menon, “Broadband lightweight flat lenses for 6 > REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < longwave-infrared imaging,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (43), 21375-21378 D. Lin, T. M. Hayward, W. Jia, A. Majumder, B. Sensale-Rodriguez, and R. Menon, “Inverse-designed multi-level diffractive doublet for wide field- of-view imaging,” ACS Photonics 10, 8, 2661–2669 (2023). S. Banerji, M. Meem, A. Majumder, B. Sensale-Rodriguez, and R. Menon, “Super-resolution imaging with an achromatic multi-level diffractive microlens array,” Opt. Lett. 45, 6158-6161 (2020). M. Meem, A. Majumder, and R. Menon, “Freeform broadband flat lenses for visible imaging,” OSA Continuum 4, 491-497 (2021). A. Majumder, M. Meem, R. Stewart, and R. Menon, "Broadband point- spread function engineering via a freeform diffractive microlens array," Opt. Express 30, 1967-1975 (2022). A. Taflove and S.C. Hagness, “Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite-Difference Time-Domain Method”, Artech: Norwood, 3rd Edition, MA, 2005. A. Oskooi, D. Roundy, M. Ibanescu, P. Bermel, J.D. Joannopoulos, and S.G. Johnson, “MEEP: A flexible free-software package for electromagnetic simulations by the FDTD method,” Computer Physics Communications, Vol. 181, pp. 687-702 (2010). MEEP Cylindrical coordinates tutorial: https://meep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/Scheme_Tutorials/Cylindrical_Coor dinates/#:~:text=Meep%20supports%20the%20simulation%20of,if%20th ere%20is%20sufficient%20symmetry. Datasheet for DWL66+, Heidelberg Instruments GmbH: Sheet-DWL-66-v220408.pdf C-F. Pan et al., “3D-printed multilayer structures for high–numerical aperture achromatic metalenses,” Sci. Adv. 9, eadj9262 (2023). Apratim Majumder received his Ph.D. degree in Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Utah, where he continues as a research assistant Professor. His research interests cover optics, photonics, hyperspectral imaging, flat optics, and photolithography. He is currently developing ultra-flat lenses and holograms for wide-ranging applications in photography, microscopy, VR/AR, and snapshot hyperspectral cameras for low-cost HIS applications. Tina Hayward graduated from the University of Utah with a B.S. in Electrical Engineering, and is currently pursuing her Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering. She joined Menon Group in Fall, 2021. Her research interests include grayscale lithography fabrication of multi-level diffractive lenses for extended depth of focus and wide-field of view applications. Robert Stewart ... Rajesh Menon combines his expertise in nanofabrication, computation and optical engineering to impact myriad fields including super-resolution lithography, metamaterials, broadband diffractive optics, integrated photonics, photovoltaics and computational optics. His research has spawned over 120 publications, over 40 patents, and 4 spin-off companies. Rajesh is a Fellow of the Optical Society of America, and Senior Member of the IEEE and the SPIE. Among his other honors are a NASA Early Stage Innovations Award, NSF CAREER Award and the International Commission for Optics Prize. He currently directs the Laboratory for Optical Nanotechnologies (http://lons.utah.edu/) at the University of Utah. He received S.M. and Ph.D. degrees from MIT. Supplementary Information FDTD-based Inverse Design enables f/0.27 flat Microlens Array for Integral Imaging Tina M. Hayward, Robert Stewart, Rajesh Menon, and Apratim Majumder I. LITERATURE SURVEY work in its appropriate context. For a fair comparison, only flat lenses (Fresnel lenses are excluded) achromatic over a broadband illumination range, or designed for multiple wavelength performance are considered here. Narrowband or single wavelength flat lenses have been ignored. The table has been arranged in ascending order of f/# of the lenses.