Double-dome Unconventional Superconductivity in Twisted Trilayer Graphene Zekang Zhou1, Jin Jiang1, Paritosh Karnatak2, Ziwei Wang3, Glenn Wagner4, Kenji Watanabe5,6, Takashi Taniguchi5,6, Christian Sch ̈onenberger2,7, S. A. Parameswaran3,8, Steven H. Simon3, Mitali Banerjee1,∗ 1Institute of Physics, Ecole Polytechnique F ́ed ́erale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland 2Department of Physics, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland 3Rudolf Peierls Centre for Theoretical Physics, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK 4Department of Physics, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland 5Research Center for Functional Materials, National Institute for Material Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 6International Center for Materials Nanoarchitectonics, National Institute for Material Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba 305-0044, Japan 7Swiss Nanoscience Institute, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 82, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland 8Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, N ̈othnitzer Str. 38, 01187 Dresden, Germany Graphene moir ́e systems are ideal environments for investigating complex phase diagrams and gaining fundamental insights into the mechanisms underlying exotic states of matter, as they permit controlled manipulation of electronic properties. Magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) has emerged as a key platform to explore moir ́e superconductivity, owing to the robustness of its superconducting order and the displacement-field tunability of its energy bands. Recent measure- ments strongly suggest that superconductivity in MATTG is unconventional. Here, we report the first direct observation of double-dome superconductivity in MATTG. The temperature, magnetic field, and bias current dependence of the superconductivity of doped holes collectively show that it is significantly suppressed near moir ́e filling ν∗ = −2.6, leading to a double dome in the phase diagram within a finite window of the displacement field. The temperature dependence of the normal-state resistance and the I −V curves straddling ν∗ are suggestive of a phase transition and the potentially distinct nature of superconductivity in the two domes. Hartree-Fock calculations incorporating mild strain yield an incommensurate Kekul ́e spiral state whose effective spin polarization peaks in the regime where superconductivity is suppressed in experiments. This allows us to draw conclusions about the normal state as well as the unconventional nature of the superconducting order parameter. INTRODUCTION Double-dome superconductivity has been found in var- ious systems such as cuprates , heavy fermion com- pounds , iron chalcogenides and kagome lattice materials . The appearance of a double dome in a superconducting phase diagram usually signals uncon- ventional superconductivity and is associated with inter- twined orders, quantum criticality, and non-Fermi liquid physics . In most systems mentioned above, the origin of double-dome superconductivity cannot be explained by conventional BCS theory and is typically attributed to electron correlations. Recently, twisted graphene moir ́e superlattices, whose nearly flat bands enhance the role of Coulomb interactions, have emerged as exciting plat- forms to explore quantum phases such as correlated in- sulators , superconductors [9–14], ferromagnets [15– 17] and (fractional) Chern insulators [18–25]. Among these, superconductivity has attracted much attention and has already been extensively studied in magic an- gle twisted bilayer graphene (MATBG) and twisted multilayer graphene [11–14]. Importantly, aspects of the superconducting order in these systems — such as its ne- maticity , re-entrant behaviour , and signatures of nodal pairing — all suggest that it may be uncon- ∗ mitali.banerjee@epfl.ch ventional, highlighting the role of electron interactions. Here, we report the direct observation of double-dome superconductivity in MATTG tunable by the application of an electrical displacement field, and differentiate the characteristics of the two domes through electronic trans- port measurements. Our findings, bolstered by numeri- cal calculations, confirm unconventional superconductiv- ity in MATTG and provide valuable insights toward un- derstanding the mechanism of superconductivity in this material. SUPERCONDUCTIVITY AND CORRELATED STATES Magic angle twisted trilayer graphene (MATTG) com- prises three layers of graphene, with the first and third layers having the same orientation and the central layer twisted by approximately 1.55◦ . This configura- tion is mirror-symmetric for zero displacement field and exhibits a moir ́e pattern with a wavelength of around 9.1 nm, as illustrated in FIG. 1a. Similar to MATBG, the low energy physics in MATTG is dominated by flat bands. However, a distinguishing feature of MATTG, as opposed to MATBG, is the presence of a Dirac band alongside the flat bands, that is decoupled from them at zero displacement field. Applying a displacement field to MATTG breaks mirror symmetry and hybridizes flat and Dirac bands, thereby modifying the band structure arXiv:2404.09909v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 15 Apr 2024 2 pattern with 9.1 nm moir ́e length in MATTG in which the alternating twist angle θ12 = 1.55◦ and θ23 = −1.55◦. b, Landau fan diagram shown by longitudinal resistance Rxx. Correlated states can be seen at ν = 1, ±2, 3. Landau levels also start from these correlated states in addition to the charge neutral point (CNP) and moir ́e band full filling. The non-zero Chern number C = ±2 of these correlated states comes from Landau levels of the Dirac band. c, linecut of Rxx in zero magnetic field. The superconducting phase appears near ν = −2 and ν = −3 in the hole side and appears on the electron side between ν = 2 and ν = 3 (the light blue region). d, Hall density nH extracted from Rxy = B/ne. nH shows ‘gap/Dirac’ behavior at ν = 0, ±4, ‘reset’ behavior at ν = 1, ±2, 3 and ‘vHS’ between ν = −4, −3, between ν = 1, 2, between ν = 3, 4 . The hole side superconducting phase is bounded by the ‘vHS’ and ‘reset’ point while the electron side superconducting phase is bounded by two ‘reset’ points, which is in agreement with previous works . e, f, dVxx/dI versus Idc and B in the hole side superconducting phase (e, ν = −2.37) and in the electron side superconducting phase (f, ν = 2.74). The hole side superconducting phase is much stronger than the electron side. No Fraunhofer interference pattern is observed either on the hole side or the electron side. and providing an elegant route to explore the interplay between various competing or intertwined states. We have fabricated multiple TTG devices close to the magic angle for this work (details of the stacking and fabri- cation process are contained in Methods). Similar to MATBG, MATTG also exhibits a rich phase diagram hosting several quantum phases whose explanation lies beyond single-particle physics. FIG. 1b shows longitu- dinal resistance Rxx as a function of the magnetic field B and bottom gate voltage Vbg, which is converted into moir ́e filling factor ν = n/n0 where n and n0 are the to- tal electron density and that needed to fill a single moir ́e band, respectively. Apart from the resistance peaks ob- served at ν = ±4, which stem from the band gap of the flat band, and at ν = 0, corresponding to semi-metallic behavior at neutrality, additional resistance peaks are ev- ident at ν = 1, ±2, 3. These cannot be accounted for solely by the non-interacting band structure and are cor- related states that form due to the strong interaction- induced symmetry breaking within the flat bands. For B ̸= 0, Landau levels also originate from these corre- lated states, indicating that the Fermi surface recon- structs at these moir ́e fillings. Furthermore, the corre- lated states exhibit a slope in the ν −B plane that trans- lates via the Streda formula dν/dB = Ce/hn0 to a Chern number |C|= 2. However, unlike in MATBG where the 3 100 mK except temperature dependence) a, Temperature dependence of Rxx in the hole side superconducting regime. The superconducting phase is strongly suppressed near ν∗ = −2.6. b, line cuts of Rxx in a when ν = −2.2 and ν = −2.8. Dashed lines are the linear fit of Rxx versus T in the high-temperature region. c, The magnetic field dependence of Rxx also shows a clear feature of double dome superconductivity. The left and right dome’s superconductivity are very robust, with a maximum critical magnetic field larger than 300 mT. Near ν∗ = −2.6, superconductivity is sufficiently weakened. d, Line-cuts from c at three different magnetic fields. At zero magnetic field, the superconducting region extends below ν = −3 and above ν = −2. When B = 0.1T, the superconducting regime shrinks from both sides, and a small resistance peak appears near ν∗ = −2.6. When B = 0.2T, the resistance peak near ν∗ = −2.6 becomes enhanced, and the ν = −2 correlated state appears. Chern number arises solely from the topology of corre- lated states in the flat bands [18–21, 23], in MATTG it can be ascribed to the Dirac band Landau levels , as follows. Due to the small carrier density relative to the flat bands, as we dope away from the correlated states, electrons (holes) in the Dirac band only populate the zero-energy Dirac Landau level, contributing CD = 2 (CD = −2) on the electron (hole) side even at small B. Since the total observed Chern number C = Cf + CD, where Cf is the Chern number of the flat band states, the observations are consistent with Cf = 0. and FIG. 1d show Rxx in zero magnetic field and the Hall density nH as a function of ν. The superconducting state appears near half-filling (|ν| = 2) on both the hole and electron sides. From the Hall density, we see that on the hole side the superconducting state is bounded by a van Hove singularity (vHS) (indicated by a diver- gence in nH) and a correlated state (nH exhibits ‘reset’ behavior). In contrast, on the electron side, the super- conductor is flanked by a pair of correlated states. The results agree with previous studies . FIG. 1e and magnetic field B when ν = −2.37 (e) and ν = 2.74 (f). The critical magnetic field of hole-side superconductivity can be as high as 400 mT, and the critical current can be around 800 nA (channel width is 1 μm), both of which highlight the robustness of the superconductivity in our device. Superconductivity on the electron side is much weaker than on the hole side, with a 30 mT critical mag- netic field and 100 nA critical current. No Fraunhofer interference pattern is observed in either hole or elec- tron sides. This may be because the device is sufficiently 4 c, dVxx/dI as a function of ν and Idc at 0.3 K (a), 1 K (b) and 1.8 K (c). The phenomenon of double dome superconductivity remains evident. Clear critical current features, denoted as Ic, are observable within the ranges of −3 < ν < −2.8 and −2.5 < ν < −2.1. At temperature 1.8 K, the superconducting feature of the left dome nearly disappears, whereas the right dome retains its superconducting characteristics, appearing as an isolated dome. d, The hysteresis of the I − V curve in the right dome, denoted as ∆Vxx = (Vxx(←) − Vxx(→)), varies as a function of filling and d.c. bias current. Notably, a distinct at filling ν = −2.84 (e) and ν = −2.6 (f). The left dome exhibits no hysteresis, whereas the right dome demonstrates a pronounced hysteresis. homogeneous that it lacks superconducting percolation paths separated by normal regions, the usual origin of such interference. DOUBLE-DOME SUPERCONDUCTIVITY In order to understand the microscopic origin of super- conductivity in MATTG, it is essential to explore the su- perconducting phase diagram. Since our device exhibits much stronger superconductivity on the hole side than on the electron side, we primarily focus on the former in the main text. FIG. 2a shows the temperature depen- dence of Rxx. The optimal doping (i.e., the strongest superconductivity) occurs near ν = −2.3 with a critical temperature around 2.5 K, which is notably high rela- tive to other reported MATTG devices. Superconductiv- ity is strongly suppressed near ν∗ = −2.6 and exhibits a double dome feature not directly observed in previ- ous experiments. The left dome is between the filling −3.2 < ν < ν∗, and the right dome is in the region ν∗ < ν < −2. ν = −2.2 and ν = −2.8. There are several differences in the temperature dependence of Rxx in the left and right domes. The normal state resistance of the right dome follows a linear temperature behavior, as shown by the dashed line, whereas the normal state resistance in the left dome deviates from linear-in-T behaviour. Another difference is that the transition region from the normal to the superconducting state is sharper in the right dome than that in the left. (The temperature dependence of Rxx at other moir ́e fillings are shown in Fig. S2.) FIG. 2c shows Rxx in the ν − B plane. Like the temperature dependence of Rxx, the magnetic field dependence also indicates that superconductivity is strongly suppressed near ν∗ = −2.6. The maximum Tc of the left dome is smaller than that of the right dome; however, the max- imum critical magnetic field in the left dome can reach as high as 400 mT, exceeding that of the right dome. Besides suppressing superconductivity near ν∗, the mag- netic field also induces a correlated state at ν = −2. However, at zero magnetic fields, the T → 0 state for 5 ν = −2 is superconducting. The connection between correlated states and superconductivity remains a matter of significant debate. Our results demonstrate that the correlated and superconducting states are in- dependent and indeed may compete. Fig. 2d displays three line cuts of Rxx at B = 0 T, 0.1 T, and 0.2 T. It is evident that a small magnetic field induces two re- sistance peaks. One corresponds to the correlated state at ν = −2, while another appears near ν∗, marking the boundary between two superconducting regimes. The resistance peak near ν∗ may indicate the emergence of a competing order near this filling, suppressing super- conductivity and thereby splitting a single large super- conducting dome into two parts. Alternatively, it could be attributed to an intrinsic change in the nature of the superconducting order in two distinct domes. Though weak, but we have observed double-dome like feature on the electron side superconducting phase diagram (Fig. S8). We have also witnessed weak double-dome super- conductivity in another near magic angle TTG devices (alternating twist angle θ = 1.51◦,Fig. S9)). BIAS CURRENT DEPENDENCE AND I − V CURVE HYSTERESIS We also perform DC current-dependent measurements to gain additional insight into the superconducting phase diagram in MATTG. FIG. 3a-c shows Rxx as a function of DC current Idc and moir ́e filling ν at three different temperatures. As shown in FIG. 3a, the results can be categorized into three regions. The left dome exhibits a pronounced critical current of approximately 500 nA. The right dome also displays a strong critical current feature; however, the critical current initially increases and then decreases with increasing carrier density, a con- trast that suggests that the right dome functions inde- pendently of the left. Finally, for the central region near moir ́e filling ν∗ = −2.6 while the resistance is zero for low Idc, the switching to the normal state is not sharp. Moreover, as we increase the temperature from T = 0.3 K to T = 1.8 K in FIG. 3c, it becomes apparent that the superconducting phase on the left side nearly disappears, while the critical current decreases slightly on the right side. In the central regime, the resistance at low Idc is no longer zero, but the same kink-like feature (shown by the dashed line in FIG. 3a,b,c) at high Idc persists. One possibility is that the feature in the central regime is predominantly influenced by the band structure rather than the superconductivity, as it exhibits little temper- ature dependence. Crucially, we also find that the right dome exhibits hysteresis in the I − V curve when Idc is swept forwards versus backwards, revealing the switching and the retrapping currents respectively, whereas the left dome and central regime show no such hysteresis. FIG. 3d illustrates the DC voltage difference when sweeping Idc in the two directions and reveals hysteresis in the range −2.4 < ν < −2.1, which lies within the right dome. This hysteresis can be as large as 60 nA, as depicted in Fig. 3f. FIG. 3e shows the I − V curve at ν = −2.84, within the left dome. The switching and the retrapping currents are identical, showing no hysteresis. Fig. S5 displays the voltage difference on sweeping Idc forwards and backwards in the left dome, confirming the absence of I − V hysteresis throughout. Hysteresis in the I −V curves of a superconductor can arise for several different reasons. One common expla- nation invokes inhomogeneity within the superconduct- ing sample, which may give rise to a network of under- damped Josephson junctions . However, we believe that this is not the case with our device: the absence of Fraunhofer-like interference patterns, high switching currents, and large critical magnetic fields all indicate that the device is clean and homogeneous. Furthermore, the systematic dependence of hysteresis on doping and the contrasting behaviour in the two domes also suggests that it has an intrinsic origin. An alternative explana- tion for I −V hysteresis can be “self heating” [35–37]. In this context, one possible explanation is that there are more quasi-particles involved in conducting heat within the left dome than in the right dome. This helps facili- tate the equilibration of electron and bath temperatures when sweeping Idc downwards from the normal state. An important clue in this regard is provided by scanning tun- neling microscopy (STM) measurements, which report a transition from a ‘U’ - shaped tunneling gap to a ‘V’ - shaped tunneling gap . Note that STM experiments are single-gated, and hence trace a diagonal line in the ν −D plane, which should be kept in mind when compar- ing results. The presence of a ‘V’ - shaped tunneling gap close to ν = −3 suggests that low-energy quasi-particles could enhance thermal conductivity in this doping, con- sequently reducing self-heating and suppressing I − V hysteresis as we observe in the left dome at non-zero D. In contrast, the ‘U’-shaped behaviour for doping close to ν = −2 is characteristic of a fully-gapped superconduc- tor with a much lower density of thermally-conducting quasiparticles and hence poor equilibration. This can lead to hysteretic I − V behaviour, consistent with our experimental findings in the right dome. DISPLACEMENT FIELD TUNABILITY OF DOUBLE-DOME BEHAVIOR In contrast to MATBG, MATTG exhibits a Dirac band coexisting with flat bands, offering a band structure that is adjustable through the application of a displacement field . In FIG. 4, we study how displacement fields affect the double-dome superconductivity. 4a shows Rxx as a function of displacement field D and moir ́e filling ν in zero magnetic field. As the dark blue region shows, a superconducting region exists on the hole side. The displacement field can be divided into three re- gions according to the behavior of the superconducting dome. In Region I, the displacement field is low and the 6 (c), the Dirac band, isolated alongside a flat band, generates Dirac Landau levels, complementing Landau levels stemming from the flat band. Charge transfer between the two sets of Landau levels gives rise to the curved feature in the lower left portion of the ν −B plane (marked with a dashed line as a guide to the eye.) In this region, a single superconducting dome exists, and the critical current of the superconducting state sharply decreases with increasing doping. The Dirac band is already hybridized with flat bands in the high displacement field regime (e). Landau levels solely originate from this hybridized band. In addition, only one superconducting dome exists, and the superconducting region shrinks as the displacement field increases until the superconducting dome vanishes entirely. The Dirac band is hybridizing with a flat band in the intermediate displacement field region (d) and the double dome superconductivity appears. Dirac and flat bands are not totally hybridized. Lan- dau levels originating from the Dirac band are visible as indicated by the curved feature in FIG. 4c. (The curvature is linked to varying charge transfer between Dirac and flat band Landau levels at fixed total density. Indeed, Hartree-Fock calculations show charge transfer cascades between the Dirac band and flat band sectors in MATTG .) In this region, there is only one super- conducting dome, shown in FIG. 4c. Critical current and critical magnetic field sharply decrease as carrier density increases, starting from ν = −2.35. Region II is at intermediate displacement fields, when the Dirac band is strongly hybridized with the flat band, indicated by the absence of discernible signatures of Dirac band Landau levels as shown in FIG. 4d. In this region, superconductivity exhibits a double-dome feature in both Idc and magnetic field dependence measurements. Re- gion III occurs at higher displacement fields, where the 7 spin polarization of the Hartree-Fock ground state as a function of the filling ν and interlayer potential ∆V . The latter serves a proxy for the displacement field D; regimes of ∆V consistent with regions I-III of Fig. 4 are indicated. The phase diagram shows a characteristic wedge (labeled A) where the effective spin polarization is peaked, which coincides with the region of suppressed superconductivity seen experimentally in FIG 4.b. Insets (i)-(vi) show representative examples of the normal state Fermi surfaces (FSs) in six distinct regimes. The FSs occur in the upper (U) and lower (L) IKS bands and are labelled by their effective spin (↑ / ↓). (i) and (ii) show the FS for ν = −3 and low and high D, respectively. The presence of a fully filled lower IKS band in a single effective spin sector for low D and charge transfer to the lower IKS band in the opposite effective spin sector for high D are consistent with ‘reset’ behaviour in Rxx only for low D in FIG 1d. (iii) shows the FS for ν = −2, where the lower IKS band is fully filled in both effective spin sectors. (iv) in wedge A doped electrons enter the upper IKS band of the same effective spin sector that is (mostly) filled at ν = −3. (v) For −3 < ν ≲ ν∗ and at high displacement fields (the region labelled B), doped electrons form FSs in the lower IKS band of the opposite effective spin sector. This doping regime coincides with the left superconducting dome. (vi) for ν∗ ≲ ν < −2 and all D (region C) we find a pair of identical FSs in the lower IKS bands of both effective spin sectors, consistent with a twofold Landau fan degeneracy. This doping regime corresponds to the right superconducting dome. The change in the FS structure across ν∗ modifies the possibilities for superconducting pairing: whereas the FS in region B only allows pairing within a single effective spin sector, the FS in region C allows pairing between either the same or different effective spin sectors. Both regions B and C involve only the lower IKS band. The coincidence of suppressed superconductivity with the wedge A of doping into the upper IKS band suggests that pairing is less robust here. Together, these results provide a scenario for the origin of double dome superconductivity with distinct pairing channels in each dome. Dirac and flat band hybridization is even stronger, and the Dirac-band Landau level features are again absent, as shown by FIG. 4e. In this region, the system again displays a single superconducting dome (FIG. 4c) that shrinks with increasing displacement field before finally disappearing. However, the characteristics of this sin- gle dome are sharply distinct from those observed in the first region. The critical current gradually increases and then slowly decreases with an increase in carrier density instead of sharply decreasing. B = 0.1 T. The results can again be divided into three 8 regions. When |D|< D1, the superconductivity of the left part is already destroyed, while the right part is still superconducting. The results agree with FIG. 4c where superconductivity in the left part is very weak. When D1 < |D|< D2, two superconducting domes are bridged by a resistive region near ν∗. When D2 < |D|< D3, only one superconducting dome is observed and it shrinks with increasing displacement field, before finally disappearing when |D|> D3. (More displacement field data is provided in FIG. S6). We can get two key pieces of information from the dis- placement field dependence measurement: (1) the Dirac band gradually hybridizes with the flat band as D is in- creased; (2) Double-dome superconductivity appears in conjunction with the disappearance of Dirac band Lan- dau levels. HARTREE-FOCK STUDIES OF NORMAL-STATE PROPERTIES ACROSS ν∗ In order to gain theoretical insight into the experi- mental observation of double-dome superconductivity, we turn to Hartree-Fock calculations on MATTG. As can be seen in FIG. 2b, the temperature dependence of Rxx at fillings ν = −2.2 and ν = −2.8 shows clear differences far above the superconducting critical temperature it- self. This suggests that the normal parent state of the superconductor undergoes changes between these fillings, and across ν∗. This can be captured by computing the Hartree-Fock ground state, and hence the Fermi surface from which the superconductor emerges. In the presence of the experimentally realistic amounts of strain necessary to capture the Landau fan degen- eracy at ν = −2 and the semimetallic behaviour at ν = 0, our calculations (see Methods) indicate the normal state of MATTG to be an incommensurate Kekul ́e spiral (IKS) at all non-zero integer fillings ν . IKS or- der, which is also ubiquitous in strained MATBG , in- volves a spiral in the graphene valley pseudospin degrees of freedom, and spontaneously breaks valley symmetry by the formation of spatially-modulated inter-valley co- herence (IVC). This leads to a multiscale order consisting of a Kekul ́e charge pattern on the graphene scale (due to IVC) that rotates on the moir ́e scale with a wavelength incommensurate with the superlattice period (due to the spiral order). IKS order has been directly observed in STM experiments in MATBG and MATTG . ization of the Hartree-Fock ground state in the range of fillings ν = −3 to ν = −2 for varying interlayer potential ∆V , which serves as a proxy for the displacement field D. The effective spin polarization corresponds to either the physical spin or the valley-filtered spin polarization, depending on whether the intervalley Hund’s coupling is ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic . Note that since the IKS bands involve IVC, they cannot be given a global valley label. The Hartree-Fock ground state exhibits IKS order in the entire region of the phase diagram. In ad- dition, we find a clear wedge where the effective spin polarization is peaked between ν = −3 and ν ≈ ν∗. This wedge shrinks as the displacement field is applied, mir- roring the wedge of suppressed superconductivity seen in Schematically, as shown in FIG. 5 (insets), the Hartree- Fock band structure below charge neutrality consists of an upper and lower IKS band in each of the effective spin sectors. At ν = −3 and small ∆V , the Hartree-Fock state consists of a single filled lower IKS band in one effective spin sector, that we will label “up” for specificity (FIG. 5i). At larger ∆V there is some charge transfer between the two lower IKS bands, leading to a small Fermi surface at ν = −3 (FIG. 5ii). This is consistent with experimental observation of ‘reset’ behaviour at ν = −3 only at small displacement fields . Upon doping from ν = −3 towards neutrality, there are two possibilities: (1) The upper IKS band in the “up” ef- fective spin sector starts filling (FIG. 5iv), or (2) the lower IKS band in the “down” effective spin sector starts filling (FIG. 5v). Whether option (1) or (2) occurs depends on the balance of kinetic versus exchange interaction energy. For small ∆V (region A), the small bandwidth means option (1) is energetically favourable, while for large ∆V (region B), the larger bandwidth favours option (2). The regime where option (1) is favoured tracks the wedge fea- ture. For ν > ν∗, the lower IKS bands in both effective spin sectors are equally occupied (FIG. 5vi). The entire range of the phase diagram shown in FIG. 5 (main figure) exhibits superconductivity as seen in FIG. 4a. However, comparison with FIG. 4b shows that the wedge where the theory predicts maximal effective spin polarization (region A) has the lowest critical magnetic field (the suppression of superconductivity also coincides with a dip in the critical temperature as seen in FIG. 2a). The most robust superconductivity is seen for ν∗ ≲ ν < −2 (region C). The Hartree-Fock state for −3 < ν ≲ ν∗ only has a single partially filled IKS band (hence a single effective spin flavor), while the state for ν∗ ≲ ν < −2 has two IKS Fermi surfaces (hence two effective spins flavors). Fermionic antisymmetry dictates that the superconduct- ing order parameter for −3 < ν ≲ ν∗ be odd parity. On the other hand, for ν∗ ≲ ν < −2 we have two effec- tive spin flavors and the order parameter can have either even or odd parity. STM measurements support nodal superconductivity for −3 < ν ≲ ν∗ and nodeless super- conductivity for ν∗ ≲ ν < −2 . The measurements in dome compared to the left dome. This is consistent with our theory: The possible order parameters for the single band case in the left dome are necessarily intra-effective spin. On the other hand, for the two-band case in the right dome we may have either inter- or intra-effective spin pairing. Hence, the pairing symmetries for the left dome (region B) are a subset of those in the right dome (region C). The higher critical temperature for the right 9 dome as well as the distinct STM signatures of the two domes suggest that inter-effective spin pairing is realized in the right dome and is more robust than intra-effective spin pairing. In both these cases, the superconductivity involves the lower IKS bands. The region of suppressed superconductivity coincides with the wedge in which we find the the Fermi surface to lie in an upper IKS band (region A), suggesting that this is antagonistic to the for- mation of strong superconducting order. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION The most striking result we report is the direct obser- vation of double-dome superconductivity in hole-doped MATTG (−3 ≲ ν ≲ −2) under a displacement field. This adds a new entry to the list of unconventional phe- nomena observed in MATTG and expands the roster of superconductors known to show a double-dome fea- ture as a function of doping. Through extensive electri- cal transport measurements we further distinguish sev- eral features of the two adjacent superconducting domes in MATTG. Notably, the strongly hysteretic I − V be- haviour and relative robustness of superconductivity in the right dome (ν∗ < ν ≲ −2) contrast with the lack of hysteresis and relatively weak superconductivity in the left dome (−3 ≲ ν < ν∗). An appealing explanation for this is that there is a paucity of low-energy quasipar- ticles that can drive thermal equilibration in the right as compared to the left, which can in turn be rational- ized in terms of a change in the nature of superconduc- tivity from nodeless to nodal as the electron density is decreased across ν∗. The latter observation would be in striking accord with STM measurements on MATTG that conjectured a transition from nodeless to nodal su- perconductivity on the basis of the evolution of the shape of the gap function in a similar range of doping where we find the two-dome feature at finite D. We gain further insight by tracking the appearance and subsequent disappearance of the double-dome fea- ture with increasing displacement field. Coupled with Hartree-Fock simulations of the normal state, this pro- vides additional clues as to the nature of superconduc- tivity in the two domes. Our numerical studies find ro- bust incommensurate Kekul ́e spiral order proximate to ν = −2, again consistent with STM experiments, which exhibits with a clear wedge of enhanced effective spin po- larization in the normal state around ν∗ and in a window of displacement fields. We also infer a change in the pos- sible superconducting pairing states in the two domes: whereas the right dome admits pairing between electrons with the same and opposite effective spins, only the for- mer is possible in the left dome. In light of this and our hysteresis data it is tempting to conjecture that MATTG hosts two types of pairing, a relatively robust nodeless even-parity pairing and a weaker nodal odd-parity pair- ing that are associated respectively with the right and left domes. The even-parity pairing obeys a modified Ander- son’s theorem (see Methods), making it stable to moir ́e scale disorder, potentially explaining its robustness. Fi- nally, our theoretical results indicate that in the ν − D region corresponding to either dome, doped electrons en- ter lower IKS bands, whereas the region of suppressed superconductivity coincides with the wedge where they enter the upper IKS band. This suggests that the lat- ter is less susceptible to pairing, which may help iden- tify the pairing mechanism in MATTG. Our work thus opens a significant new chapter in the phenomenology of MATTG, and motivates future work to assemble the several tantalizingly consistent pieces of evidence into a coherent picture of its superconducting phase diagram. Y. Koike, N. Watanabe, T. Noji, et al., Effects of the cu- site substitution on the anomalous x dependence of Tc in La2−xBaxCuO4, Solid State Commun. 78, 511 (1991). G. Grissonnanche, O. Cyr-Choini`ere, F. Lalibert ́e, et al., Direct measurement of the upper critical field in cuprate superconductors, Nat. Commun. 5, 1 (2014). H. Q. Yuan, F. M. Grosche, M. Deppe, et al., Observa- tion of two distinct superconducting phases in CeCu2Si2, Science 302, 2104 (2003). F. M. Grosche, P. Agarwal, S. R. Julian, et al., Anoma- lous low temperature states in CeNi2Ge2 and CePd2Si2, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 12, L533 (2000). J. Zhang, F.-L. Liu, T.-P. Ying, et al., Observation of two superconducting domes under pressure in tetragonal FeS, npj Quantum Mater. 2, 1 (2017). Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Zhou, et al., Pressure-induced reemergence of superconductivity in the topological kagome metal CsV3Sb5, Phys. Rev. B 103, 224513 T. Das and C. Panagopoulos, Two types of supercon- ducting domes in unconventional superconductors, New J. Phys. 18, 103033 (2016). Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, et al., Correlated insulator behaviour at half-filling in magic-angle graphene super- lattices, Nature 556, 80 (2018). Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, et al., Unconventional super- conductivity in magic-angle graphene superlattices, Na- ture 556, 43 (2018). M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, et al., Tuning su- perconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, Science 363, J. M. Park, Y. Cao, K. Watanabe, et al., Tun- able strongly coupled superconductivity in magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene, Nature 590, 249 (2021). Z. Hao, A. M. Zimmerman, P. Ledwith, et al., Elec- tric field–tunable superconductivity in alternating-twist magic-angle trilayer graphene, Science 371, 1133 (2021). Y. Zhang, R. Polski, C. Lewandowski, et al., Promotion of superconductivity in magic-angle graphene multilay- ers, Science 377, 1538 (2022). 10 J. M. Park, Y. Cao, L.-Q. Xia, et al., Robust supercon- ductivity in magic-angle multilayer graphene family, Nat. Mater. 21, 877 (2022). A. L. Sharpe, E. J. Fox, A. W. Barnard, et al., Emergent ferromagnetism near three-quarters filling in twisted bi- layer graphene, Science 365, 605 (2019). M. Serlin, C. L. Tschirhart, H. Polshyn, et al., Intrinsic quantized anomalous Hall effect in a moir ́e heterostruc- ture, Science 367, 900 (2020). J.-X. Lin, Y.-H. Zhang, E. Morissette, et al., Spin- orbit–driven ferromagnetism at half moir ́e filling in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Science 375, 437 K. P. Nuckolls, M. Oh, D. Wong, et al., Strongly cor- related Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 588, 610 (2020). I. Das, X. Lu, J. Herzog-Arbeitman, et al., Symmetry- broken Chern insulators and Rashba-like Landau-level crossings in magic-angle bilayer graphene, Nat. Phys. 17, Y. Saito, J. Ge, L. Rademaker, et al., Hofstadter subband ferromagnetism and symmetry-broken Chern insulators in twisted bilayer graphene, Nat. Phys. 17, 478 (2021). S. Wu, Z. Zhang, K. Watanabe, et al., Chern insula- tors, van Hove singularities and topological flat bands in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nat. Mater. 20, J. M. Park, Y. Cao, K. Watanabe, et al., Flavour Hund’s coupling, Chern gaps and charge diffusivity in moir ́e graphene, Nature 592, 43 (2021). Y. Choi, H. Kim, Y. Peng, et al., Correlation-driven topo- logical phases in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 589, 536 (2021). A. T. Pierce, Y. Xie, J. M. Park, et al., Unconventional sequence of correlated Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nat. Phys. 17, 1210 (2021). Y. Xie, A. T. Pierce, J. M. Park, et al., Fractional Chern insulators in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Na- ture 600, 439 (2021). Y. Cao, D. Rodan-Legrain, J. M. Park, et al., Nematic- ity and competing orders in superconducting magic-angle graphene, Science 372, 264 (2021). Y. Cao, J. M. Park, K. Watanabe, et al., Pauli- limit violation and re-entrant superconductivity in moir ́e graphene, Nature 595, 526 (2021). H. Kim, Y. Choi, C. Lewandowski, et al., Evidence for unconventional superconductivity in twisted trilayer graphene, Nature 606, 494 (2022). M. Oh, K. P. Nuckolls, D. Wong, et al., Evidence for unconventional superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 600, 240 (2021). E. Khalaf, A. J. Kruchkov, G. Tarnopolsky, et al., Magic angle hierarchy in twisted graphene multilayers, Phys. Rev. B 100, 085109 (2019). C. Shen, P. J. Ledwith, K. Watanabe, et al., Dirac spec- troscopy of strongly correlated phases in twisted trilayer graphene, Nat. Mater. 22, 316 (2023). P. Stepanov, I. Das, X. Lu, et al., Untying the insulat- ing and superconducting orders in magic-angle graphene, Nature 583, 375 (2020). Y. Saito, J. Ge, K. Watanabe, et al., Independent super- conductors and correlated insulators in twisted bilayer graphene, Nat. Phys. 16, 926 (2020). M. Tinkham, Introduction to superconductivity (Courier Corporation, 2004). M. Tinkham, J. U. Free, C. N. Lau, et al., Hysteretic I − V curves of superconducting nanowires, Phys. Rev. A. Vl. Gurevich and R. G. Mints, Self-heating in normal metals and superconductors, Rev. Mod. Phys. 59, 941 H. Courtois, M. Meschke, J. T. Peltonen, et al., Origin of Hysteresis in a Proximity Josephson Junction, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 067002 (2008). Z. Wang, Y. H. Kwan, G. Wagner, et al., Kekul ́e spirals and charge transfer cascades in twisted symmetric tri- layer graphene (2023), arXiv:2310.16094 [cond-mat.str- el]. Y. H. Kwan, G. Wagner, T. Soejima, et al., Kekul ́e spi- ral order at all nonzero integer fillings in twisted bilayer graphene, Phys. Rev. X 11, 041063 (2021). K. P. Nuckolls, R. L. Lee, M. Oh, et al., Quantum tex- tures of the many-body wavefunctions in magic-angle graphene, Nature 620, 525 (2023). H. Kim, Y. Choi, ́E. Lantagne-Hurtubise, et al., Imaging inter-valley coherent order in magic-angle twisted trilayer graphene, Nature 623, 942 (2023). R. Bistritzer and A. H. MacDonald, Moir ́e bands in twisted double-layer graphene, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 108, 12233 (2011). A. Kerelsky, L. J. McGilly, D. M. Kennes, et al., Maxi- mized electron interactions at the magic angle in twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 572, 95 (2019). D. Wong, K. P. Nuckolls, M. Oh, et al., Cascade of electronic transitions in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 582, 198 (2020). Y. Choi, J. Kemmer, Y. Peng, et al., Electronic correla- tions in twisted bilayer graphene near the magic angle, Nat. Phys. 15, 1174 (2019). Y. Xie, B. Lian, B. J ̈ack, et al., Spectroscopic signatures of many-body correlations in magic-angle twisted bilayer graphene, Nature 572, 101 (2019). D. E. Parker, T. Soejima, J. Hauschild, et al., Strain- induced quantum phase transitions in magic-angle graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, 027601 (2021). G. Wagner, Y. H. Kwan, N. Bultinck, et al., Global phase diagram of the normal state of twisted bilayer graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128, 156401 (2022). P. Anderson, Theory of dirty superconductors, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 11, 26 (1959). METHODS A. Sample fabrication and measurements The stacks are made by using the dry-transfer tech- nique. First, graphene and hBN are exfoliated on SiO2/Si substrates, and monolayer graphene and proper hBN (10 - 50 nm) are identified under an optical microscope. The big monolayer graphene is precut by an AFM tip into three pieces instead of being cut by hBN to reduce strain during stacking. We used homemade poly(bisphenol A carbonate)/polydimethylsiloxane (PC/PDMS) to pick up all the flakes sequentially. First, top graphite is picked up around 100 ◦C, and then top hBN is picked up around 11 70 ◦C. We used the combined structure PDMS/PC/top graphite/top hBN to pick up the first layer of graphene at 50 ◦C; afterward, the micro-stage which holds the ma- terials chip is rotated by 1.6 - 1.65◦. Then, the second graphene piece is picked up. Subsequently, the micro- stage is rotated back to its original place, and the third graphene is picked up. Then, bottom hBN and narrow bottom graphite are picked up. The final stack is dropped down on the chip with aligned markers. The Hall bar ge- ometry is defined by using electron-beam lithography and reactive ion etching. 5nm/60nm Cr/Au is evaporated to connect the graphene to form one-dimensional contacts. The electronic transport measurements are performed in a dilution fridge with a base temperature of 100 mK. The temperature dependence measurement is done in a He-3 fridge. Resistance measurements are conducted us- ing a standard lock-in technique employing a 10 nA AC current excitation at a frequency of 17 Hz. Two Yoko- gawa GS200 are used to apply top and bottom gate volt- age to tune carrier density and displacement field. Volt- age signals are taken before being amplified 100 times. B. Hall density and estimation of twist angle The Hall density in FIG. 1d is extracted from the Hall resistance Rxy. In order to reduce the effect of The Hall density can be extracted through the relation Rxy = B/(en). The twist angle is linked to full moir ́e carrier density by Nf = 8θ2/ √ 3a2, where a = 0.246 nm is the lattice constant of graphene. The carrier density in the device is determined by n = (CtgVtg + CbgVbg)/e. According to FIG. 1d, near ν = 0, the Hall density equals the carrier density, so the absolute capacitance between the bottom gate and MATTG can be extracted. The bot- tom gate voltage Vbg(full) corresponding to the full filling of the flat band can be obtained from FIG. 1b. Full car- rier density is then expressed as Nf = CbgVbg(full)/e. The twist angle of the device is 1.54◦ which is the magic angle of twisted trilayer graphene. C. Extraction of Tc and coherence length ξGL The critical temperature is defined as the temperature when the resistance Rxx(T) equals to xRxx(Normal), x is the percentage of normal resistance Rxx(Normal). Rxx(Normal) is extracted by linearly fitting the high- temperature part of Rxx(T) by Rxx(Normal) = AT +B. (The normal resistance of the left superconducting dome is not so linearly dependent on temperature, but we still use the same method to define the normal state resis- tance). The Ginzburg–Landau coherence length is ex- tracted through the dependence of Tc on magnetic field B: Tc/Tc0 = 1 − (2πξGL/Φ0)B. Tc0 is critical temper- ature when magnetic field is zero and Φ0 = h/2e is su- perconducting quantum flux. The Ginzburg–Landau co- herence length ξGL is then extracted from a linear fit of Tc versus B. FIG. S4 shows ξGL as a function of moir ́e filling by using x=10% to define Tc (the corresponding error bars are evaluated by using Tc defined by 6% and 14% of normal state resistance). D. In-plane magnetic field dependence The in-plane field dependence measurement is per- formed in an 8T-2T-2T triple-axis magnet. As the sample plane is not strictly perpendicular to the z- direction, an out-of-plane magnetic field exists when the in-plane magnetic field Bx and By are applied, and two- dimensional superconductivity is very sensitive to the out-of-plane magnetic field. So Bz is needed to compen- sate for the out-of-plane magnetic field. The calibration of the magnetic field is done in the following way: a set of (Bxi, Byi) is applied to the device, and then we tune the carrier density near the boundary of the superconduct- ing dome and measure Vxx as a function of Bz. When Vxx is smallest, the corresponding Bzi is our needed com- pensating magnetic field. A set of (Bxi, Byi, Bzi) can be linearly fitted and we can express Bz as Bz = αBx +βBy where α and β are fitting parameters. E. Hartree-Fock studies The non-interacting band structure can be captured using a three-layer generalization of the celebrated Bistritzer-MacDonald continuum model . The gate screened Coulomb interaction is incorporated via a self- consistent Hartree-Fock mean-field approach (for further details see Ref. ). We fix the gate distance d = 25 nm, dielectric constant εr = 20, and twist angle θ = 1.56◦. In addition, we include uniaxial heterostrain of strength ε = 0.15%. This is consistent with typical values detected in many moir ́e graphene samples using scanning tunnel- ing microscopy (STM) [43–46]. In addition, two features of our transport data strongly suggest that our sample has strain: The absence of strong insulating behaviour at charge neutrality as well as the two-fold Landau fan degeneracy at filling ν = −2 , which is not re- produced in realistic theoretical models of the flat bands unless strain is included. Our Hartree-Fock calculations are performed on a 10 × 10 momentum mesh, and are Hartree-Fock-interpolated to a 50×50 mesh to construct the Fermi surfaces. F. Modified time-reversal symmetry In region C of FIG. 5 (main figure), including ν = −2, the Hartree-Fock (HF) ground state consists of one copy of the (doped) IKS state in each of the two spin sec- tors (assuming a collinear spin configuration) and as such preserves a modified time-reversal symmetry ̃T = 12 exp(i∆φIVCszτz)T , where sz and τz act on spin and val- ley degrees of freedom respectively, ∆φIVC is the dif- ference in IVC angles of the two spin sectors and T is the usual time-reversal operator acting on both spin and orbital degrees of freedom. More generally, the HF ground state is given by S |ψ⟩colinear where S is some valley-specific spin rotation, and the HF ground state is symmetric under Sexp(i∆φIVCszτz)T S−1. This modi- fied time-reversal symmetry ̃T leads to a generalized An- derson theorem for superconductivity , implying ro- bustness of the gap to disorder which preserves ̃T . Moir ́e scale disorder would preserve ̃T , however graphene scale disorder can break ̃T since it couples directly to the val- ley U(1) degree of freedom (clearly, neither form of dis- order breaks the standard time-reversal symmetry T ). Therefore, we expect the superconductor in region C to be robust against moir ́e scale disorder. This is contrast to the superconductor in region B, and hence provides an appealing explanation for the differening robustness of the right and left domes. For completeness we note that our numerical simu- lations do find that in small portions of Region C, ̃T - breaking states with finite polarization can be closely competing with IKS states; however only the IKS order is robust across most of region C. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Erez Berg, Cyprian Lewandowski, Mohit Randeria, Nandini Trivedi, Jason Alicia, Oskar Vafek, and Cheng Shen for important discussions. P.K. thanks Artem Kononov for help with the cryostat. Z.Z., J.J. ac- knowledges funding from SNSF. M.B. acknowledges the support of SNSF Eccellenza grant No. PCEGP2 194528, and support from the QuantERA II Programme that has received funding from the European Union’s Hori- zon 2020 research and innovation program under Grant Agreement No 101017733. P.K. and C.S. acknowledge support from the European Research Council (ERC) un- der the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and in- novation program: grant agreement No 787414, ERC- Adv TopSupra. K.W. and T.T. acknowledge support from the JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Numbers 20H00354 and 23H02052) and World Premier International Re- search Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan. G.W. ac- knowledges funding from the University of Zurich post- doc grant FK-23-134. Z.W. acknowledges funding from Leverhulme Trust International Professorship grant (number LIP-202-014). For the purpose of Open Access, the authors have applied a CC-BY public copyright li- cense to any Author Accepted Manuscript version aris- ing from this submission. S.H.S. acknowledges support from EPSRC grant EP/X030881/1. S.A.P. acknowledges support from the European Research Council under the European Union Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme via Grant Agreement No. 804213-TMCS, and from a Gutzwiller Fellowship at the Max Planck In- stitute for the Physics of Complex Systems, Dresden. Author contributions Z.Z. and M.B. conceived the project. J.J. fabricated the devices with Z.Z.’s help. Z.Z. has performed all the measurements and analyzed the data and M.B. su- pervised the project. P.K. and C.S. provided the 100 mK measurement cryostat with vector magnet. K.W. and T.T. provided the hBN crystals. Z.W. performed the numerical Hartree-Fock simulations. Z.W., G.W., S.A.P., and S.H.S. performed the theoretical analysis. Z.Z., Z.W., G.W., S.H.S., S.A.P. and M.B. wrote the manuscript with input from all authors. Data availability The data supporting the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. 13 SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS I. LANDAU FANS IN THE PRESENCE OF FLAT BANDS AND DIRAC BANDS The Landau fans emerging from ν = −2 in FIG 4c deviate from a linear slope. In this section we argue that this can be a consequence of charge transfer between the Dirac and flat band sectors. For Dirac fermions with a Fermi velocity vF , the Landau levels in magnetic field B have the form EDirac N = ±vF � 2|N|B, (1) while for the flat band sector the Landau levels (LLs) are located at energies Eflat N = B m∗ (N + 1 2). (2) We now assume the Dirac band LLs to be closely spaced compared to the flat band LLs. The density at which Ng flat band LLs are filled (g is the degeneracy of the flat band) is n = nflat + nDirac = Ng Nφ A + nDirac(μ), (3) where Nφ = BA/φ0 is the number of flux quanta (A is the area of the sample and φ0 is the flux quantum). We have nDirac(μ) = μ2 πvF and μ = Eflat N such that n = Ng φ0 B + (N + 1/2)2 πvF m∗2 B2, (4) yielding a deviation from a linear slope for the Landau fans. Similarly, for the case where the flat band LLs are closely spaced compared to the Dirac band LLs, one also obtains a deviation from the linear Landau fans. II. SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES 14 ν = −2 shows that the Landau levels stemming from ν = −2 have a sequence of −2, −4, −6 with a twofold degeneracy. This is due to the lifting of the degeneracy of the Fermi surface by the interaction-driven symmetry breaking. The main Landau levels originating from ν = 0 have a four fold degeneracy without any symmetry breaking. of the right dome (red curves) obeys a linear temperature dependence, while that of the left dome (blue curves) deviates from linear temperature dependence. ν∗ (green curve) marks the transition between the two domes. 15 system is in the superconducting state with zero Hall resistance. When the magnetic field is high, the system transitions to a state with a linear-in-B Hall resistance. c with errorbars defined by using T 6% c and T 14% c . The red line shows the inter-particle distance defined as dparticle = 1/ √ n∗ versus ν. For all the density regimes, ξGL/dparticle is between 1 and 10, which implies strong coupling superconductivity in MATTG. a magnetic field. a, ∆Vxx when sweeping Idc forwards and backwards in the left dome. It is clear that there is no I − V hysteresis in the left dome as ∆Vxx is close to zero. b, ∆Vxx versus B and Idc at ν = −2.26. The hysteresis disappears as the magnetic field increases. 16 (c, in region II) and corresponding Landau fan (bottom panel). Both a and b are in region I, Dirac Landau levels are visible and only one superconducting dome exists with sharpely decreasing critical current for ν < −2.5. c is in region II and shows double-dome superconductivity. In-plane magnetic field dependence measurements. a,b,c, dVxx/dI versus the direction of the in plane B∥. The superconductivity shows no nematicity. 17 electron side. Critical current is in the range of 100 nA, and superconductivity is suppressed near ν = 2.4. b, dVxx/dI as a function of ν and B. Superconductivity is weak, with a maximum critical magnetic field of around 50 mT. A suppression of superconductivity is visible near ν = 2.4. c, dVxx/dI versus Idc and B shows a clear ‘diamond’ feature. The offset of the center of the magnetic field is due to the residual magnetic field in the magnet. as a function of bottom gate voltage Vbg which is already converted into moir ́e filling ν. Superconductivity is observed both on the hole side and the electron side. b, dVxx/dI versus Idc and ν on the hole side. Superconductivity is weakened around ν = −2.6 and shows a double-dome behavior. c, Magnetic field dependence of Rxx also shows double-dome superconductivity.