1 Interplay between electronic dephasing and localization in finite-sized Chern insulator Yunhe Bai1,10†, Yuanzhao Li1,2†, Jianli Luan1,2†, Yang Chen1, Zongwei Gao2, Wenyu Song1, Yitian Tong1, Jinsong Zhang1,3,4, Yayu Wang1,3,4, Junjie Qi2, Chui-Zhen Chen5,6, Hua Jiang7, X. C. Xie4,7,8, Ke He1,2,3,4*, Yang Feng2*, Xiao Feng1,2,3,4*, and Qi-Kun Xue1,2,3,4,9 1State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China; 2Beijing Academy of Quantum Information Sciences, Beijing 100193, China; 3Frontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing 100084, China; 4Hefei National Laboratory, Hefei 230088, China; 5School of Physical Science and Technology, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China; 6Institute for Advanced Study, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, China; 7Institute for Nanoelectronic Devices and Quantum Computing, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China; 8International Center for Quantum Materials, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; 9Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China; 10Present address: Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. †These authors contributed equally to this work. *Corresponding author. E-mail: kehe@tsinghua.edu.cn (K. H.); fengyang@baqis.ac.cn (Y. F.); xiaofeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn (X. F.) Abstract Anderson localization is anticipated to play a pivotal role in the manifestation of the quantum anomalous Hall effect, akin to its role in conventional quantum Hall effects. The significance of Anderson localization is particularly pronounced in elucidating the reasons behind the fragility of the observed quantum anomalous Hall state in the intrinsic magnetic topological insulator MnBi2Te4 with a large predicted magnetic gap. Here, employing varying sized MnBi2Te4 micro/nano-structures fabricated from a single molecular-beam-epitaxy-grown thin film, we have carried out a systematic size- and temperature-dependent study on the transport properties of the films regarding the quantum anomalous Hall states. The low-temperature transport properties of the finite- sized MnBi2Te4 samples can be quantitatively understood through Anderson 2 localization, which plays an indispensable role in stabilizing the ground states. At higher temperatures, the failure of electron localization induced by an excessively short electronic dephasing length is identified as the cause of deviation from quantization. The work reveals that electronic dephasing and localization are non-negligible factors in designing high-temperature quantum anomalous Hall systems. Main The quantum Hall (QH) effect and Anderson localization have a close relationship1. Anderson localization is crucial for the robust quantized plateaus of Hall resistivity characterizing the QH effect. On the other hand, QH systems provide a good platform to quantitatively study Anderson localization in the two-dimensional (2D) case. The conductivity of a 2D electron system subject to inevitable disorder, according to Anderson localization2,3, decreases exponentially with the sample size LS: σxx ~ exp(- LS/ξ) where ξ is the localization length. Since Anderson localization results from the interference of electrons, the electronic dephasing length lφ, which characterizes the length scale of quantum-interference phenomena, acts as the effective sample size when it is smaller than LS (ref. 4). The critical behaviors related to Anderson localization have been investigated in QH systems through temperature-dependent transport properties around the quantum phase transitions (QPTs) between QH plateaus5, in which temperature is used to tune lφ relative to ξ and LS. Nevertheless, there were very few experiments directly studying Anderson localization at quantized plateaus (far from QPTs), because ξ in plateau states is too small (several tens of nanometers, on the order of the magnetic length6) for lφ or achievable LS. Such studies, which can directly unveil the influences of Anderson localization on the quantized transport properties of chiral edge states, are highly anticipated for understanding a special QH effect—the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect. The QAH effect is a variant of QH effect contributed by magnetization-induced topologically non-trivial bands instead of Landau levels7. The effect provides a road towards widespread electronic applications of dissipationless QH edge states, which is, 3 however, obstructed by the rather low temperature needed to achieve it (below 1 K in most cases)8–12. The recently discovered intrinsic magnetic topological insulator (TI) MnBi2Te4 has a magnetically induced surface state gap up to ~50 meV according to first-principles calculations13–15, in principle capable of supporting the QAH effect at a rather high temperature. But the QAH state experimentally achieved in MnBi2Te4 is much more fragile than theoretically expected9,16–23. Since Anderson localization plays a key role in the robustness of usual QH effects, its role in the QAH effect and its occurring temperature should also be thoroughly considered. The QAH phase (or Chern insulator phase) is expected in MnBi2Te4 thin films both in the antiferromagnetic (AFM) ground state without magnetic field (only in odd-layer films) and in the ferromagnetic (FM) configuration under high magnetic field (regardless of film thickness)13–15. Although in both cases, the QAH phase has been achieved, the former one is more difficult, reported by only two groups so far9,24. In most MnBi2Te4 samples, normal insulator behaviors are observed around zero magnetic field in both odd- and even-layer samples9,17,19–22. The QPT from a normal insulator to the QAH phase occurs with an increasing magnetic field, allowing us to investigate the critical behaviors. Besides, as shown below, ξ in MnBi2Te4 is around 1 μm in the QAH phase, much longer than that in usual QH systems, which makes possible a size-dependent study with standard fabrication techniques. In this work, we systematically investigated finite-sized MnBi2Te4 thin films within the quantized regime with both the size- and temperature- dependent transport measurements, both near and far from QPT, which presents a comprehensive picture on the intricate relationship between Anderson localization and QAH state. A considerable challenge for the study is the rather low repeatability of MnBi2Te4 samples with quantized transport properties (even those only quantized at high magnetic field). In this situation, the only feasible way for a size-dependent investigation is by measuring a series of devices with different sizes fabricated from one homogeneously quantized MnBi2Te4 epitaxial film (thin flake samples are too small for the task). Homogeneous MnBi2Te4 epitaxial films exhibiting quantized anomalous 4 Hall resistivity in the FM configuration have been achieved in our previous work23. For the present study, we developed a set of fabrication procedures based on electron-beam lithography (EBL) that enables us to make structures down to several hundred nanometers from MnBi2Te4 epitaxial thin films without destroying their quantized transport properties (see Methods for the details of sample preparation). Figure 1a shows an optical image of the samples studied in this work: including eight Hall bar devices (two of them failed) with the widths (W) ranging from 0.3 μm to 30 μm, each with an individual top gate, fabricated on a 5-SL MnBi2Te4 film. The cyan box in Fig. 1a indicates one of the devices, and the zoom-in image of its Hall bar region is shown in Fig. 1b. The aspect ratio is 1 for devices with W ≥ 5 μm and 2 for those with W < 5 μm (see Methods for more details). Hereinafter, W and length (L), as defined in Fig. 1b, are used to represent device dimensions. resistivity (ρyx) and the longitudinal resistivity (ρxx) of the largest device (W = 30 μm), respectively. The gate voltage (Vg) is tuned to the charge-neutral point (CNP). At high magnetic field, say 9 T (FM configuration), ρyx is perfectly quantized, and ρxx drops to ~0.002 h/e2 at 20 mK (h is the Planck constant, and e is the elementary charge), clearly indicating a QAH state (Chern number C = -1). It is the first time that full quantization of ρyx with vanishing ρxx has been achieved in MnBi2Te4 epitaxial thin films (under high magnetic field). The device maintains nearly full quantization up to the temperature T = 0.7 K. Around zero magnetic field (AFM configuration), ρxx increases abruptly with decreasing temperature, up to ~10 h/e2 at T = 20 mK, and ρyx shows a hysteresis loop with the zero-field value far below h/e2. The ρyx–μ0H curves become noisier at lower temperatures, mainly due to large device resistance. With increasing magnetic field, ρxx–μ0H curves at different temperatures cross at one point (Hcr in Fig. 1d), suggesting a QPT occurring here. These observations, together with the flow diagram to be discussed later (Fig. 3i), suggest that the film around zero magnetic field is a normal insulator (C = 0)25. To assess the homogeneity of the film, we present the magnetic ordering 5 temperature (TN), coercive field (Hc), and Hcr of the successful devices of different sizes in Fig. 1e, extracted from Fig. 2 (Hcr of W = 0.3 μm device is excluded due to too noisy ρxx). All these quantities exhibit minimal variation across different devices. Figure 1f shows the 1/T-dependent longitudinal conductivity (σxx) of the devices (except for the W = 0.3 μm one because of significant noise during T variations) at -9 T. The linear relation observed in all the curves at high-temperature region demonstrates a typical thermal activation behavior, with the slope determined by the activation gap Δ. All the curves have a similar slope, and the fitted Δ of the devices (inset of Fig. 1f) are all around 2 K. The low-temperature part of the curves in Fig. 1f is size-dependent and will be discussed below and in Fig. S2. Obviously, the magnetic and electronic properties of the different devices on the chip are uniform enough for a size-dependent study. The magnetic field-dependent ρyx and ρxx (Vg is set at CNP) at different temperatures (from 0.02 K to 3 K) are shown in Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively. The Vg-dependent ρyx (blue) and ρxx (red) at T = 0.02 K and μ0H = -9 T are depicted in Fig. 2c. All the devices exhibit similar behaviors to the W = 30 μm device, indicating the QAH phase at high field and the normal insulator phase at low field. In the Vg-dependent curves in Fig. 2c, ρyx manifests a perfectly quantized plateau (blue curves) in all the devices except for the smallest one (W = 0.3 μm). Even in this device, the ρyx maximum only decreases to ~0.95 h/e2. On the other hand, ρxx obviously deviates from zero in the W = 10 μm device and increases gradually with decreasing W. A straightforward explanation for the deviation from quantization with reduced W could be the direct tunneling between the chiral edge states of opposite edges. However, this scenario implies that the width of the chiral edge states is several microns, too large compared with that reported in magnetically doped TIs26,27. Moreover, the tunneling between two chiral edge states is expected to increase exponentially with decreasing W (ref. 7). Yet, even though ρxx becomes non-vanishing from W = 10 μm, the deviation from quantization is not significant in the W = 0.3 μm device (ρyx ~ 0.95 h/e2; ρxx ~ 0.1 h/e2), which means that chiral edge states still dominate the transport properties. Clearly, 6 our observations cannot be simply interpreted by the direct scattering between the chiral edge states7. To understand the observation, we summarize ρyx and ρxx as functions of W at different temperatures with μ0H = -9 T (0 T) in Figs. 3a (3d) and 3b (3e), respectively. In Fig. 3a (ρyx (-9 T)), at the lowest temperature (blue), ρyx remains quantized in all devices except for the W = 0.3 μm one; at higher temperatures, ρyx–W curves show a maximum at W = 2 μm, which will be discussed later. In Fig. 3d (ρyx (0 T)), only the W dependences of ρyx at 2 K and 3 K are displayed, because the data measured at lower temperatures are too noisy to be read (see Fig. 2a). In Fig. 3b (ρxx (-9 T)), at the lowest temperature (blue), ρxx decreases with increasing W. Higher temperatures not only enhance ρxx but also change its W dependence. At 3 K (red), ρxx exhibits an increasing trend with increasing W. In Fig. 3e (ρxx (0 T)), at the lowest temperature (blue), ρxx largely increases with increasing W. With increasing temperature, ρxx decreases in all devices but more significantly in larger ones. As a result, at 3 K (red), ρxx only slightly grows with W. A similar trend shared by the W dependences of ρxx at high field (Fig. 3b) and zero field (Fig. 3e) is that in larger devices ρxx exhibits stronger temperature dependences (it can be directly observed in Fig. 2b). The evident correlation between the temperature and size dependences of ρxx is a signature of Anderson localization. The electron dephasing length lφ increases with decreasing T according to the relation lφ T-p/2 where p is the inelastic-scattering-length exponent1,4, and meanwhile, localization length ξ is insensitive to T. Therefore, at sufficiently low T, lφ can exceed the actual device size LS, and the sample conductivity σxx will decrease with increasing LS due to Anderson localization. Schematics illustrating the scenarios for small and large devices at specific low T are depicted in Figs. 3g and 3h, respectively. At higher temperatures such that lφ becomes smaller than the actual device size, the sample conductivity will be insensitive to LS but sensitive to lφ and T. data, at different temperatures with μ0H = -9 T and 0 T, respectively. At the lowest 7 temperature (blue), σxx decreases with increasing W, at both high and zero magnetic fields, qualitatively consistent with Anderson localization. The electron localization drives the film towards the insulating ground states, either normal (C = 0) or Chern insulator (C = -1). In Fig. 3i, the (σxy, σxx) data of different device sizes (represented by different colors) and different magnetic fields are plotted (flow diagram). The data points at 0 T and -6 T are denoted by hollow triangles, while others are depicted with solid lines (the data of -6 T instead of -9 T are shown because the latter ones are all around the stable point). With increasing device size, the (σxy, σxx) data points at 0 T and -6 T flow towards the stable fixed points (0, 0) and (e2/h, 0), respectively. This observation is well-consistent with the finite-size scaling behavior in QH/QAH systems due to Anderson localization, a phenomenon well-established in theory1,28 but scarcely demonstrated directly in experiments in usual QH systems. To confirm the role of Anderson localization quantitatively, we try to extract ξ and lφ values from the experiment. Figure 4a shows the current-dependent ρxx (-9 T) for each device at 20 mK, obtained using a tunable dc bias current I in parallel with a small ac excitation current of 1 nA. When I exceeds a critical value Ic, ρxx significantly increases, due to the breakdown of the QAH phase. Within the variable-range hopping regime, in- gap states are accelerated by a transverse electric field (Ey) within a typical length ξ (ref. 6,29,30), and the effective electron temperature (Teff) is elevated due to dissipation of the work done by the electric field force: kBTeff ~ eEy·ξ/2 = eρyxI/W·ξ/2. ξ values are estimated by fitting the relation (Fig. 4b), and the fitted ξ ranges from 0.4 to 1.2 μm in different devices (inset of Fig. 4c). The renormalized localization length ξ/W decreases with increasing W (Fig. 4c), quantitatively consistent with the numerical calculation results in 2D systems in Anderson localization31,32. The electronic dephasing length lφ can be obtained by analyzing the critical behaviors near the QPT between the C = 0 state at zero magnetic field and the C = -1 state at high magnetic field1,33. According to the finite-size scaling theory1,33, the maximum slope |∂σxy/∂μ0H| (inset of Fig. 4d) around Hcr is proportional to T-κ, where κ is the temperature scaling exponent. As the double-logarithmic plot of ∂σxy/∂μ0H with 8 T shown in Fig. 4d, the data of different devices coincide on a single line above approximately 1 K with the slope κ ~ 0.49 ± 0.02 and gradually saturate at different values at low temperatures. The behavior can be experimentally expressed as34: ∂σxy/∂μ0H ~ (Tp + l02/L·W)-1/2ν, (1) where l0 is a prefactor linked to lφ, and ν = p/2κ is the localization-length exponent. The first and second terms in the parentheses represent the scattering rates from inelastic processes and sample boundaries, respectively34. At sufficiently low temperature, inelastic scattering (the first term) is suppressed, and we can estimate the critical exponent ν ~ 2.56 ± 0.05 by fitting the data with the second term, as shown in Fig. 4e. p ~ 2.49 ± 0.14 is obtained from the relation between critical exponents, and the fitting curves well capture the features as shown in Fig. 4d. The experimentally extracted critical exponent ν is close to the value expected for a phase transition in the universality class of QH/QAH effect5,33 and previous experiments35–37, supporting the validity of the above analyses. The temperatures at which the slope drops to the saturated values (Ts) are obtained by the intersection of the two straight asymptotes fitted to the two parts of the curves in Fig. 4d. Since Ts corresponds to the temperature at which lφ roughly equals W, lφ at different temperatures are obtained, as shown in Fig. 4f. The estimated lφ at 2 K in our study is of the same magnitude as those obtained in Bi2Se3- family TIs through weak anti-localization, typically around hundreds of nanometers38,39. The estimated ξ and lφ values provide quantitative evidences for the contribution of Anderson localization to the size dependence of σxx (-9 T) at 20 mK. At this temperature, ξ is about 1 μm, and lφ exceeds several tens of μm (see Figs. 4c and 4f). According to Anderson localization, σxx is expected to show an obvious decrease as the device size increases from ξ to several times ξ, just as the observation. The σxx (-9 T)– W data at 20 mK can be well-fitted with the relation σxx cosh-2(W/ξ) obtained by the scattering matrix theory (the pink dashed line in Fig. 3c) with ξ = 1 μm (ref. 40), which can be translated to an exponential decay in the context of large device sizes, as indicated by Anderson localization (Fig. 3h). Meanwhile, the presence of in-gap states contributes to enhanced scattering between edge states at opposite edges in small device 9 sizes comparable to ξ, facilitated by resonant tunneling (Fig. 3g)41. As lφ decreases with increasing temperature down to below the device size, σxx should become insensitive to W. From Fig. 3c, the size dependence of σxx indeed becomes less significant as T increases up to 0.7 K. However, at higher temperatures, an obvious increase in σxx with increasing device size is distinguished. This observation cannot be understood solely with Anderson localization. We notice that above 1 K, lφ is reduced below ξ (see Figs. 4c and 4f), which means that bulk electrons cannot be localized but contribute to conductivity. According to classical Ohm’s law, conductivity should be invariant with device size, in contrast to the current observation. The solution to this puzzle may lie in the fact that in the smallest device (W = 0.3 μm), lφ is close to the device size, and electrons basically maintain phase coherence throughout the entire device. In larger devices, the device size (especially L) relative to lφ increases, and consequently, electrons in chiral edge states experience more phase-broken inelastic scatterings into dissipative bulk bands42, which enhances σxx. Actually, only considering the σxx of bulk electrons may also increase with the sample size when it is near lφ due to phase-broken scatterings in certain situations43. This understanding can also explain the ρyx (-9 T)–W curves in Fig. 3a where ρyx at W = 2 μm decreases more slowly with increasing temperatures than larger and smaller devices. In smaller devices, the more rapid decrease of ρyx with increasing temperature can be attributed to enhanced scattering between two chiral edge states by elevated temperatures41. Meanwhile in larger devices, the more rapid ρyx drop can be attributed to the enhanced σxx due to electronic dephasing. At last, we attempt to understand the data at zero magnetic field. At 20 mK, σxx (0 T) also decreases with increasing device size, but more slowly compared to that at high field and saturates at 0.1 e2/h when W exceeds 10 μm. Such behavior cannot be well- fitted by the theoretical relation of Anderson localization. The observation suggests that ξ is larger at zero magnetic field, and there might exist conducting channels that cannot be localized. At higher temperatures, W dependences of σxx (0 T) are analogous to that at 20 mK (except for a slight increase in σxx in the W = 30 μm device), which implies 10 that the system is little influenced by electron dephasing. So, the observed temperature- and size-dependent transport properties of MnBi2Te4 epitaxial films, especially in the QAH regime under high magnetic field, can be well understood through the interplay of electron localization and dephasing. The large localization length (~1 μm) allows us to vary lφ and the device size from below to above it, giving a relatively complete picture of the relationship between Anderson localization, electronic dephasing, and the QAH effect. Interestingly, in scanning microwave impedance microscopy (SMIM) studies of MnBi2Te4, the observed edge states also have a width of ~1 μm (ref. 22), in the same order of magnitude as the scale width of QAH edge states44. It is likely that SMIM detects signals not only from the chiral edge states but also from the bulk states within the localization length from the chiral edge states. The exact mechanism for this requires further investigation. On the other hand, our results also demonstrate that electronic dephasing can be a serious obstacle to achieving a high-temperature QAH effect, a factor that has rarely been discussed before. Even for a QAH system with a large magnetic gap and a high magnetic ordering temperature, it cannot exhibit the QAH effect at a temperature at which lφ is shorter than ξ. Conventional QH systems rarely encounter the problem since ξ is typically only around several tens of nanometers, which is usually much smaller than lφ. In our epitaxial MnBi2Te4 films, ξ is similar to that in Cr-doped (Bi,Sb)2Te3. It is understandable that the temperature to observe the QAH effect in the former does not significantly exceed that in the latter. We still cannot figure out what leads to the large ξ in magnetic TIs. A recent magnetic force microscopy (MFM) study on our epitaxial MnBi2Te4 films unveils μm-scaled inhomogeneity of magnetic force signals45, which may have some relationship with the μm-scaled ξ. Charge puddles induced by impurities and disorder may also enhance ξ. The present size-dependent study not only unveils the important roles of electronic localization and dephasing in the QAH effect, which may inspire new insights for the exploration of high-temperature QAH effect, but also represents a progress towards the scalable fabrication of QAH micro/nano-structures based on the extremely fragile 11 intrinsic magnetic TI MnBi2Te4. The techniques we developed can be applied to construct arrays of QAH devices for quantum resistance standards and QAH-based topological quantum computation.