Spin-dependent photodynamics of boron-vacancy centers in hexagonal boron nitride T. Clua-Provost,1, ‚àó Z. Mu,1, ‚àó A. Durand,1 C. Schrader,1 J. Happacher,2 J. Bocquel,2 P. Maletinsky,2 J. Frauni ÃÅe,3 X. Marie,3 C. Robert,3 G. Seine,4 E. Janzen,5 J. H. Edgar,5 B. Gil,1 G. Cassabois,1, 6 and V. Jacques1, ‚ÄÝ 1Laboratoire Charles Coulomb, Universit ÃÅe de Montpellier and CNRS, 34095 Montpellier, France 2Department of Physics, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 3Universit ÃÅe de Toulouse, INSA-CNRS-UPS, LPCNO, 135 Avenue Rangueil, 31077 Toulouse, France 4CEMES-CNRS and Universit ÃÅe de Toulouse, 29 rue J. Marvig, 31055 Toulouse, France 5Tim Taylor Department of Chemical Engineering, Kansas State University, Kansas 66506, USA 6Institut Universitaire de France, 75231 Paris, France The negatively-charged boron vacancy (V‚àí B) center in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is currently garnering considerable attention for the design of two-dimensional (2D) quantum sensing units. Such developments require a precise understanding of the spin-dependent optical response of V‚àí B centers, which still remains poorly documented despite its key role for sensing applications. Here we investigate the spin-dependent photodynamics of V‚àí B centers in hBN by a series of time-resolved photoluminescence (PL) measurements. We first introduce a robust all-optical method to infer the spin-dependent lifetime of the excited states and the electron spin polarization of V‚àí B centers under optical pumping. Using these results, we then analyze PL time traces recorded at different optical excitation powers with a seven-level model of the V‚àí B center and we extract all the rates involved in the spin-dependent optical cycles, both under ambient conditions and at liquid helium temperature. These findings are finally used to study the impact of a vector magnetic field on the optical response. More precisely, we analyze PL quenching effects resulting from electron spin mixing induced by the magnetic field component perpendicular to the V‚àí B quantization axis. All experimental results are well reproduced by the seven-level model, illustrating its robustness to describe the spin-dependent photodymanics of V‚àí B centers. This work provides important insights into the properties of V‚àí B centers in hBN, which are valuable for future developments of 2D quantum sensing units. I. INTRODUCTION During the past decade, quantum sensors based on optically-active spin defects in semiconductors have found a broad variety of applications, in both basic and applied science, due to their unprecedented combina- tion of sensitivity, spatial resolution and ability to op- erate under a wide range of experimental conditions . While the most prominent example is undoubtedly the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in diamond [2‚Äì6], the ex- ploration of alternative spin defects and host materi- als remains an active field of research worldwide [7‚Äì11]. In this context, the negatively-charged boron vacancy (V‚àí B) center in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) is cur- rently attracting a growing interest for the development of quantum sensing and imaging technologies on a two- dimensional material platform . This point defect, which can be readily created by various irradiation meth- ods [13‚Äì17], has a spin triplet ground level whose electron spin resonance frequencies can be measured optically and strongly depends on external perturbations. Despite a very low quantum efficiency of its optical transition, dense ensemble of V‚àí B centers in hBN flakes can be em- ployed as local sensors of static magnetic fields, strain, electric fields, temperature and magnetic noise [18‚Äì27]. Compared to other quantum sensing platforms, one ad- vantage of the hBN host material is its high flexibility ‚àó Contributed equally to this work. ‚ÄÝ vincent.jacques@umontpellier.fr for device integration. In addition, V‚àí B centers can be embedded in few-atomic-layer thick hBN flakes without impairing their magneto-optical properties , opening appealing perspectives for quantum sensing and imaging with atomic-scale proximity to the sample being probed. Despite rapid developments of hBN-based quantum sensing units during the last years , the spin- dependent photodymanics of V‚àí B centers remains poorly documented [29‚Äì32]. In particular, the understanding of intersystem crossing (ISC) transitions to metastable lev- els, which are responsible for electronic spin polarization and readout, is still incomplete. In this work, we study the spin-dependent optical response of V‚àí B centers by a series of experiments including measurements of (i) the spin-dependent lifetime of the excited states, (ii) the elec- tron spin polarization under optical pumping, and (iii) spin-dependent photoluminescence (PL) time traces. By analyzing experimental results with a seven-level model of the V‚àí B centers, we extract all the rates involved in the spin-dependent optical cycles, both under ambient conditions and at liquid helium temperature. We then use these findings to analyze the impact of a vector mag- netic field on the optical properties of V‚àí B centers in hBN. Similar to the NV defect in diamond , we observe a reduced PL intensity when the magnetic field compo- nent perpendicular to the V‚àí B quantization axis increases. These results, which are well reproduced by the seven- level model without any fitting parameter, might find applications for all-optical magnetic imaging with V‚àí B centers. arXiv:2404.14155v1 [cond-mat.mtrl-sci] 22 Apr 2024 2 II. METHODS A. Energy level structure of the V‚àí B center The energy level diagram used to model the spin- dependent optical response of the V‚àí B center is sketched in Fig. 1(a). The ground level is a spin triplet 3A‚Ä≤ 2 with an axial zero-field splitting Dg ‚àº 3.47 GHz between a singlet state with spin projection ms = 0 and a doublet ms = ¬±1 , which are labelled |0g ‚ü© and |¬±1g ‚ü©, re- spectively. The notation ms refers to the electron spin projection along the quantization axis of the V‚àí B center, that corresponds to the c-axis of the hBN crystal. Under optical illumination with a green laser, the V‚àí B center can be promoted to a spin triplet excited level 3E‚Ä≤ through a dipole-allowed transition , and then relaxes rapidly by internal conversion towards a lower- energy triplet level 3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ featuring an axial zero-field split- ting De ‚àº 2.1 GHz between the ms = 0 (|0e ‚ü©) and ms = ¬±1 (|¬±1e ‚ü©) spin projections [31, 34‚Äì36]. Phonon- assisted relaxation from the 3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ excited level to the 3A‚Ä≤ 2 ground level leads to the emission of a broadband PL signal in the near infrared with a rate kr . Impor- tantly, this emission is intrinsically weak because optical transitions between the 3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ and 3A‚Ä≤ 2 levels are forbidden by symmetry. Theoretical studies estimated a radiative decay rate in the range of kr ‚àº 105 s‚àí1 . In the following, we consider that the absorption and the phonon-assisted radiative relaxation channels are purely spin conserving (‚àÜms = 0) with identical rates for all electron spin projections [Fig. 1(a)]. Another relaxation pathway from the 3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ excited level involves non-radiative intersystem crossing (ISC) to a manifold of singlet levels , which is modeled by a single metastable level labelled |m‚ü©. These processes are spin dependent, giving rise to (i) polarization of the V‚àí B center in the |0g ‚ü© ground state by optical pumping and (ii) spin-dependent PL emission that enables opti- cal detection of magnetic resonances . As depicted in Fig. 1(a), we denote by Œ≥0 (resp. Œ≥1) the ISC rate from the excited state |0e ‚ü© (resp. |¬±1e ‚ü©) to the metastable level, and by Œ∫0 (resp. Œ∫1) that from the metastable level to the ground state |0g ‚ü© (resp. |¬±1g ‚ü©). Rate equations within the seven-level model sketched in Fig. 1(a) are used to analyze the spin-dependent pho- todynamics of V‚àí B centers. B. Experimental details We investigate ensembles of V‚àí B centers created in few tens of nanometers thick hBN flakes by nitrogen ion ir- radiation at 30 keV energy with a dose of 1014 ions/cm2. The flakes were obtained by mechanical exfoliation of an isotopically-purified h11B15N crystal produced through metal flux growth methods . The spin-dependent optical response of V‚àí B centers is first studied at room temperature using a scanning confo- a wavelength (nm) norm. PL signal b B N V‚àí B |0g i |¬±1g i |¬±1e i |0e i |mi metastable level kp 3E0 3E00 3A0 2 Œ≥0 Œ≥1 Ô£ø1 Ô£ø0 PL signal (Mcnts/s) c 1 0 1000 800 600 20 Œºm 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 40 30 20 10 0 0 0.6 PL (Mcnts/s) kr De Dg laser power (mW) in hBN. The notations used to label the ground (3A‚Ä≤ B center 2) and ex- cited (3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤,3E‚Ä≤) triplet levels refer to the irreducible represen- tations of D3h symmetry . All other notations are defined in the main text. (b) PL spectrum of V‚àí B centers recorded under green laser illumination at room temperature. Inset: Typical PL raster scan of an irradiated hBN flake recorded with a green laser power of 4 mW. (c) PL signal as function of the laser intensity. The solid line is a fit with a saturation function, yielding a saturation power of the optical transition Ps = 89(3) mW. cal microscope equipped with a 0.42 numerical aperture objective. Optical excitation at 532 nm is provided by a continuous laser source combined with an acousto-optic modulator to produce Œºs-long laser pulses. The result- ing diffraction-limited laser spot on the sample surface is on the order of ‚àº 1 Œºm2. To measure the excited-state lifetime, we add a pulsed laser source at the same wave- length with a pulse duration of 60 ps. The PL signal produced by V‚àí B centers in the near infrared is detected by an avalanche photodiode operating in the single pho- ton counting regime. Time-resolved PL measurements are obtained by recording photon detection events on a time tagger with a bin width of 200 ps. All measurements performed at room temperature are done at zero exter- nal magnetic field. The same laser sources and detection 3 laser 200 Œºs ‚â´ T1 200 ns a counts time (ns) b polarized thermal c lifetime (ns) polarization (%) 1.8 1.5 1.2 0.9 0.6 0.3 0.0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 flake # 100 75 50 25 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 flake # ‚åß0 = 1.26(3) ns ‚åß1 = 0.57(3) ns P = 80(2)% 12 8 4 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 polarized thermal Œ¥t = d P = 75(7) % ‚åß0 = 1.22(9) ns ‚åß1 = 0.53(6) ns electron spin polarization P of V‚àí B centers at room temperature. The power of the 5-Œºs-long laser pulse is 4 mW. (b) Time- resolved PL decay recorded within the same experimental sequence for V‚àí B centers prepared in polarized (blue) and thermal (red) spin distributions at room temperature. The PL decays are not normalized and superimposed for clarity using a time offset. The solid lines are data fitting with a bi-exponential function following the procedure described in the main text, leading for 18 hBN flakes. The dashed lines indicate the average values of {œÑ0, œÑ1, P} and the shaded areas illustrate the one standard deviation uncertainty of the statistical distribution. All measurements are performed at zero external magnetic field. modules are also used to carry out experiments at liquid helium temperature (T = 4 K) with a second scanning confocal microscope, which employs a higher numerical aperture objective (NA = 0.82) and is equipped with a vectorial magnet. A typical PL raster scan of an irradiated hBN flake recorded at room temperature is shown in the inset of Fig. 1(b). It reveals a uniform PL signal featuring the characteristic broadband emission spectrum of V‚àí B cen- ters. For all the experiments reported in this work, the laser excitation power is below the saturation of the op- tical transition [Fig. 1(c)]. The longitudinal spin relax- ation time of V‚àí B centers is T1 ‚àº 13 Œºs at room tem- perature, and reaches few milliseconds at liquid helium temperature (see Appendix A). III. RESULTS A. Spin-dependent excited state lifetimes and electron spin polarization measurements We start by introducing a simple all-optical method to infer both the spin-dependent lifetime of the excited states and the electron spin polarization of V‚àí B centers. The experimental sequence is sketched in Fig. 2(a). A 5-Œºs-long laser pulse is first used to polarize the V‚àí B cen- ters in the ground state |0g ‚ü© by optical pumping. After a time delay Œ¥p = 200 ns ensuring that all populations of the metastable level have relaxed to the ground level (see Section III B), we record the time-resolved PL signal resulting from a 60-ps laser pulse excitation. Since Œ¥p is much shorter than the longitudinal spin relaxation time T1, this measurement is used to analyse the PL decay for spin polarized V‚àí B centers. Within the same experimen- tal sequence, a second ps laser pulse is applied after a time delay Œ¥t = 200 Œºs, which is much longer than T1 at room temperature. In this case, the recorded PL decay is thus associated to V‚àí B centers prepared in a thermal spin distribution, i.e. with equal initial populations in the three spin projections of the ground level. Typical time- resolved PL signals recorded for V‚àí B centers in polarized and thermal spin distributions at room temperature are shown in Fig. 2(b). Owing to spin-dependent ISC to the metastable level, the PL signal follows a bi-exponential decay of the form S(t) ‚àù n0ee‚àít/œÑ0 + n¬±1ee‚àít/œÑ1, where n0e and n¬±1e are the populations promoted in the excited states |0e ‚ü© and |¬±1e ‚ü© by the laser pulse excitation, while œÑ0 and œÑ1 denote the corresponding spin-dependent lifetimes. Assuming that optical excitation is spin conserving with an identi- cal oscillator strength for the different spin projections, the PL decay can be expressed as S(t) ‚àù n0ge‚àít/œÑ0 + n¬±1ge‚àít/œÑ1 , (1) where n0g and n¬±1g are the populations in the ground 4 states |0g ‚ü© and |¬±1g ‚ü© before optical excitation, which fulfill the relation n0g + n¬±1g = 1. The experimental data are fitted with this bi-exponential function con- volved with the independently-measured instrument re- sponse function. We first fit the PL decay recorded for V‚àí B centers prepared in a thermal spin distribution [red curve in Fig. 2(b)]. In this case, the ground state spin populations are fixed to n0g = 1/3 and n¬±1g = 2/3, while œÑ0 and œÑ1 are used as fitting parameters. We obtain œÑ0 = 1.26(3) ns and œÑ1 = 0.57(3) ns. These values are then held fixed to fit the PL decay recorded for polarized V‚àí B centers using solely n0g as a free parameter [blue curve in Fig. 2(b)], leading to n0g = 80(2)%, which corresponds to the elec- tron spin polarization P in state |0g ‚ü©. We note that within the fitting uncertainty, the absolute maximum of the bi-exponential decay is identical for the polarized and thermal spin distributions, supporting our assumption that the oscillator strength of the optical transition is identical for all electron spin projections. The same mea- surements were carried out for V‚àí B centers hosted in 18 different hBN flakes [Fig. 2(c,d)]. A statistical analysis of the results leads to œÑ0 = 1.22(9) ns, œÑ1 = 0.53(6) ns and P = 75(7)%, where the uncertainties correspond to one standard deviation of the statistical distribution. We now link these measurements to transition rates in the seven-level model of the V‚àí B center sketched in Fig. 1(a). On the one hand, the spin-dependent lifetimes are simply given by œÑ0 = (kr + Œ≥0)‚àí1 and œÑ1 = (kr + Œ≥1)‚àí1 . (2) On the other hand, it can be shown by rate equations that the steady state populations in the ground states {ns 0g, ns ¬±1g} after optical pumping with the 5-Œºs-long laser pulse fulfill the relation (see Appendix B) ns 0g ns ¬±1g = P 1 ‚àí P = Œ∫0 2Œ∫1 √ó Œ≥1 Œ≥0 √ó kr + Œ≥0 kr + Œ≥1 . (3) Considering that kr ‚àº 105 s‚àí1 , the radiative decay rate can be safely neglected such that Œ≥0 = œÑ ‚àí1 0 , Œ≥1 = œÑ ‚àí1 1 , and Œ∫0 Œ∫1 = 2P 1 ‚àí P . (4) B. Lifetime of the metastable level These first measurements are then used to estimate the lifetime of the metastable level at room tempera- ture. To this end, we record PL time traces produced by a 5-Œºs-long laser pulse with varying power for V‚àí B centers prepared in polarized and thermal spin distri- butions. The results are summarized in Fig. 3. For polarized V‚àí B centers, a sharp PL peak appears at the beginning of the pulse when the laser power increases [Fig. 3(a)]. This effect, which is commonly observed for other optically-active spin defects such as the NV center a polarized thermal Time (Œºs) Normalized PL signal 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 0.4 0.8 1.2 Time (Œºs) b 1 2 3 5 10 15 20 30 PL [mW] powers for V‚àí B centers prepared in (a) polarized and (b) ther- mal spin distributions at room temperature. The data are vertically shifted for clarity and the solid lines are the results of a global fit of the dataset using the seven-level model of the V‚àí B center. in diamond , results from ISC to the metastable level. For V‚àí B centers prepared in a thermal state, the PL signal starts at a lower value owing to spin-dependent emission, and then increases before reaching a steady- state corresponding to the PL signal obtained for polar- ized V‚àí B centers [Fig. 3(b)]. The full dataset is simultaneously fitted with the seven- level model, while constraining the values of Œ≥0, Œ≥1 and Œ∫0/Œ∫1 by the measurements described in the previous sec- tion [see Eqs. (4)]. Optical absorption is described by a rate kp = k0 p √ó PL, where PL is the laser power focused on a diffraction-limited spot around 1 Œºm2. The fit then uses only k0 p and the ISC rate Œ∫0 as free parameters. Note that the temporal profile of the laser pulse was indepen- dently measured by detecting the light reflected by the sample. This profile is integrated into the fitting pro- cedure to take into account the rising edge of the laser pulse. Data fitting leads to k0 p = 1.0(4) √ó 106 s‚àí1/mW and Œ∫0 = 41(8) √ó 106 s‚àí1, where the uncertainties are evaluated by taking into account those on the parame- ters Œ≥0, Œ≥1 and Œ∫0/Œ∫1. The value obtained for k0 p is in good agreement with a recent report and the lifetime of the metastable level is given by œÑm = (Œ∫0 + 2Œ∫1)‚àí1, leading to œÑm = 18(3) ns. This very short metastable lifetime explains why the PL signal of V‚àí B centers can be detected despite the very low quantum efficiency of the 5 optical transition. Given the rising and falling edges of the laser pulse, it was not possible to directly measure the metastable level lifetime through PL recovery meth- ods . The transition rates of the seven-level model inferred at room temperature are summarized in Table 1. Even though the fitting procedure reproduces fairly well the full experimental dataset, the model slightly overestimates the initial PL signal for V‚àí B centers in a thermal state, with a deviation being more pronounced at the highest laser powers [Fig. 3(b)]. It has recently been suggested that the direct relaxation from the 3E‚Ä≤‚Ä≤ excited level to the 3A‚Ä≤ 2 ground level might involve an additional non-radiative component with a rate knr , which competes with ISC transitions to the metastable level. To check this hypothesis, the fit was performed by introducing a direct, non-radiative decay rate as an ad- ditional free parameter. In this case k0 p, Œ∫0 and knr are used as fitting parameters of the seven-level model, all the other rates being constrained by Eqs. (2) and (3), in which kr is replaced by knr. As shown in the Appendix C, we do not obtain a clear improvement of the fit. It is thus not possible to discriminate between the two models with this set of measurements. The fit leads to a strong non-radiative decay rate knr = 8(1) √ó 108 s‚àí1 and an in- creased optical pumping rate k0 p = 10(2) √ó 106 s‚àí1/mW. Although the ISC transitions rates and their ratio are drastically modified when a direct non-radiative decay is introduced in the model, we obtain a similar lifetime of the metastable level (see Appendix C). In what follows, we keep the simplest model of the V‚àí B center which does not introduce a direct non-radiative decay from the excited level. The discrepancy between the fit and the experiments for the thermal state at short time scale could be caused by charge state conversion of V‚àí B centers under strong optical pumping. C. Low temperature measurements We now investigate how the transition rates of the seven-level model evolve at liquid helium temperature (T = 4K). The spin-dependent lifetime of the excited states and the electron spin polarization are first mea- sured at 4K using the method introduced in Section III A. The experimental sequence is identical to that shown in Fig. 2(a), except that the waiting time before ap- plying the second ps laser pulse used to probe the PL decay of the thermal state is increased to Œ¥t = 20 ms because the longitudinal spin relaxation of V‚àí B centers reaches few ms at 4K (see Appendix A). Time-resolved PL signals recorded for V‚àí B centers in polarized and ther- mal spin distributions at low temperature are shown in Fig. 4(a). Data fitting with a bi-exponential decay fol- lowing the procedure described in Section III A leads to lifetime of the excited states increases by almost a factor of three. This increase, which has also been reported by others , indicates a significant variation of counts time (ns) 4 K a b normalized PL signal time (Œºs) 3 2 1 0 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.0 PL [mW] 1 5 8 10 15 20 25 7 8 9 10 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1000 2 25 20 15 10 5 0 polarized thermal ‚åß0 = 4.46(7) ns ‚åß1 = 1.50(5) ns P = 71(1)% B centers prepared in polarized (blue) and thermal (red) spin distri- butions at liquid helium temperature using the experimental sequence sketched in Fig. 2(a) with Œ¥t = 20 ms. The solid lines are data fitting with a bi-exponential function following the procedure described in section III A, from which we ex- tract œÑ0, œÑ1 and P. (b) Normalized PL time traces recorded at different laser powers for V‚àí B centers prepared in a polarized spin distribution. The data are vertically shifted for clarity and the solid lines are the results of a global fit of the dataset using the seven-level model of the V‚àí B center, in which the val- ues of the rates Œ≥0, Œ≥1 and Œ∫0/Œ∫1 are constrained by Eqs. (4). non-radiative ISC rates with temperature, whose detailed analysis is going beyond the scope of the present work. However, we note that the ratio œÑ1/œÑ0 = Œ≥0/Œ≥1, which is directly linked to the spin-dependent PL contrast, is al- most identical to that obtained at room temperature. In addition, the electron spin polarization does not signifi- cantly vary at 4 K, suggesting that the ratio of ISC rates Œ∫0/Œ∫1 is not drastically modified [See Eq. (4)]. A statis- tical analysis over a large number of hBN flakes was not performed at low temperature because the 20-ms waiting time required to measure the PL decay of V‚àí B centers in a thermal state leads to very long data acquisition times. The lifetime of the metastable level is then estimated by analyzing PL time traces recorded at different laser powers for spin polarized V‚àí B centers. As shown in Fig. 4(b), a PL peak is once again detected at the be- ginning of the pulse when the laser power increases. Fit- ting the full dataset with the seven-level model leads to Œ∫0 = 24(2)√ó106 s‚àí1, such that œÑm = 30(3) ns at 4 K. The lifetime of the metastable level is therefore also slightly increased at low temperature. On the other hand, we ob- tain a decreased optical pumping rate under green laser illumination, k0 p = 4.4(3)√ó105 s‚àí1/mW, despite a smaller 6 T = 300 K T = 4 K Œ≥0 0.82(6) ns‚àí1 0.22(1) ns‚àí1 Œ≥1 1.8(2) ns‚àí1 0.67(3) ns‚àí1 Œ∫0 41(8) Œºs‚àí1 24(2) Œºs‚àí1 Œ∫1 7(2) Œºs‚àí1 5(1) Œºs‚àí1 œÑm 18(3) ns 30(3) ns model of the V‚àí B center at room temperature and at T = 4 K. At room temperature, the uncertainties of the rates result from the statistical analysis of spin-dependent lifetime and spin polarization measurements performed on 18 hBN flakes [Fig. 2(c,d)]. At low temperature, these measurements are only performed for one hBN flake, explaining why the relative uncertainties are smaller. focused laser spot owing the larger NA of the microscope objective. This observation is assigned to a modifica- tion of the phonon-assisted absorption efficiency of the 3A‚Ä≤ 2 ‚Üí 3E‚Ä≤ optical transition at T = 4 K [see Fig. 1(a)], whose maximum has been measured around 470 nm at room temperature . A summary of all the transitions rates of the seven- level model measured under ambient conditions and at liquid helium temperature is given in Table I. We note that these values might slightly change with the density of V‚àí B centers, the quality of the hBN crystal and the method used to create V‚àí B centers. D. Magnetic-field-dependent optical properties We finally investigate how the optical properties of V‚àí B centers evolve with an external magnetic field. All the measurements described below are carried out at liquid helium temperature, with superconducting coils provid- ing a vector magnetic field B. The spin Hamiltonian of the V‚àí B center in the ground ( ÀÜHg) and excited ( ÀÜHe) triplet levels is expressed as ÀÜHg(e) = Dg(e) ÀÜS2 z + Œ≥B ¬∑ ÀÜS , (5) where Dg(e) is the axial zero-field splitting in the ground or excited level, Œ≥ = 28 GHz/T is the electron gyro- magnetic ratio, and z corresponds to the c-axis of the hBN crystal. At cryogenic temperature, the axial zero- field splitting parameters increase to Dg ‚àº 3.63 GHz and De ‚àº 2.2 GHz owing to variations of the hBN lattice pa- rameters with temperature . Note that the transverse zero-field splitting is not included in the spin Hamiltonian because it has no impact on the results. We start by recording the PL intensity as a function of a magnetic field up to 3.5 T applied along the z axis. As shown in Fig. 5, two dips of the PL signal are detected around Bg ‚àº Dg/Œ≥ ‚àº 129 mT and Be ‚àº De/Œ≥ ‚àº 78 mT, which correspond to anticrossings between the spin states ÔøΩÔøΩ0g(e) ‚ü© and ÔøΩÔøΩ‚àí1g(e) ‚ü© in the ground and excited levels, respectively [31, 34‚Äì36]. Such anticrossings are mediated by the hyperfine coupling of the V‚àí B center with the three neighboring 15N nuclei [not included in Eq. (5)]. In a simple picture, the hyperfine interaction can be viewed as an effective classical magnetic field with a component perpendicular to the z axis given by Bhf ‚ä• ‚àº 1 4Œ≥ 3 ÔøΩ i=1 xx + A(i) yy] , where A(i) xx and A(i) yy denote the transverse components of the hyperfine interaction tensor for each neighboring 15N nuclear spin. Using ab initio calculations of the hy- perfine tensor , we estimate that Bhf ‚ä• ‚àº 5 mT for V‚àí B centers hosted in a hBN crystal isotopically purified with 15N . At the anticrossings, this effective magnetic field mixes the spin states ÔøΩÔøΩ0g(e) ‚ü© and ÔøΩÔøΩ‚àí1g(e) ‚ü©, resulting in a reduced PL signal owing to spin-dependent ISC to the metastable level. The PL dip at the excited level an- ticrossing exhibits a shoulder at Bcr ‚àº Dg/2Œ≥ ‚àº 65 mT [Fig. 5], which corresponds to cross-relaxation between V‚àí B centers and surrounding S = 1/2 paramagnetic im- purities . Besides these well-identified PL dips, there are no additional features for magnetic fields up to 3.5 T. We can thus conclude that within this field range, there is no evidence of anticrossings between different or- bitals of the excited level, as it is for example the case for NV defects in diamond . More generally, this exper- iment indicates that no additional spin-triplet level with D < 100 GHz is involved in the spin-dependent photo- dynamics, thus supporting the simple seven-level model of the V‚àí B center used in this work. normalized PL signal Magnetic field Bz (T) Bz (mT) norm. PL 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 180 120 60 0 Be Bg Bcr B centers as a function of a magnetic field applied along the z axis at cryogenic temperature. The inset shows a zoom on the magnetic field range 0 - 200 mT. Anticrossings of the spin states in the ground and excited levels occur at Bg ‚àº 129 mT and Be ‚àº 78 mT, respectively, while cross-relaxation between the V‚àí B center and surrounding S = 1/2 paramagnetic impurities occurs at Bcr ‚àº 65 mT. 7 c Normalized PL signal Magnetic field (mT) ‚úì = 30‚ó¶ ‚úì = 0‚ó¶ ‚úì = 45‚ó¶ Angle Œ∏ (¬∞) b Magnetic field (mT) data a hBN B ‚úì z 1.0 0.8 0.6 1.0 0.8 0.6 200 150 100 50 0 1.0 0.8 0.6 200 150 100 50 0 simulation Magnetic field (mT) 0 10 30 20 40 0 50 100 150 200 0 50 100 150 200 norm. PL 1 0.8 0.6 1 0 10 30 20 40 norm. PL 1 0.8 0.6 1.0 0.8 0.6 ‚úì = 6‚ó¶ Angle Œ∏ (¬∞) B centers as a function of a magnetic field applied with different angles Œ∏ with respect to the z axis. The data are normalized by the PL signal measured at zero field. (b) Magnetic-field-dependent PL intensity calculated through rate equations within the seven-level model of the V‚àí B center. For this calculation we use Dg = 3.63 GHz, De = 2.2 GHz, Bhf ‚ä• = 5 mT, and the transition rates given in Table 1. (c) PL profiles for different angles Œ∏ of the external magnetic field. The black markers show the data and the red solid lines are the result of the calculation. The PL intensity is then measured as a function of the magnetic field while varying its angle Œ∏ with respect to the z axis. The experimental results are summarized in Fig. 6(a). When the tilt angle Œ∏ increases by few degrees, the transverse component of the external magnetic field B‚ä• = B| sin Œ∏| is added to the effective hyperfine field, leading to a broadening of the PL dips around level an- ticrossings. For larger angles (Œ∏ > 15‚ó¶), the transverse magnetic field component B‚ä• becomes strong enough to effectively mix the electron spin states in the ground and excited levels, even at low field. In this case, the PL signal decreases steadily with the magnetic field before reaching a plateau corresponding to a maximal PL drop of ‚àº 50% for which the electron spin states are fully mixed. Such a PL quenching is directly correlated with an overall reduc- tion of the excited level lifetime (see Appendix D) . These experimental results are finally compared to a simulation of the magnetic-field-dependent PL response of V‚àí B centers. For each magnetic field, the three eigen- states of the spin Hamiltonian in the ground and ex- cited triplet levels are expressed as linear combinations of the zero-field eigenstates { ÔøΩÔøΩ0g(e) ‚ü©, ÔøΩÔøΩ+1g(e) ‚ü©, ÔøΩÔøΩ‚àí1g(e) ‚ü©}. We then use rate equations within the seven-level model of the V‚àí B center to calculate the PL signal, following the procedure introduced in Ref. for NV centers in diamond. The calculation is performed with the zero- field transition rates measured in the previous section [see Table 1] and Bhf ‚ä• = 5 mT, which is assumed to be identical in the ground and excited levels. As shown in Figs. 6(b,c), a good agreement is obtained between the simulation and the experiment, illustrating the robust- ness of the seven level model for describing the photody- namics of V‚àí B centers in hBN. The magnetic-field dependent PL quenching of V‚àí B centers might find interesting applications for all-optical magnetic imaging . Quantitative measurements of static magnetic fields are commonly obtained by record- ing the Zeeman shift of the V‚àí B center‚Äôs electron spin sublevels through optically-detected magnetic resonance spectroscopy [23‚Äì25]. This method, which requires to combine optical illumination with a microwave excita- tion, becomes however challenging when the magnetic field exhibits a strong component perpendicular to the V‚àí B quantization axis leading to mixing of the electron spin sublevels. Such a situation will be inevitably reached when nm-thick hBN sensing units will be placed, for in- stance, on the surface of a ferromagnet where fields in ex- cess of several hundreds of mT are commonly produced. In this case, the magnetic-field dependent PL quench- ing of V‚àí B centers could be exploited to map regions of the sample producing large stray fields, such as domain walls or skyrmions , without the need for microwave excitation. IV. CONCLUSION To summarize, we have provided a complete picture of the spin-dependent optical response of an ensemble of V‚àí B centers in hBN. By analyzing a series of time- resolved PL measurements with a simplified seven-level model of the V‚àí B center, we inferred all the rates involved in the spin-dependent optical cycles both at room temperature and at T = 4 K. Our results indicate that the lifetime of the metastable level responsible for electron spin polarization and readout is very short (‚àº 20-30 ns), explaining why the PL signal of V‚àí B centers can be detected despite the very low quantum 8 efficiency of its optical transition. The robustness of the seven-level model was then tested by studying the impact of a vector magnetic field on the optical response. We have shown that electron spin mixing induced by the magnetic field component perpendicular to the V‚àí B quantization axis leads to a strong PL quenching, which is well reproduced by the seven-level model without any fitting parameter. This work provides important insights into the properties of V‚àí B centers in hBN, which are valuable for developing quantum sensing and imaging technologies on a two-dimensional material platform.