Electro-optically Modulated Nonlinear Metasurfaces Zhengqing He ‡,1 Lun Qu ‡,1 Wei Wu,1 Jikun Liu,1 Jingfei You,1 Weiye Liu,1 Lu Bai,1 Chunyan Jin,1 Chenxiong Wang,1 Zhidong Gu,1 Wei Cai,1 Mengxin Ren,1, 2, ∗ and Jingjun Xu1, † 1The Key Laboratory of Weak-Light Nonlinear Photonics, Ministry of Education, School of Physics and TEDA Applied Physics Institute, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, People’s Republic of China 2Collaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, People’s Republic of China Tunable nonlinearity facilitates the creation of reconfigurable nonlinear metasurfaces, enabling innovative applications in signal processing, light switching, and sensing. This paper presents a novel approach to electrically modulate SHG from a lithium niobate (LN) metasurface, exploiting the electro-optical (EO) effect. By fabricating a nanohole array metasurface on a thin LN film and applying an electric field, we demonstrate the alteration of the material’s refractive index, resulting in resonance shifts and modulation of SHG intensity at specific wavelengths. Our findings provide valuable insights for the development of electrically tunable nonlinear light sources, quantum optics, dynamic nonlinear holography, and nonlinear information processing. Keywords: Second harmonic generation, electro-optical modulation, lithium niobate, metasurface INTRODUCTION Metasurfaces, composed of meticulously engineered subwavelength-scale structures, stand at the forefront of optical technology, offering significant potential to redefine the landscape of photonic device miniaturiza- tion and functionality [1–6]. This advancement is fur- ther accentuated by the infusion of nonlinear function- alities into metasurfaces, broadening their scope beyond the traditional linear optics [7–9]. Nonlinear metasur- faces, purposely designed to generate and control non- linear phenomena such as second-harmonic generation (SHG), has catalyzed a plethora of groundbreaking appli- cations encompassing nonlinear holography, optical en- cryption, and nonlinear beam shaping [10–17]. These significant strides in nonlinear metasurface research have propelled nonlinear flat optics as a pragmatic alternative to conventional nonlinear optics. Past decades have wit- nessed extensive endeavors to enhance SHG from meta- surfaces. These efforts encompass techniques such as light field confinement through the excitation of plasmon resonances in metallic structures or Mie resonances in dielectric inclusions, aimed at amplifying SHG efficiency [18–36]. In addition to the pursuit of enhanced nonlinearity, achieving tunable nonlinearity is of paramount impor- tance . This capability enables the creation of recon- figurable nonlinear metasurfaces, facilitating novel appli- cations in signal processing, light switching, and sens- ing. Researchers have diligently explored diverse meth- ods to dynamically control SHG from metasurfaces us- ing external stimuli. Notable approaches include electric- field-induced SHG [38–41], and current-induced SHG in plasmonic metasurfaces. Additionally, Stark tuning of intersubband transitions in quantum-well polaritonic metasurfaces has emerged as a successful method for con- trolling SHG in the infrared region . Further- more, the integration of hybridized metasurfaces with liquid crystals has proven effective for tuning SHG per- formance, achieved through the manipulation of liquid crystal molecule orientation via external electric fields . In this paper, we demonstrate a new approach based on electro-optical (EO) effect in the metasurface to mod- ulate its SHG. We identify lithium niobate (LN) as a particularly suitable material, owing to its large second order nonlinear susceptibilities showing synergistic com- bination of exceptional SHG and EO properties. We fab- ricated a nanohole array metasurface on a thin LN film, which exhibits distinct resonances in their transmission spectrum. By applying a specific electric field, the refrac- tive index of the material is altered, causing a shift in the resonances. Consequently, this resonance shift impacts the intensity of the SHG signal at a specific wavelength, enabling the utilization of the electro-optical effect for SHG signal modulation. Our findings serve as valuable guidelines for innovative applications such as electrically tunable nonlinear light sources, quantum optics, dynamic nonlinear holography, and nonlinear information process- ing. RESULTS The concept of electrically modulated SHG from a LN metasurface is illustrated in Figure 1a. The metasur- face is composed of a square lattice of circular air holes etched into a suspended LN film, positioned within a gold electrode gap. SHG from the metasurface can be efficiently boosted by resonance, and wavelength of the maximum SHG efficiency coincides with the resonance peak . To facilitate electrical modulation of the SHG, a square alternating voltage wave with a peak-to-peak value of Vpp was fed into the electrodes. To capitalize arXiv:2404.07598v1 [physics.optics] 11 Apr 2024 2 Concept of electrically modulated SHG from LN metasurface. (a) The metasurface consists of a square lattice of air holes milled in an x-cut LN film. Experimen- tal coordinates are chosen to overlap with the LN principal crystallographic axes. The z-direction corresponds to the op- tic axis. Two Au electrodes are positioned on the opposite side of metasurface array. A square alternating voltage wave with a peak-to-peak value of Vpp is delivered into the elec- trodes. The incident FW light is z-polarized and normal to the metasurface, while the collected SHG signal is captured in the transmission direction. (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle of electrically modulated SHG. The wavelength dependence curve of the intensity of SHG (PSH) before and after modulation is depicted above. The static signal (blue line) applies a voltage that causes a change in the refractive index of the sample, resulting in a shift in the wavelength do- main (red line). The difference between the intensity of SHG before and after modulation at a given wavelength is the mod- ulation amplitude (∆PSH). The wavelength dependence curve of ∆PSH is shown schematically in the figure below. the LN’s largest second-order nonlinear susceptibilities, namely d33 for SHG and γ33 for EO modulation, the LN film is x-cut, and its optic axis (labeled by z-axis in Fig- ure 1a) lies within the metasurface plane. Additionally, both the FW polarization and the modulating voltage were aligned along the z-axis. Under the influence of the external electric voltage, the refractive index of the LN undergoes alterations, resulting in a spectral shift of res- onance. Due to the negative value of γ33, the refractive index of the LN decreases under positive modulating volt- age, causing a blue-shift in resonance, and vice versa (as depicted in Figure 1b). This resonance shift also leads to a shift in the SHG conversion efficiency spectrum. Con- sequently, the SHG magnitude at a specific wavelength experiences modulation. We started with an LNOI wafer, which consists of a 190 nm-thick crystalline LN film on a 300 μm-thick sil- icon dioxide (SiO2) substrate. We employed a standard ultraviolet (UV) lithography technique to pattern an in- terdigital gold (Au) electrode array with 10 μm gaps, as depicted in the scanning electron microscope (SEM) im- age in Figure 2b. The metasurface was fabricated within of the LN metasurface. (a) Overview of the key fabrica- tion steps involved in creating the metasurface between Au electrodes. PR: photoresist, FIB: focused ion beaming, BOE: buffered oxide etching, IDT: interdigital electrodes. (b) Left: top-view SEM image depicting the Au interdigital electrodes (IDT) and the LN film within their slits. Middle: SEM im- age capturing the entire footprint of the metasurface, with an array size of 10×10 μm2. Right: zoomed-in SEM image revealing the detailed structure of the array, characterized by a period P=570 nm and air hole diameter D=200 nm. the electrode gap using focused ion beam [FIB, gallium ions (Ga+), 30 kV, 24 pA] milling. The overall footprint of the metasurface array was 10×10 μm2, featuring a lat- tice constant of 570 nm and an air hole diameter of 200 nm, as revealed in the SEM images in Figure 2b. Subse- quently, the sample underwent immersion in a buffered oxide etching solution (BOE, NH4F: HF=20: 1) to selec- tively remove a micrometer-thin SiO2 layer beneath the metasurface array. This process suspended the meta- surface, offering advantages of increased refractive index contrast in the vertical direction and better light field confinement within the metasurface layer. The metasurface displays discrete translational sym- metry, a structural configuration linked with guided reso- nance modes . These modes efficiently confine electro- magnetic energy within the metasurface layer, resulting in pronounced resonances in both the transverse mag- netic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) bands, as shown by Figure 3a. The electric field of TE mode is primar- ily characterized by the z-component, facilitating effec- tive interaction with the nonlinear coefficient d33 of the LN. Therefore, our study focused on the TE mode. We employed the finite element method (COMSOL Multi- physics software) to simulate the transmission spectrum. 3 Linear optical properties of the membrane metasurface. (a) Calculated band diagram of the metasur- face. The symmetric points in an irreducible Brillouin zone are defined in the inset. The Γ-point at the center of the first Brillouin zone can be excited by normal incidence. The transverse magnetic (TM) and transverse electric (TE) modes are presented by purple and orange curves, respectively. (b) The experimental transmission spectrum under normally in- cident z-polarized light is shown by the blue curve, while the simulated transmission spectrum is depicted by the orange dashed line. The electric field map at a resonance wavelength of 902 nm (highlight by a green circle in the spectrum) is pre- sented in the inset. The refractive index of LN used in the simulation was de- termined through ellipsometry (Accurion EP4) . To account for optical losses caused by Ga ion implantation during the FIB fabrication, we introduced an extra imag- inary part κ of 0.015 to the refractive index of LN. The simulated spectrum, depicted by an orange dashed line in Figure 3b, reveal a prominent Fano-shaped resonance around 900 nm. This results in a significant localization of the electromagnetic field within the LN metasurface layer, as illustrated by the electric field map in the inset. Experimental transmission spectrum was obtained using a commercial microscopic spectrometer (IdeaOptics Co., Ltd.), which is shown by blue line in Figure 3. The ex- perimental result agrees reasonably with the simulation. To experimentally characterize the SHG properties of the metasurface, we used a tunable Ti:sapphire femtosec- ond laser (Maitai, Spectra-Physics, 80 MHz, 230 fs) to excite the sample, as shown in Figure 4a. The FW light power was adjusted by a combination of a half wave plate (HWP) and a Glan-Taylor prism (GTP). The pump light, polarized along the z-axis, was focused onto the sample through a 10× objective lens (NA = 0.25). The SHG light was collected by another objective lens (100×, NA = 0.90) in the transmission direction. A band pass fil- ter (BG40 color glass) was employed to block the pump light, ensuring that only the SHG light reached a bal- anced detector (PDB220A2/M, Thorlabs). An optical chopper was positioned in front of the detector, and its signal was recorded using a lock-in amplifier (Zurich In- struments MFLI). To elucidate the relationship between the SHG magnitude and the transmission resonance, we measured the SHG strength by sweeping the pump wave- Electrically modulated SHG from metasur- face. (a) Schematic representation of the experimental setup. Components include HWP (half-wave plate), GTP (Grant- Taylor prism), Obj (objective), BG40 (band-pass filter), and Det (balanced detector). (b) Experimentally measured wave- length dependent SHG strength, characterized by the detec- tor output voltage U2 in an arbitrary unit. (c) Electrically induced SHG strength alteration (|∆U2|) under an external driving voltage with Vpp of 100 V and frequency f of 50 kHz. Circles represent the experimental data, with the line serving as an eye-guide. The maximum value is marked by the blue dash line. (d) Modulation depth, defined by |∆U2|/U2, as a function of pump wavelength. (e) Dependences of |∆U2|/U2 at 916 nm and 908 nm on Vpp in a range from 0 to 100 V with a frequency of 50 kHz. length between 880 to 930 nm with a step of 1 nm. The average pump power was maintained at 30 mW during pump wavelength adjustments, corresponding to a peak intensity of approximately 2.1 GW/cm2. As shown in output voltage U2) exhibited a distinct wavelength de- pendence, featuring a pronounced peak around 451 nm, coinciding with the fundamental frequency transmission resonance of 902 nm shown in Figure 3. For the electrical modulation of SHG, we employed an arbitrary waveform generator (Agilent 33250A) to pro- duce a square alternating voltage signal at a frequency of 50 kHz. This signal underwent amplification to 100 Vpp (peak-to-peak magnitude, -50 V to +50 V output voltage) using a high-voltage amplifier (New Focus 3211) 4 before being applied to the electrodes. The optical chop- per was removed from the setup. The electrically induced SHG changes (|∆U2|) are depicted in Figure 4c. No- tably, the |∆U2| curve exhibits an M-shape, with peaks observed at 448 nm and 454 nm. We further investi- gated the modulation depth, defined as |∆U2|/U2. The wavelength dependence of |∆U2|/U2 is shown in Figure 4(d), reaching its maximum value of 11.3% at 458 nm. In 454 nm (blue line) and 458 nm (orange line) are presented as a function of the driving voltage Vpp, both exhibiting a linear relationship. DISCUSSION In conclusion, we demonstrated a novel approach to electrically modulate SHG from an LN metasurface, leveraging the EO effect. By fabricating a nanohole array metasurface on a thin LN film and applying a specific electric field, we were able to alter the refractive index of the material, causing a shift in resonances and consequently modulating the SHG signal intensity at a specific wavelength. Our findings provide valuable insights for the development of electrically tunable nonlinear light sources, quantum optics, dynamic non- linear holography, and nonlinear information processing. This work opens new avenues for the practical imple- mentation of electrically controlled nonlinear optical devices, with implications for various fields including telecommunications, imaging, and sensing. Data availability All relevant data supporting the results of this study are available within the article and its supplementary in- formation files. Further data are available from the cor- responding authors upon request.