Probing Topological Superconductivity of oxide nanojunctions using fractional Shapiro steps Claudio Guarcelloa,b, Alfonso Maiellaroa,b, Jacopo Settinoc,d, Irene Gaiardonia, Mattia Tramaa,e, Francesco Romeoa,b and Roberta Citroa,b,f,∗ aDipartimento di Fisica “E.R. Caianiello”, Università di Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II, 132, I-84084 Fisciano (SA), Italy bINFN, Sezione di Napoli, Gruppo collegato di Salerno, Italy cDipartimento di Fisica, Università della Calabria, Via P. Bucci Arcavacata di Rende (CS), Italy dINFN, Gruppo collegato di Cosenza, Italy eInstitute for Theoretical Solid State Physics, IFW Dresden, Helmholtzstr. 20, 01069 Dresden, Germany fCNR-SPIN, Via Giovanni Paolo II, 132, Salerno, I-84084, Italy A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: AC Josephson effect Fractional Shapiro steps Majorana bound states Topological superconductivity Resistively shunted junction model A B S T R A C T We theoretically discuss the emergence of fractional Shapiro steps in a Josephson junction created by confining a two–dimensional electron gas at an oxide interface. This phenomenon is induced by an alternating current of proper amplitude and frequency and can be tuned by a magnetic field applied perpendicular to the Rashba spin–orbit axis. The presence of fractional Shapiro steps can be associated with the creation of Majorana bound states at the boundaries of the superconducting leads. Our findings represent a route for the identification of topological superconductivity in non– centrosymmetric materials and confined systems in the presence of spin–orbit interaction, offering also new insights into recently explored frameworks. 1. Introduction The AC Josephson effect has proven to be an efficient and sensitive probe for investigating exotic superconductors, offering valuable insights into their properties and aiding in understanding the underlying physics. In particular, in order to explore the anharmonic content of the current–phase rela- tion (CPR) in unconventional systems, recent proposals have pursued tracking of phase–locked behavior in a Josephson junction (JJ) under high–frequency AC drives . In the case of a non– sinusoidal CPR, the AC response exhibits not only the typ- ical constant–voltage plateaus, known as “integer” Shapiro steps , in the voltage versus current characteristic (VIC), but also other steps at specific “fractional” voltages, Vn∕q = (n∕q)Φ0νac, with q ≠ n, Φ0 = h∕(2e) the flux quantum (e is the elementary charge and h is the Planck’s constant), and νac the frequency of the driving signal. Moreover, the 4π–periodicity of Majorana bound states (MBS) spectrum in topological JJs has been speculated to leave traces on the Shapiro response . Despite the experimental fea- sibility of the various approaches developed so far, giving a reliable interpretation of a specific experiment can be com- plicated due to the nonlinear character of the Josephson re- sponse. Here, we show that fractional AC Josephson effect can also emerge in an oxide–based JJ made by constraining a ∗Corresponding author cguarcello@unisa.it (C. Guarcello); amaiellaro@unisa.it (A. Maiellaro); jacopo.settino@unical.it (J. Settino); igaiardoni@unisa.it (I. Gaiardoni); mtrama@unisa.it (M. Trama); fromeo@unisa.it (F. Romeo); rocitro@unisa.it (R. Citro) two–dimensional electron gases (2DEGs), which can form, e.g., at the interface between transition–metal oxides like LaAlO3 and SrTiO3 (LAO/STO), to get a quasi–1D system. Recently, taking a clue from some experimental evidences , a non–trivial response of the critical current to the magnetic field in this kind of systems has also been the- oretically reported ; the latter work discusses also the link to the appearance of MBSs with an “orbital–flavoured” internal structure. Here, we demonstrate that the same sys- tem can exhibit an unconventional voltage response when driven by an AC signal. In particular, we are referring to the emergence of sizable fractional Shapiro steps in VICs of the junction: those magnetic fields responsible for the increase in critical current, as theoretically argued in Ref. , also induce the unconventional step structure in the VIC. The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. 2, we intro- duce the microscopic model to obtain the CPRs at different applied magnetic fields; in Sec. 3, we numerically study the response of our device to an AC drive, i.e., we incorporate the previously obtained CPRs into the so–called resistively shunted junction model, which is commonly used to char- acterize the time–averaged voltage measured in a current– biased JJ; in Sec. 4, conclusions are drawn. 2. The microscopic model Here, we consider the microscopic theoretical framework treatment presented in Ref. , i.e., a short superconductor– normal–superconductor (SNS) junction formed by constrain- ing the 2DEG at the LAO/STO (001) interface, see Fig, 1(a). The nanochannel Hamiltonian is given by H = H0 + HP + HSO + HZ + HM, (1) : Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 8 arXiv:2407.09923v2 [cond-mat.supr-con] 11 Oct 2024 Ic+ Ic- -0.5 0.0 0.5 0.00 0.01 0.02 Mx Ic + (b) (c) 0 π/2 π 3π/2 2 π 0.00 0.01 0.02 φ Iφ - (a) and negative (downward-pointing triangles) critical currents as a function of Mx. (c) Collection of CPRs obtained by varying Mx from -0.85 (purple curve) to 0.85 (red curve) in increments of 0.05, used to extract the critical currents shown in (b). The colouring matches that of data in (b). where H0= ∑ j Ψ† j(h0 on ⊗ σ0)Ψj + Ψ† j(h0 hop ⊗ σ0)Ψj+1 + h.c., (2) HP = ∑ j,α Δ(j, q) c† j,α,↑c† j,α,↓ + h.c., (3) HSO=ΔSO ∑ j Ψ† j (lx ⊗ σx + ly ⊗ σy + lz ⊗ σz ) Ψj, (4) HZ=−iγ 2 ∑ j Ψ† j (ly ⊗ σ0 ) Ψj+1 + h.c., (5) HM=Mx ∑ j Ψ† j (lx ⊗ σ0 + l0 ⊗ σx ) Ψj (6) using t2g orbitals (dxy, dyz, and dzx) basis. Here, Ψj = (cyz,↑,j, cyz,↓,j, czx,↑,j, czx,↓,j, cxy,↑,j, cxy,↓,j)T represents the electron annihilation operators for spin, or- bital, and position. The terms H0, HP , HSO, HZ, HM correspond to kinetic energy, mean–field pairing, spin–orbit coupling (SOC), inversion–symmetry breaking, and Zeeman interaction, respectively . The nanochannel is oriented along the x–direction , with the topological phase stabi- lized by a magnetic field perpendicular to the orbital Rashba– like field . σi are Pauli matrices, while σ0 is the iden- tity matrix. lx, ly, lz are projections of the L = 2 angular momentum operator onto the t2g subspace. Analytic expres- sions of these matrices along with hopping Hamiltonians h0 on and h0 hop are provided in Ref. . Based on ab initio esti- mates and spectroscopic studies , consistent with Ref. , we assume: t1 = 300, t2 = 20, ΔSO = 10, Δt = −50, and γ = 40 (in meV). t1 and t2 are x–directed intraband hopping couplings for the yz and zx∕xy bands in H0. Δt denotes the crystal field potential due to symmetry lowering from cubic to tetragonal, and it represents a physi- cal regime with a hierarchy of electronic energy scales such that |Δt| > γ > ΔSO. In Eq. (3), α is an orbital index, and Δ(j, q) = Δeiqjeiφj is a space–dependent gap, considering a phase gradient (φj = χL j φL + χR j φR, with χα j = 1 only when j belongs to the α = L, R electrode) induced by the bias current and a finite momentum effect of the Cooper pair (q). It has been demon- strated that superconductors with both broken inversion and time–reversal symmetries, and in presence of SOS, Cooper’s pairs may acquire a finite momentum . Therefore, a spatially modulated superconducting gap is included, with q continuously determined by the magnetic field (q = ηMx). The pairing amplitude is determined as Δ = 0.05, while the phase gradient is φ = φL − φR, with φL,R being the phase of the order parameter of the left and right lead. The Josephson current of a short SNS junction with transla- tional invariant leads is efficiently calculated using the sub- gap Bogoliubov–de Gennes (BdG) spectrum of a system with truncated superconducting leads: I(φ) = − e ħ ∑ n dEn dφ , (7) where En are the subgap energies of the BdG spectrum. The finite–lead approach is valid in the short–junction limit, i.e., LN ≪ ξ, with ξ the BCS coherence length. Thus, the total system size is set as L = 2LS + LN, with LS ≫ ξ and LN ≪ LS the sizes of the superconducting lead and the normal region, respectively. The maximum (absolute value of minimum) of I(φ) yields the critical current, Ic, in the positive (negative) direction. The tight–binding Hamiltonian is numerically treated us- ing KWANT and solved with NUMPY routines . We explore different electronic regimes varying the Zeeman en- ergy Mx and the phase difference φ. In this paper, we set LS to 1000 and LN to 10, both in units of the lattice constant, and we look only at the orbital filling regime corresponding to the lowest doublet in the energy spectrum with the dxy orbital character. 3. Results Our baseline is the recent experimental evidence of un- conventional magnetic–field dependence of the Josephson current discussed in Ref. and the corresponding micro- scopic treatment developed in Ref. . The latter disclosed a connection between topological superconductivity (TSC) and the critical current pattern of a short SNS junction based on non–centrosymmetric superconductors. Specifically, the hypothesis of a topological phase transition put forward in Ref. is based on two key observations regarding the critical current of the junction: i) the enhancement with in- creasing applied magnetic field perpendicular to the SOC and ii) the distinct symmetry observed when reversing both : Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 8 0 π 2 π 0.00 0.01 0.02 φ Iφ Mx = -0.35 0. 0.1 n = 1/2 0. 0. 0.1 ΔIdc n 5/2 0 1 2 3 4 5 0. 0.1 Iac 7/2 〈V〉 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 P 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 (a) (e) (f) (b) (c) (d) n 0 1 2 3 4 0.00 1 2 3 4 5 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Iac n ΔIdc and ωac = 0.1 × 2π. (a) CPR. (b) Average voltage drop, ⟨V ⟩, on the (Idc, Iac )–parameter space, and (c) selected ⟨V ⟩ vs Idc profile at Iac = 2.9 (the closeup zooms on the half–integer steps). In the vertical right side of this plot, a histogram, P (⟨V ⟩), of binned voltage data helps to easily visualize the main step arrangement (the bar height counts the fraction of values lying in each bin). The dashed lines are guides to the eye for the ISSs. (d) Voltage histogram map, P (⟨V ⟩ , Iac ); red arrows mark the peaks associated to the half–integer step. Current step widths, ΔIn dc: (e) Integer, i.e., n = {0, 1, 2, 3, and 4}, and (f) half–integer, i.e., n = {1∕2, 3∕2, 5∕2, and 7∕2}, as a function of Iac. In panels (b,d,e,f), a gray dot-dashed line marks the value Iac = 2.9 chosen for the VICs in (c). Histogram bins have a width of δV = 0.1. the magnetic field and the bias current. These features are also clearly highlighted in the magnetic patterns of the crit- ical current shown in Fig. 1(b). These characteristics are in- tertwined with the formation of MBSs at the edges of super- conducting conductors and to multiband effects, which rele- vance can be fine–tuned by appropriate gating of the system . Thus, a non–trivial topology can manifest in peculiar- ities of critical current patterns as the magnetic field varies, in line with the experimental findings in Refs. . Instead, in this paper we adhere to a different, and at the same time complementary line of thinking, i.e., we demon- strate that even the system’s AC response can exhibit non– trivial peculiarities, still assuming working conditions such as those imposed in Ref. . In particular, we survey the emergence of sizable half–integer Shapiro steps (HISSs) at those applied magnetic fields that enhance the critical cur- rent. In general, the appearance of HISSs is a quite intrigu- ing phenomenon: in the presence of a microwave excitation, the VICs exhibit periodic modulations, known as Shapiro steps , which occur at voltages that are integer multiples of the product of the microwave frequency and Φ0 ≃ 2.07 × 10−3 mV/GHz. In unconventional superconductors, which can exhibit non–trivial order–parameter symmetries, HISSs may also appear. These steps can provide valuable infor- mation about the nature of the underlying superconducting state. We first focus on two specific cases, i.e., when the mag- netic field is such that: i) a topological phase emerges and the critical current was demonstrated to approach a maxi- mum (i.e., we fix Mx = −0.35) and ii) there are no MBSs and the magnetic field is far from the values that maximize the critical current (i.e., we fix Mx = 0.85) . Through the CPRs resulting from our microscopic analy- sis (see Fig. 1 (c) for a collection of CPRs obtained for Mx ∈ [−0.85, 0.85]), we determine the full AC response of the system by inserting them into a resistively and capacitively shunted junction (RCSJ) model . It describes a current– biased JJ as a parallel arrangement of various current con- tributions: the external bias current, the Josephson term ac- counting for Cooper-pair dissipationless flow (i.e., the CPR), a resistive contribution from quasiparticle tunneling, the dis- placement current, and the thermal current. The use of RCSJ models is a very common practice when studying the AC response of unconventional current–driven Josephson sys- tems. We will exclusively look at a noise–free overdamped JJ, in which the so–called Stewart–McCumber parameter, βc = 2eIcR2 NC∕ħ (here, RN and C are the normal-state resistance and the capacitance of the junction, respectively), is very small , i.e., we neglect the inertia term 1. 1For example, in InAs–nanowire–based JJs for Shapiro step analysis a Stewart–McCumber parameter βc < 0.01, i.e., an highly overdamped junc- tion, was estimates, thus supporting the use of a resistively shunted junc- tion (RSJ) model . In this way, we are also ruling out the effects of the junction capacitance as a possible source of the discussed phenomenology . In any case, a critical limit for the Stewart–McCumber parameter : Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 8 0 π 2 π φ Iφ Mx = 0.8 n 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 5 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Iac ΔIdc n 0. 0.1 n = 1/2 0. 0. 0.1 ΔIdc n 5/2 0 1 2 3 4 5 0. 0.1 Iac 7/2 〈V〉 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 P 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 (a) (e) (f) (b) (c) (d) and ωac = 0.1 × 2π. (a) CPR. (b) Average voltage drop, ⟨V ⟩, on the (Idc, Iac )–parameter space, and (c) selected ⟨V ⟩ vs Idc profile at Iac = 2.9 (the closeup zooms on the half–integer steps). In the vertical right side of this plot, a histogram, P (⟨V ⟩), of binned voltage data helps to easily visualize the main step arrangement (the bar height counts the fraction of values lying in each bin). The dashed lines are guides to the eye for the ISSs. (d) Voltage histogram map, P (⟨V ⟩ , Iac ). Current step widths, ΔIn dc: (b,d,e,f), a gray dot-dashed line marks the value Iac = 2.9 chosen for the VICs in (c). Histogram bins have a width of δV = 0.1. This constraint is well–suited for externally shunted junc- tions of any nature and offers a qualitative understanding of (unshunted) weak links . Thus, by normalizing time to the inverse of plasma frequency, ωp = √ 2πIc∕(Φ0C) , the RSJ model, in dimensionless units, can be easily ex- pressed as Iφ+dφ∕dt = Ibias(t), where we include both DC and AC bias current components, Ibias(t) = Idc+Iac sin(ωact), and we look te the average voltage drop ⟨V ⟩ across the junc- tion. For each set of Mx, Idc, and Iac, at a given ωac, the RSJ model is integrated via a fourth–order Runge–Kutta method over 104 time steps. As already mentioned, the VICs of a JJ can exhibit Shapiro steps, which result from the interaction between external mi- crowave radiation and the intrinsic dynamics of the super- conducting phase difference across the junction. To under- stand why this phenomenon occurs, according to the RSJ model, we can look at the JJ as a “phase particle” in a tilted washboard potential, U. Under an external microwave drive with frequency νac, the motion of this phase particle syn- chronizes with the drive. In each excitation period Tac, the phase across the junction changes by 2πn, where n is an inte- ger. The velocity, ̇φ, of this synchronized motion is given by 2πnνac. Remarkably, this synchronization is stable within certain intervals of the applied dc–current, Idc, i.e., small exists, i.e., βc < 1∕4, below which the inertial contributions to phase dy- namics can be safely ignored . Fulfilling this condition allows for the omission of the term CΦ0 ̈φ∕(2π) in the model, thereby also eliminat- ing chaotic behaviors and resulting in a highly damped, more stable system . changes in Idc do not disrupt the synchronization, allowing the system to maintain a constant velocity. This stability re- sults in the appearance of plateau, i.e., the Shapiro steps, in the VICs. Each step corresponds to a constant voltage given by Vn = Φ0 2π ̇φn = nΦ0νac, with n integer, so that Shapiro steps are equidistant, with a separation ΔV = Vn+1 − Vn = Φ0νac. In other words, only the frequency νac determines the spacing between steps, e.g., at νac ≈ 483.6 GHz the separa- tion is ∼ 1 mV. In the following, we impose ωac = 0.1×2π, knowing that the overall effect of the drive frequency is to increase the range of DC currents between two successive integer steps as ωac increases . In Fig. 2 we collect the AC response of the system by set- ting Mx = −0.35. In this case, the obtained CPR deviates significantly from a sinusoidal profile, see Fig. 2(a); it also features an anomalous Josephson contribution , i.e., a non–zero current at zero phase, and a marked asym- metry, i.e., quite different maximum and minimum currents – the so–called Josephson diode effect . In Fig. 2(b) we show how the average voltage drop, ⟨V ⟩, changes on the (Idc, Iac )–parameter space; this is a Shapiro map, com- monly used to chart the widths of the observed plateaus, il- lustrating their dependence on both the AC drive amplitude and DC current bias (often, in the place of the voltage, the differential resistance, dV ∕dIdc, is plotted). The formation of plateaus due to integer Shapiro steps (ISSs) is quite ev- ident, just like the transitions between steps, which follow a typical pattern. A selected VIC is presented in Fig. 2(c), : Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 8 n -0.5 0.0 0.5 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 Mx ΔImax n 7/2 5/2 3/2 1/2 width, ΔIn max with n = {1∕2, 3∕2, 5∕2, and 7∕2}. i.e., the ⟨V ⟩ vs Idc profile for Iac = 2.9. The dashed lines are guides to the eye for the ISSs. This plot reveals the for- mation of additional small steps in the midpoints between integer steps, as also better highlighted in the closeup. Step formation can be appreciated not only directly in the VIC, but also by binning the measurement data according to volt- age, i.e., through a histogram such the one placed vertically to the right of Fig. 2(c). Here, the bar height counts the frac- tion of values lying in each bin, so that each peak marks to an ISS. Further information can then be gathered by taking into account all P (⟨V ⟩) histograms as Iac varies, in order to construct a voltage histogram map, P (⟨V ⟩ , Iac ), as in Fig. 2(d). This density plot shows the ISSs very clearly, but we can also resolve “islands” of more intense color amidst the ISSs, which attest to the formation of HISSs (also pointed out by red arrows). Furthermore, a careful look reveals that, especially for high Iac values, other fractional resonances tend to emerge, corresponding to phase locking with dif- ferent higher–order CPR harmonics. However, these reso- nances are significantly narrower than their half–integer coun- terparts, making them potentially more vulnerable to sup- pression by thermal fluctuations. Indeed, temperature is a quite important parameter to consider, as it has been ob- served that the height of the Shapiro steps can nonmono- tonically depende on it . The width ΔIn dc of the ISSs, n = {1, 2, 3, 4, and 5}, and HISSs, n = {1∕2, 3∕2, 5∕2, and 7∕2}, by changing Iac is reported in Fig. 2(e)–(f). In both cases, we observe a pro- nounced Shapiro response. At zero current, there is only the n = 0 step; then, as Iac grows, other integer steps “switch on", until the lobe structure typical of ISSs emerges, with the step widths in current exhibiting an oscillating Bessel– function–like pattern . Even for HISSs, we can appreci- ate the formation of lobes in the ΔIn dc(Iac) profile. The situation changes if we consider a magnetic field giv- ing a CPR closer to a sinusoidal profile, see Fig. 3(a) for Mx = 0.85. The ⟨V ⟩ (Idc, Iac ) Shapiro map still shows the formation of plateaus, see Fig. 3(b), but if we look in detail at a VIC, see Fig. 3(c), it is evident that the HISSs do not form so clearly this time. This is confirmed by the histogram map in Fig. 3(d). If we graph the step width behavior as Iac changes, we observe that the ISSs again follow a lobe struc- ture, which is however lost when we look at the HISSs (in the latter case, there is only an increasing trend due to the formation of spurious tones in the VIC as Iac increases), see Fig. 3(e-f). We note also that the width of the integer steps at the minimum intralobes is non–zero, and the comparison of Figs. 3(e) and 4(e) reveals that it tends to increase as the skewness of the CPR rises; this agrees with the fact that a residual non–sinusoidal correction of the CPR leads to an integer step width that does not completely cancel out chang- ing the AC amplitude and frequency (this phenomenon is well illustrated in the animations in the Supplementary Material). To get an overall insight into the effects induced by the external magnetic field on the Shapiro response, we collect in Fig. 4 the maximum step width, ΔIn max = maxIac {ΔIn dc }, of the HISSs for Mx ∈ [−0.85, 0.85]. Especially when look- ing at the steps with n = 1∕2 and 3∕2, the formation of two peaks standing out clearly against a small, non–zero back- ground is quite evident. These peaks form just at those Mx’s at which the enhancement of the critical current is observed, see Fig. 1(b), namely, the magnetic field values that were pointed out as being responsible for the emergence of topo- logical features . In other words, we assert that those val- ues of Mx for which the system enters a topological phase, not only give a maximum of the critical current, but also should induce measurable half–integer steps in the VIC of a junction excited by an AC drive. 4. Conclusions In this paper, we extended the theoretical findings in Ref. showing that the emergence of half–integer Shapiro steps can be a valuable tool for recognizing topological signatures in Josephson junctions based on non–centrosymmetric su- perconductor. Numerically calculating the AC response of this system, we showed that half–integer Shapiro steps oc- cur clearly within a specific magnetic field range of values; in particular, the phenomenon takes place at the magnetic fields giving the increase in critical current that was reported in Ref. in connection with the emergence of Majorana modes at the edges of superconducting leads. We observe that the visibility of the half–integer Shapiro steps scales with the external magnetic field showing a very peculiar two– lobe structure. These findings provide a tool for proving the presence of topological phase , complementary to that discussed in Ref. , which could be promptly em- ployed in, e.g., LAO/STO–type or nanowire–based systems . The appearance of a fractional Shapiro re- sponse marks a deviation from topologically–trivial to non- trivial junctions, potentially driven by the external magnetic field. Finally, we conclude with a word of caution, since the point of the experimental feasibility is indeed delicate and we stress a constraint of our proposal: in fact, the structure of half–integer steps can also be affected by non–adiabatic effects , as the current–phase relation may suffer ad- ditional distortions, especially at high driving frequencies, : Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 8 e.g., see Ref . In particular, the frequency window defin- ing the adiabatic regime should be identified paying special attention to the crossover frequency with the non-adiabatic regime, which is related to the Thouless energy, in the dif- fusive case, or the RISW product, for ballistic systems (with ISW being the JJ switching current) . Furthermore, even within the adiabatic driving regime, deviations in the current– phase relation can emerge due to the interference of multiple supercurrent paths according to the basic mechanism pre- sented in Ref. . This is likely to occur when a 2DEG structure is gated at low density, a condition under which the interaction of the electron density with unavoidable im- purities may induce percolation and interference of phase– coherent superconducting paths. We also note that the occur- rence of fractional Shapiro steps has also been attributed to causes not directly related to a non-sinusoidal current-phase relation. For example, in YBCO long Josephson junctions, fractional Shapiro steps have been associated with chaotic dynamics . For these reasons, a comparison with a con- crete experiment should certainly take into account the work- ing regimes, and possibly consider a revision of the micro- scopic model . Under the mentioned limits, our approach well captures the key aspects of the dynamic Josephson re- sponse relevant to our considerations. 5. Acknowledgments This work is financed by Horizon Europe EIC Pathfinder under the grant IQARO number 101115190. F.R. acknowl- edges funding from Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (MIUR) for the PRIN project STIMO (Grant No. PRIN 2022TWZ9NR). M.T. and A.M. acknowledge financial support from "Fondazione Angelo Della Riccia". R.C. acknowledges funding from Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (MIUR) for the PRIN project QUESTIONS (Grant No. PRIN P2022KWFBH).