Granular Ta-Te nanowire superconductivity violating the Pauli limit Lingxiao Zhao1#, Yi Zhao1#, Cuiying Pei1, Changhua Li1, Qi Wang1,2, Juefei Wu1, Weizheng Cao1, Lin Xiong1,3, Haiyin Zhu1,3, Tianping Ying4, Yanpeng Qi1,2,3* 1. School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, 201210 Shanghai, China. 2. ShanghaiTech Laboratory for Topological Physics, ShanghaiTech University, 201210 Shanghai, China 3. Shanghai Key Laboratory of High-resolution Electron Microscopy, ShanghaiTech University, 201210 Shanghai, China 4. Institute of Physics and University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China # These authors contributed to this work equally. * Correspondence should be addressed to Y.Q. (qiyp@shanghaitech.edu.cn) Abstract: Strategies to achieve higher upper-critical-field superconductors (μ0Hc2(0)) are of great interest for both fundamental science and practical applications. While reducing the thickness of two-dimensional (2D) materials to a few layers significantly enhances μ0Hc2(0) with accompanied potential unconventional pairing mechanisms, further dimensional reduction to 1D compounds rarely exceeds the expected Pauli limit. Here, we report the discovery of a 1D granular Ta-Te nanowire that becomes superconducting under high pressure, with a maximum critical temperature (Tc) of 5.1 K. Remarkably, the μ0Hc2(0) reaches 16 T, which is twice the Pauli limit, setting a record of μ0Hc2 (0) in all the reported 1D superconductors. Our work demonstrates that the Ta- Te nanowire not only is a potential candidate for applications in high magnetic fields, but also provides an ideal platform for further investigations of the mechanisms between nanowires and large μ0Hc2(0). Introduction Since the discovery of the Meissner effect, efforts for pursuing superconductors with higher upper critical fields (μ0Hc2(0)) have never been paused. In recent years, the success in mechanical exfoliation of 2D van der Waals materials has unveiled many new superconductors with large upper critical fields, especially in nano-films of transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs). Few-layer NbSe2 is reported to be an Ising superconductor and exhibits orbital Fulde-Ferrell-Larkin-Ovchinnikov (FFLO) states under large magnetic fields1-5. As a result, the in-plane μ0Hc2(0) of few-layer NbSe2 is about 1.5 times of Pauli limit (μ0Hp). Similar behaviors are also observed in MoS26, TaS27 and gated WS28. The discovery of large upper critical fields in 2D materials inspires the exploration of further reducing their dimensions, which may lead to higher μ0Hp and possibly unconventional superconductivity. However, reports of superconductivity in 1D nanowires violating the Pauli limit are extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge, Bi nanowires are reported to show complex superconducting properties, depending on the morphology of the nanowires9-11. Single crystal Bi nanowires' Tc and μ0Hc2(0) are 1.3 K and 4 T, respectively10. In contrast, granular nanowires of Bi exhibit 8.3 K and 4.5 T, which show similar behavior to the bulk high-pressure phase, Bi-V9. Another example is the B nanowire, which is insulating at ambient pressure, but superconducting at 84 GPa. The μ0Hc2(0) of B nanowires is about 2.5 T while the Tc is only about 1.5 K12. In the cases of single crystal Bi nanowires and pressurized B nanowires, the upper critical fields are quite large considering their low Tc. Apart from high pressure, proximity effects and ion beams can also induce superconductivity in nanowires13-15. Therefore, the dependences of the critical behavior of superconducting nanowires on morphology, pressure, gating, proximity effect, and synthesis methods are quite complex, little consensus has been reached up to now. In this work, we synthesized a novel TMC nanowire composed of Ta3Te4 granules. The nanowires show semi-metal behavior at ambient pressure and superconductivity under high pressure. The upper critical field reaches about 16 T at 21 GPa, which is about 4 times Tc and much larger than the value of Pauli limit. The μ0Hc2(0) - Tc ratio is the highest among all the reported superconducting nanowires. We have successfully combined the advantages of TMC compounds, nanowires and high-pressure modulations, realizing a large upper critical field in compressed Ta-Te nanowires. Ta-Te nanowires are synthesized by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) method16. A Stoichiometric amount of 99.999% tantalum and tellurium powder (Alfar Aesar) is mixed and sealed in evacuated silica ampoules. The starting powder in each ampoule weighs 1 gram and 20 mg of iodine as the transport agent. The size of the ampoules used is 10 cm (length) * 1.5 cm (diameter). The sealed ampoules are heated to 1100 °C in 10 hours, and annealed for 24 hours in a box furnace. The small temperature gradient in the box furnace is enough for the growth of the nanowires. The nanowires are black, and show fiber-like texture, with typical dimensions of 100 nm * 100 nm * 100 μm. They are densely tangled, forming bundles, as shown in Figure S1. SEM image of the nanowires under low magnification. The insets show elemental mapping under SEM. (b) Powder XRD results of a bunch of nanowires. The inset shows the crystal structure of Ta-Te nanowires. (c) The TEM image of the nanowires under low magnification. (d) The TEM images of a nanowire under high magnification. The inset shows the fast Fourier transform (FFT) of the images. A low magnification SEM image of the synthesized samples is presented in Figure 1a. Under higher magnification, we performed elemental dispersion spectrum (EDS) mapping of a single nanowire. The results are exhibited in the insets of Figure 1a. We observe that Ta and Te atoms are uniformly distributed in the nanowire. We have also conducted powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements on a bunch of nanowires directly acquired from synthesis, as shown in Figure 1b. Though the strongly anisotropic orientation of the nanowires causes difficulty in Rietveld refinements, we have confirmed that the indexed XRD peaks are correlated to the hexagonal Nb3Te4 structure17, with the space group P63/m, as shown in the inset of Figure 1b. It is worth noting that the average full width at half maximum of the diffraction peaks is 0.2°. Using the Scherrer equation, the estimated grain size is 58 nm, implying that these 1D samples may be composed of numerous small nanocrystals. To further investigate the appearance and morphology of the nanowires, we have performed high magnification SEM and TEM observations. From Figure 1a, we can observe that the nanowires directly collected from synthesis are densely tangled. The samples we used for the following high-pressure in-situ resistivity measurements are of the same appearance as the bundle of nanowires near the right edge of Figure S1. The nearly isolated nanowire in the middle of Figure S1 is used for resistivity measurements at ambient pressure. The samples for TEM are prepared by dispersion of nanowires into ethanol using ultrasonic methods. The dispersed nanowires are transferred to copper grids with carbon membranes. As shown in the low magnification image in Figure 1d, the dispersed samples stand on the carbon membranes. Some of the nanowires are slightly distorted or twisted due to local stress. High-resolution TEM image of a single nanowire is shown in Figure 1d. The nanowires are composed of crystalline granules. The orientations of the crystalline granules are slightly random, as indicated by yellow lines in Figure 1d. The insets show the fast fourier transformations (FFT) of the images. In the FFT results, "amorphous" halos are observed. This indicates that the grain boundaries exhibit disordered structure. The nanowires thus have bamboo-like structures. dependence of resistivity at ambient pressure. The inset shows the setup of electrodes and focused ion beam (FIB) transported sample. (b) The temperature dependence of resistivity under 1.5-54.6 GPa. (c) The normalized temperature dependence of resistivity at low temperature. (d) The Tc-Pressure phase diagram. The temperature dependence of resistivity of a single nanowire at ambient pressure is summarized in Figure 2a. The sample is transported to pre-set electrodes by focused ion beam (FIB) under SEM (Inset of Figure 1e). We use ionic deposited Pt to contact the sample with the electrodes. The nanowire shows an insulator-type electronic transport property, as shown in Figure 2a. The resistivity first slightly drops with cooling temperature. At about 200 K, it turns to increase rapidly, showing insulating behavior. This result is quite different from the metallic behavior of its isomer Nb3Te418. The electronic structure of the sample is quite important, given that the nanowires show semi-metal type transport properties. We have performed IR transmission spectrum on Ta-Te nanowires to deduce the band gap, shown in Figure S2. The transmission rate of IR light with wavelengths from 2 to 15 um is lower than 1%. So, the optical band gap is at least lower than 75 meV. We suggest that the insulating behavior of the nanowire below 200 K is not a result of the electronic band structure. Since the samples are insulating at ambient pressure, we attempted utilizing high- pressure to induce superconductivity in Ta-Te nanowires. We have measured the temperature dependence of resistivity from 1.8 K to 300 K under high pressure, as shown in Figure 2b-c. Bunches of tangled nanowires are directly loaded into the sample chamber. At 1.5 GPa, the sample shows insulating behavior, similar to ambient state. It transforms into bad-metal type at 4.9 GPa. During compression, the resistivity at room temperature gradually decreases. At 10.6 GPa, superconductivity onsets at about 3.5 K. The delta Tc is rather wide at this pressure point, with the resistivity dropping to zero at 2 K. With further compression, Tc shows a dome-like evolution with a maximum of 4.13 K at 21.2 GPa, and it drops slowly to about 2.7 K at the highest-pressure point measured in this work. Other runs of measurements have acquired similar evolutions, as shown in Figure S3-4. The phase diagram of Tc and pressure from multiple runs are summarized in Figure 2d. of resistivity under different magnetic fields from 0 T to 9 T, at 21.2 GPa. (b) The fitted (b), but at 32.5 GPa. The green line in (b) and blue line in (d) denotes the Pauli limit. To further investigate the superconductivity properties of Ta-Te nanowires, we have measured the upper critical field of the sample at 21.2 GPa and 32.5 GPa (Figure 3). In Figure 3a and c, as the magnetic field increases, Tc gradually decreases until it disappears above the lowest measured temperature. By defining the temperature where the resistance drops by 90% under the magnetic field as Tc, we plot the μ0Hc2 against Tc in Figure 3b and d. We then fit the data using the multi-band model. We have found that at 21.2 GPa and 32.53 GPa, the μ0Hc2(0) are 16.39 T and 16.64 T, respectively. It should be noted that the Pauli limit μ0Hp at these two pressure points are 7.60 T and 7.05 T, respectively. The μ0Hc2(0) results are much higher than μ0Hp, exhibiting exotic superconducting behavior. The Pauli limit violating behavior indicates that the pressure-induced superconductivity in Ta-Te nanowires possibly originates from a complex mechanism. According to literature, the μ0Hc2(0) of most superconducting nanowires are near or below the Pauli limit, regardless of the Tc (Figure 4). Compared with them, Ta-Te nanowires show significantly larger μ0Hc2(0). In the case of Ta-Te nanowires, the μ0Hc2(0) is larger than two times μ0Hp. Some 2D TMCs present similar phenomena. For example, few-layer NbSe2 is an Ising superconductor, with large in-plane μ0Hc2(0). It also turns into FFLO state at low temperature and high magnetic field5, with an abrupt upturn of μ0Hc2 after the transition point in the phase diagram. The large upper critical field of the Ta-Te nanowires may originate from a similar mechanism, since the compositional element Ta is moderately heavy, with strong spin-orbital coupling. However, no signals of upturning FFLO states are observed under 9 T in this work (Figure 3b and d). Large upper critical fields have also been observed in some other unconventional superconductors such as cuprates, iron arsenides, heavy-fermion superconductors, etc19-29. The exotic pairing mechanisms play important roles in enhancing μ0Hc2(0). In short, further investigations on the Ta-Te nanowires are required to unveil the pairing mechanism and its influence on the large μ0Hc2(0). Apart from the pairing mechanisms of large μ0Hc2(0) observed in these materials, there might be exotic unknown origin in the 1D nanowires. In addition, due to the large upper critical field (16 T) and the moderate Tc (4 K) among known superconducting nanowires, application potentials of Ta-Te nanowires can be expected, considering that the nanowires are easy to synthesize, and may exhibit excellent mechanical properties. In summary, we propose a granular strategy for Ta-Te nanowires that successfully realizes superconductivity under high pressure and achieves a record-high upper critical field. Superconductivity emerges at 10.6 GPa, with a Tc of about 3.5 K. Tc exhibits a slight dome-like behavior during compression. Ta-Te nanowire is a possible candidate for applications in high magnetic field, and provides an ideal platform for investigating the exotic mechanisms of large upper critical fields. data points in one type of nanowire represent different diameters. The details are summarized in Table S1. Supplementary Information measurements from a bunch of nanowires. High-pressure in-situ electrical transport property is measured in Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9T) using a nonmagnetic diamond anvil cell (DAC). A cubic BN/epoxy mixture is used as insulating layer between BeCu gaskets and electrodes. The nanowires are directly collected from synthesis and then loaded into the diamond anvil cell (DAC) with 200 μm anvil culet. Four Pt foils are arranged in a van der Pauw four-probe configuration to contact the sample in the chamber for resistivity measurements30. Pressure is determined by the ruby luminescence method31. pressure from Run 2. (a) 1.8 – 265 K. (b) 1.8 – 10 K. pressure from Run 3. (a) 1.8 – 265 K. (b) 1.8 – 10 K. Compound Tc (K) μ0Hc2(0) (T) μ0Hc2(0) / Tc ref Ta-Te nanowires 3.83 4.34 This work Bi 1.3 4 3.07 10 Ta2PdS5 5 11.4 2.28 32 Pb 7.2 15 2.08 33 W(CO)6 5.25 9.5 1.81 34 NbC 5 8.5 1.7 35 W 4.2 7 1.67 13 He+ Focused WC1-x 6.4 9 1.41 14 B 1.7 1.35 12 diffused Ge−Si 2.9 3.4 1.17 36 Bi-V 8.3 4.3 0.52 9 Bi-III 7.2 1.0 0.14 9 ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2023YFA1607400) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52272265), The authors thank the Analytical Instrumentation Center (# SPST- AIC10112914), SPST, ShanghaiTech University.