1 Electronic Correlation and Pseudogap-like Behavior of High-Temperature Superconductor La3Ni2O7 Yidian Li1*, Xian Du1*, Yantao Cao2,5*, Cuiying Pei3*, Mingxin Zhang3, Wenxuan Zhao1, Kaiyi Zhai1, Runzhe Xu1, Zhongkai Liu3,4, Zhiwei Li2, Jinkui Zhao5, Gang Li3, Yanpeng Qi3,4ŌĆĀ, Hanjie Guo5ŌĆĀ, Yulin Chen3,4,6ŌĆĀ, and Lexian Yang1,7,8ŌĆĀ 1State Key Laboratory of Low Dimensional Quantum Physics, Department of Physics, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China. 2Key Lab for Magnetism and Magnetic Materials of the Ministry of Education, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, China 3School of Physical Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University and CAS-Shanghai Science Research Center, Shanghai 201210, China. 4ShanghaiTech Laboratory for Topological Physics, Shanghai 200031, China. 5Songshan Lake Materials Laboratory, Dongguan, Guangdong 523808, China 6Department of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK. 7Frontier Science Center for Quantum Information, Beijing 100084, China. 8Collaborative Innovation Center of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100084, China *These authors contributed equally to this work. Emails: YPQ: qiyp@shanghaitech.edu.cn; HJG: hjguo@sslab.org.cn; YLC: yulin.chen@physics.ox.ac.uk; LXY: lxyang@tsinghua.edu.cn 2 High-temperature superconductivity (HTSC) remains one of the most challenging and fascinating mysteries in condensed matter physics. Recently, superconductivity with transition temperature exceeding liquid-nitrogen temperature is discovered in La3Ni2O7 at high pressure, which provides a new platform to explore the unconventional HTSC. In this work, using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy and ab-initio calculation, we systematically investigate the electronic structures of La3Ni2O7 at ambient pressure. Our experiments are in nice agreement with ab-initio calculations after considering an orbital-dependent band renormalization effect. The strong electron correlation effect pushes a flat band of dz2 orbital component below the Fermi level (EF), which is predicted to locate right at EF under high pressure. Moreover, the dx2ŌłÆy2 band shows a pseudogap-like behavior with suppressed spectral weight and diminished quasiparticle peak near EF. Our findings provide important insights into the electronic structure of La3Ni2O7, which will shed light on the understanding of the unconventional superconductivity in nickelates. 3 Being a long-standing problem yet to be resolved, high-temperature superconductivity (HTSC) exhibits important scientific significance and application prospects . Up to date, there are only two families of compounds featuring unconventional superconductivity well above the McMillan limit at ambient pressure: cuprates and iron-based superconductors (Fe-SCs) . Both of them show layered crystal structure; the electronic states near the Fermi level (EF) are dominated by 3d electrons with strong electronic correlation ; and the superconductivity is in proximity to a magnetic phase in their phase diagrams . However, prominent differences also exist between these two families of superconductors. Cuprates based on 3d9 electronic configuration of Cu2+ have a single band crossing EF, which is usually described by the one-band Hubbard model . By contrast, iron-based superconductors with Fe 3d6 electronic configuration have a multi-band and multi-orbital nature . Moreover, cuprate shows a pseudogap above the transition temperature , while Fe-SCs are usually bad metals in the normal state. To understand the importance of these similarities and differences in unconventional superconductivity, it is highly desired to explore new materials with HTSC. Infinite-layer nickel oxides are considered to exhibit unconventional superconductivity despite their relatively low critical temperature . Similar to the cuprates and Fe-SCs, 3d electrons of Ni dominate the electronic states near EF. Electronic correlation also plays an important role in the electronic structure and superconductivity of Ni-based superconductors (Ni-SCs) . In particular, Ni+ exhibits an effective electronic configuration of 3d9, the same as Cu2+ in cuprates , making infinite-layer nickelates an attractive platform for exploring HTSC. Superconductivity at 15 K and 30 K has been observed in thin films of infinite-layer nickelates at ambient and high pressure respectively . Superconductivity at 13 K is also observed in the quintuple-layer Nd6Ni5O12, in which Ni exhibits an effective electronic configuration of d8.8 . However, the synthesis of these nickelates is challenging and the superconductivity is realized only in thin films below the McMillan limit regardless of the application of pressure. 4 Recently, HTSC with Tc up to 80 K was discovered in La3Ni2O7 bulk compound under pressure between 14.0 GPa and 43.5 GPa . It belongs to the series of Lan+1NinO3n+1 Ruddlesden- Popper phase that can be viewed as the parent phase of the infinite-layer and quintuple-layer nickelates. Many theoretical understandings of the electronic structure and superconductivity of the system have been proposed . It was proposed that the Ni ions with an average valence of +2.5 are pressurized to resemble the electronic configuration of Cu2+ in cuprates, which favors the superconductivity at high pressure . Simultaneously, the crystal and electronic structures are strongly modulated by the pressure-induced Jahn-Teller distortion. The 3dx2ŌłÆy2 and 3dz2 orbitals strongly interact with O p orbitals, forming intra- and inter-layer ’ü│ bonds respectively. The interaction between the occupied Ni dx2ŌłÆy2 and O p orbitals also induces the Zhang-Rice singlet in the superconducting state . While it is extremely challenging to experimentally investigate the electronic structure at high pressure, the experiments at ambient pressure will nevertheless provide crucial information for its normal-state properties, including the Fermiology, the electronic correlation effect, density wave orders, and non-Fermi-liquid behaviors . A previous measurement using angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) revealed orbital dependent correlation effect in La3Ni2O7 at ambient pressure with more details awaiting further experimental exploration. In this work, by combining ARPES and ab-initio calculation, we systematically investigate the electronic structure of La3Ni2O7 at ambient pressure. The band structure shows a multi-band and multi-orbital nature with Ni 3dx2ŌłÆy2 and 3dz2 orbitals dominating the electronic states near EF. After being renormalized by 2.7 and 5.0 for the dx2ŌłÆy2 and dz2 bands respectively , the calculated results are in nice agreement with the experiments, suggesting a strong electronic correlation in the system . In particular, the 3dz2 orbitals form a flat band just below EF, which contributes significantly to the electronic density of states (DOS). With high pressure, our ab-initio calculation suggests that the band width of the La3Ni2O7 increases and the flat band 5 locates right at EF, which may favor the pressurized HTSC. Furthermore, we observe diminished quasiparticle peak and suppressed spectral weight as the dx2ŌłÆy2band dispersing approaching EF, which shows a pseudogap-like behavior with decreasing temperature and is reminiscent of the normal-state behaviors of cuprates and Fe-SCs . Our findings will help construct a unified picture of unconventional HTSC in different families of materials. As schematically shown in Fig. 1a, La3Ni2O7 crystallizes into a layered orthorhombic structure in the space group Amam at ambient pressure with lattice constants a = 5.393 ├ģ, b = 5.449 ├ģ, and c = 20.518 ├ģ . In the conventional unit cell, corner-sharing NiO6 octahedrons form Ni-O bilayers stacking along the c direction, which are separated by La-O layers. At ambient pressure, the NiO6 octahedrons slightly distort with their vertical axis canting for about 6┬░ away from the c axis (Fig. 1b) . The application of high pressure aligns the octahedrons along c and drives the system into the space group Fmmm (Fig. 1c). The Ni-O planes also become flat at high pressure. Within each Ni-O bilayer, the corner-sharing of NiO6 octahedrons through the apical oxygen atoms provides the structural basis for the interlayer ’ü│ bonds between Ni 3dz2 and O p orbitals. The crystals can be easily cleaved between the bilayers to expose the La-O termination as indicated by the blue planes in Fig. 1a. The Brillouin zones (BZs) corresponding to the primitive and conventional unit cells are shown in Fig. 1d with high-symmetry points of the conventional BZ indicated. Our sample shows clear Laue peaks in Fig. 1e, confirming its orthorhombic structure. The metallic temperature dependence of the resistance suggests the proper element composition, particularly of the oxygen, since a slight deficiency of oxygen will drive the system into an insulating phase . We note slight kink-like features in the resistance curve, which were previously associated to a possible charge-density-wave (CDW) transition . At the pressure of 27.9 GPa, our samples show a superconducting transition with onset critical temperature of about 80 K, in good agreement with the previous measurements . 6 onsite Coulomb interaction on Ni atoms U = 0 eV and 4 eV respectively. The onsite Coulomb interaction expels the t2g bands towards higher binding energies, so that the eg and t2g bands do not hybridize for U = 4 eV. Simultaneously, the ’üż band with a flat band top submerges below EF. Fig. 2c shows the calculated three-dimensional (3D) Fermi surface (FS), which suggests a weak kz dispersion, consistent with our experiments at different photon energies (See the Supplementary). There are three sets of FS sheets in the conventional BZ: a cylindrical electron pocket around the ╬ō╠ģ point, a cylindrical hole pocket around the X╠ģ/Y╠ģ point, and a flat FS sheet near the S╠ģ point (Figs. 2c and d). In the experiment, we observe a large rectangular pocket around the ╬ō╠ģ point (Fig. 2e), which originates from the band folding induced by the distortion (Figs. 1a-c) of the NiO6 octahedrons at the ambient pressure (See the Supplementary). In the conventional BZ (orange lines) (Fig. 2f), we resolve a hole pocket around the X╠ģ/Y╠ģ point and a small square-like pocket around the S╠ģ point, agreeing nicely with the calculation. The parallel FS provides an ideal condition for FS nesting (See the Supplementary), which may drive an instability towards long-range ordering states , as suggested by the calculation of the spin susceptibility . However, the existence of the density-wave ordering and its origin require further experimental and theoretical investigations. The electron pocket around ╬ō╠ģ is better visualized using laser-ARPES, consistent with the previous report . Based on the experimental FS in Figs. 2e-g, the carrier density is estimated to be about 0.249 e- per unit cell, in nice agreement with the theoretical predictions . Fig. 2h shows the band structure measured in a large energy range. The most prominent spectral features locate between -5.0 and -1.5 eV, with relatively weak intensity near EF. The comparison between the integrated energy-distribution curve (EDC) and calculated DOS shows an overall consistence (Fig. 2i). overall band dispersion along different momentum directions. We observe a hole band ’üż with a flat 7 band top and an electron band ’üĪ’Ć»’üó around the ╬ō╠ģŌĆ▓ point (the center of the second Brillouin zone) (Figs. 3b and c). The flat band is very close to EF, compared to that at about 50 meV below EF in the previous ARPES measurements . This difference might be due to the oxygen vacancies in the samples. The electron band ’üĪ’Ć»’üó was also observed in the second BZ and at other photon energies (See the Supplementary). Near the S╠ģ point, we observe an electron band ’ü¦ dispersing to about 100 meV below EF (Figs. 3b and d). Data collected using 75 eV and 86 eV are in general similar to each other, consistent with the layered crystal structure (Figs. 3c and e). It is noteworthy that the experimental band structure of La3Ni2O7 is very similar to that of La4Ni3O10 , which also shows superconductivity at high pressure . The calculated band structure with U = 4 eV is renormalized by a factor of about 5 and overlaid on the ARPES spectra in Figs. 3b-e. The calculation nicely reproduces the experimental band structure, suggesting a strong electronic correlation in the system . Consistently, we notice a waterfall- like structure at high energies, which has been widely observed in various correlated superconductors (white arrow in Fig. 3b) . It is noteworthy that the ’üĪ’Ć»’üó and ’ü¦ bands, with the estimated renormalization factor of about 2.7, are less-correlated than the flat ’üż band, in agreement with the orbital-dependent electronic correlation effect in the previous report , as indicated by the white dashed lines in Figs. 3b, 3d and 3e. By comparing with the orbital-projected calculation in Fig. 3f (See the Supplementary), we identify that the highly dispersive ’üĪ’Ć»’üó band and the flat ’üż band are contributed by Ni 3dx2ŌłÆy2 and 3dz2 orbitals, respectively . The electronic correlation and its orbital-dependence agree with previous ARPES experiment, while the latter reported a further enhancement of the correlation effect of the 3dz2 band along the ╬ō╠ģS╠ģ direction . The nice agreement between the experiments and calculations confirms the validity of our ab-initio calculations in the investigation of the electronic structure of La3Ni2O7. We further calculated the 8 band structure at high pressure that flattens the Ni-O layer and aligns NiO6 octahedrons along c. As shown in Fig. 3g, the bandwidth increases by about 25% and the ’üż band (the flat band in the experiment) moves closer to EF. Moreover, a van Hove singularity (saddle point) at the X╠ģ point also moves closer to EF. Along ╬ō╠ģS╠ģ the dx2ŌłÆy2 and dz2 orbitals show an enhanced mixture at high pressure. These changes of the band structure at high pressure will enhance the electronic DOS near EF, which favors the superconducting transition. temperature, the flat band stays put at temperatures up to about 120 K (Fig. 4a), as can be seen from the EDCs at ╬ō╠ģŌĆ▓ (Fig. 4b). We notice that the spectral weight of the ’üĪ’Ć»’üó band gradually reduces as approaching EF without a clear quasiparticle peak near EF, which is also noticeable in Ref. and is beyond the expectation of the typical Fermi-liquid picture. This behavior is better visualized in the laser-based ARPES measurements with improved energy and momentum resolutions as shown in Fig. 4c. In a large temperature range from 19 K to 120 K, the spectral weight of the ’üĪ band remains strongly suppressed near EF. The degree of the suppression reduces with increasing temperature, which is evident by the gradual shift of the leading edge of the EDCs at kF (Fig. 4b) towards high energies. The leading edge is below EF even at 120 K, which may be related to the multiple kink-like features in the resistance that are related to the density-wave states (Fig. 1f). Fig. 4d plots the leading-edge position as a function of temperature. It is clear that the leading-edge shift towards high-energies starts at about 100 K and reaches its maximum of about 9 meV at 19 K, showing a Bardeen-Cooper-Shrieffer (BCS)-like evolution. The temperature dependence of the dx2ŌłÆy2 band is reminiscent of the pseudogap in cuprate superconductors , However, one should notice that the observed pseudogap-like behavior is not necessarily related to the HTSC under pressure. It is also noteworthy that recent theoretical calculations likewise unravel a pseudogap in the DOS near EF , in agreement with our 9 experiments. We suggest that the observed pseudogap-like behavior of La3Ni2O7 may be due to the strong electronic correlation, the formation of possible density wave, and/or the hybridization between the ŌĆ£localizedŌĆØ dz2 orbital and ŌĆ£itinerantŌĆØ dx2ŌłÆy2 orbitals, which proposes further experimental and theoretical studies. On the other hand, the lacking of a well-defined Fermi edge in a metallic system suggests a non-Fermi-liquid behavior. Consistent with our observation, a non- Fermi-liquid behavior has also been revealed by the optical study and our ultrafast reflectivity measurements . Moreover, a non-Fermi-liquid state has been theoretically predicted in the Fmmm phase of La3Ni2O7 at high pressure, which is argued to be intimately correlated to the superconducting state . In conclusion, we have comprehensively studied the electronic structure of La3Ni2O7 at ambient pressure. The nice agreement between experiment and calculation with onsite Coulomb interaction and band renormalization suggests an important role of electronic correlation in the system. The dz2 band is flattened by the strong correlation, while the less-correlated dx2ŌłÆy2band shows a pseudogap-like behavior, which are reminiscent of the orbital-selective band renormalization in Fe- SCs and pseudogap in cuprates. At high pressure, the flat band is predicted to locate right at EF and is believed to be crucial for the HTSC. Our systematic experiments provide an electronic basis for exploring the Ni-based unconventional HTSC. METHODS Sample growth Single crystals of La3Ni2O7 were grown by the high-pressure optical floating zone technique . Raw materials of La2O3 were dried at 900 oC overnight prior to the reaction to avoid moisture contamination. Subsequently, La2O3 and NiO powders were mixed in a stoichiometric ratio with 10 1% ~2% excess of NiO and then ground thoroughly. The mixture was then pressed into pellets and sintered at 1100 ┬░C for 2 days with several intermediate grindings. The reactant was pressed into seed and feed rods with a diameter of about 6 mm under hydrostatic pressure and then sintered at 1300 ┬░C for 2 hours. The single-crystal growth was performed in a high-pressure optical floating zone furnace (HKZ-300) with an oxygen pressure of 15 bar. The growth rate was 2 mm/h and the feed and seed rods were rotated in opposite directions with speeds of 20 and 25 rpm, respectively. High-pressure transport measurement High-pressure in-situ electrical transport property was performed in Physical Property Measurement System (PPMS-9T) as described elsewhere . Nonmagnetic BeCu diamond anvil cell (DAC) with 200 um culet was employed to perform the in situ high-pressure resistivity measurements. A cubic-BN/epoxy mixture covers BeCu gasket as an insulator layer. The van der Pauw four-probe electrodes were applied on the cleavage plane. The pressure was determined by ruby fluorescence method . ARPES Synchrotron-based ARPES measurements were conducted at beamline 03U in Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation Facility (SSRF). The samples were cleaved in-situ under ultra-high vacuum below 7├Ś 10-11 mbar. Data were collected with a Scienta DA30 electron analyzer. The total energy and angular resolutions were set to 20 meV and 0.2┬░, respectively. Laser-based ARPES measurements were conducted at Tsinghua University. The 7-eV laser was generated by frequency doubling in a KBBF crystal and focused on the sample by an optical lens. Samples were cleaved in-situ under ultra-high vacuum below 6├Ś 10-11 mbar. Data were collected with a Scienta DA30L electron analyzer. The total energy and angular resolutions were set to 3 meV and 0.2┬░, respectively. Ab-initio calculations 11 First-principles band structure calculations were performed using Vienna ab-initio simulation package (VASP) with a plane wave basis. The exchange-correlation energy was considered under Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE) type generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with spin-orbit coupling included. Hubbard U = 4 eV was applied to describe the localized 3d orbitals of Ni atoms. The cutoff energy for the plane-wave basis was set to 400 eV. A ╬ō-centered Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh of 19├Ś19├Ś5 was adopted in the self-consistent calculations. Based on the tight-binding type Hamiltonian constructed from maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWF) supplied by the Wannier90 code , the surface-projected band structures were calculated with the WANNIERTOOLS package . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This work is funded by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grants No. 2022YFA1403100 and No. 2022YFA1403200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 12275148, No. 12004270, and No. 52272265), and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant No. 2022B1515120020). L. X. Y. acknowledges the support from Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS L.X.Y. conceived the scientific project. Y.D.L. and X.D. carried out ARPES measurements and data analyses with the assistance of W.X.Z., K.Y.Z., R.Z.X., Z.K.L., and Y.L.C. X.D. performed the ab-initio calculations with the help from G.L. Single crystals were synthesized and characterized by Y.T.C., M.X.Z., C.Y.P., Z.W.L., J.K.Z., Y.P.Q., and H.J.G. All authors contributed to the scientific planning and discussion. 12