Page 1 of 27 Title Signatures of a Spin-Active Interface and Locally Enhanced Zeeman field in a Superconductor- Chiral Material Heterostructure Authors Cliff Chen1†, Jason Tran1†, Anthony McFadden2, Raymond Simmonds2, Keisuke Saito3, En-De Chu1, Daniel Morales1, Varrick Suezaki1, Yasen Hou4,5, Joe Aumentado2, Patrick A. Lee4, Jagadeesh S. Moodera4,5 and Peng Wei1* Affiliations 1. Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, United States 2. National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80305, United States 3. Rigaku Americas, A Division of Rigaku Americas Holding, The Woodlands, TX 77381, United States 4. Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States 5. Francis Bitter Magnet Laboratory, and Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States * peng.wei@ucr.edu † These authors contributed equally to this work Abstract A localized Zeeman field, intensified at heterostructure interfaces, could play a crucial role in a broad area including spintronics and unconventional superconductors. Conventionally, the generation of a local Zeeman field is achieved through magnetic exchange coupling with a magnetic material. However, magnetic elements often introduce defects, which could weaken or destroy superconductivity. Alternatively, the coupling between a superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling and a non-magnetic chiral material could serve as a promising approach to generate a spin active interface. In this study, we leverage an interface superconductor, namely induced superconductivity in noble metal surface states, to probe the spin active interface. Our results unveil an enhanced interface Zeeman field, which selectively closes the surface superconducting gap while preserving the bulk superconducting pairing. The chiral material, i.e. trigonal tellurium, also induces Andreev bound states (ABS) exhibiting spin polarization. The field dependence of ABS manifests a substantially enhanced interface Landé g-factor (geff ~ 12), thereby corroborating the enhanced interface Zeeman energy. Teaser A spin-active interface between a chiral material and a superconductor with strong spin-orbit coupling has been demonstrated. Page 2 of 27 MAIN TEXT Introduction Heterostructures combining a structurally chiral material with a superconductor have recently unveiled unique features of induced spin polarization at the superconductor interface(1) and quasiparticle states of magnetic origin(2-5). The underlying mechanism is intricately associated with chirality-induced spin selectivity (CISS), a phenomenon that connects the structural chirality to the orbital angular momentum and spin of electrons. Although the theoretical framework of CISS is evolving, recent models and experimental investigations have underscored the imperative role of spin-orbit coupling (SOC) in facilitating the conversion of chirality-induced orbital polarization of an electron into spin polarization(6-8). In the context of superconductivity, therefore, obtaining an interface superconductor with strong SOC is highly desirable to elucidate the manifestation of CISS, and would be crucial for superconducting spintronics and topological superconductivity(9). Further, because CISS is an interface phenomenon, the quality of the interface is critical. In contrast to previous reports, where the interface is constructed ex-situ by integrating a superconductor with organic chiral molecules(1-5), an interface constructed under ultra-high vacuum (UHV) is desired. Such an interface may substantially enhance the Zeeman energy at the surface of a superconductor, which could serve as a candidate for creating unconventional quasiparticles such as Majorana bound states(10,11). The spin-active interface may also lead to well-defined spin-polarized quasiparticle bound states, i.e. Andreev bound states (ABS), suitable for constructing an Andreev spin qubit. Results By leveraging proximity effect, we induce superconductivity into a (111)-oriented Au layer, i.e. Au(111), to obtain a surface superconductor with strong SOC. We make Au(111) thin with the aim to acquire a full superconducting gap from an epitaxially grown superconductor layer underneath (Fig 1a). The Au(111) layer is expected to host Shockley surface states, which become superconducting due to proximity effect and may be used to sense any local Zeeman field once an Page 3 of 27 interface is formed on top(12,13). We synthesize high quality Au(111)/Nb bilayers (Methods and SM section-I). The crystallinity, sharp interface, and ultra-thin layers are confirmed by grazing incidence X-ray (GIXRD) and in situ electron diffraction characterizations (Fig 1a and SM section- I). The results demonstrate a substantially improved layer quality compared to the previously reported Au(111)/V materials(12-14). Because of strong SOC, the layers break the Pauli paramagnetic limit. Fig 1b shows the in-plane upper critical field (HC,∥) of Au(111)/Nb samples with varying Nb and Au thicknesses. When both Nb and Au(111) are thin, we obtain HC,∥ > HP. Here HP is the Pauli paramagnetic limit defined as HP = ∆ √2μB (∆ the superconducting gap, μB Bohr magneton) to account for the pair breaking energy when the magnetic field acts on the spin of the quasiparticles and when SOC is negligible(15). When SOC is considered, we adopt the implicit relation describing the pair breaking mechanism(15,16): ln TC TC0 = ψ ( 1 2) − ψ ( 1 2 + α 2πkBTC) (1) Here α is the pair-breaker strength (or pair breaking energy) defined as 2α = ħ τk with τk the lifetime of the Cooper pairs. TC0 is TC under zero applied field and ψ is the digamma function. In the presence of a planar field H and spin-orbit scattering, 2α = ħτSO( 2μBH ħ )2 holds with τSO denoting the spin-orbit scattering time. Thus, α = 2μB 2H2 ∆SO with ∆SO= ħ τSO defining the SOC splitting energy. with ∆SO ~ 1.4 meV. Because the heterostructure is consist of both Au(111) and Nb and the SOC of Nb is small, the fitted value of ∆SO may depend on Nb thickness. We expect larger ∆SO when Nb is thinner. We would also like to note that breaking the Pauli paramagnetic limit would otherwise not be possible if the thin (4 nm) Nb layer were not protected by the air inert Au(111) layer from oxidization. Page 4 of 27 To create an interface between a chiral material and Au(111), we explore low gap semiconductors, such as selenium (Se) or tellurium (Te), as a tunnel barrier. These materials, i.e. Se and Te, are known to have a trigonal phase, which is structurally chiral(17). We carry out modified point contact measurements using normal metal leads and barriers with a variable thickness to probe the induced superconductivity in Au(111) (Methods and Fig 1c). The dI/dV spectra are described by are modifiable upon changing the thickness of the tunnel barrier – evolving towards the tunneling dominated regime when the thickness increases, for example in Se barrier in Fig 1d (right). The BTK fitting results are given in Table S1 and discussed in SM section-II. However, because of the amorphous growth of the Se barrier, the quasiparticle lifetime broadening (Γ) is large (SM section- II), which obscures any subtle tunneling features that are narrow in energy. Using an epitaxially grown Te barrier (Fig 1d left), we obtain tunneling spectra with a dramatically reduced Γ, which is limited by temperature kBT (SM section-II). Because Γ is reduced, sharp tunneling features reminiscent of two superconducting gaps are observed in a thick Au(111) layer (15 nm) (Fig 1d left). The energy of the larger gap agrees with the bulk superconducting gap estimated from Δ ~ 1.76kBTC according to BCS model(15) and the measured TC = 6.3 K. We fit Fig 1d (left) using a sum of two BTK dI/dV conductance, namely a two-gap approach (SM section- III), to include both the bulk (ΔB) and surface (ΔS) gaps. The fit reproduces the data over a wide range of Vbias, yielding ΔB ~ 0.85 meV and ΔS ~ 0.33 meV, which exactly match the locations of the dI/dV peaks in Fig 1d (left). Although signatures of ΔS has been observed in Au(111) before(13), here ΔS stands out much more pronounced. In fact, Fig 1d (left) precisely reproduces Potter & Lee’s theory of induced surface superconductivity in Au(111)(18). Compared to the previous work where ΔS ~ 0.38 meV(13), here ΔS ~ 0.33 meV is comparable. When a planar field μ0H is applied, i.e. a magnetic field applied parallel to the thin film surface, ΔB and ΔS evolve with μ0H (Fig 2a). The gaps get reduced and are accompanied by a weakening Page 5 of 27 of the coherence peaks. Using the two-gap BTK model fitting, we reproduce the experimental data under all μ0H (Fig 2a). The fitting in Fig 2a further confirms the two-gap picture, i.e. the coexistence of ΔB and ΔS. To better demonstrate how ΔB and ΔS evolve with μ0H, we plot the dI/dV spectra as a function of Vbias and μ0H in a density plot (Fig 2b). The closing of ΔS is directly tied to the fill-up of the superconducting gap in the low Vbias regime (Fig 2b). The coherence peaks corresponding to ΔB also move in towards lower energies as μ0H increases. To quantify such a field dependence, we plot ΔS and ΔB against μ0H in Fig 2c. Here, the values of ΔS and ΔB are deduced from the two-gap BTK fitting according to the data in Fig 2a. There is a sharp contrast on their field dependence. ΔS vs. μ0H follows a square root dependence and is well fitted according to ΔS ~ √1 − ( H HC)2 (Fig 2c), which describes the gap closing of a superconductor in the thin film limit, i.e. thickness ≪ penetration depth(15). This agrees with the two-dimensional nature of ΔS. The square root fitting also outlines the gap in the low Vbias regime in Fig 2b, which confirms that the fill-up of the gap corresponds to the closing of ΔS. On the other hand, ΔB vs. μ0H does not follow the square root dependence (Fig 2c) – consistent to the bulk nature of ΔB. From the fitting, we extract the surface gap (ΔS) critical field ~ 2.1 T, whereas the critical field for ΔB is larger (Fig 2c). Interestingly, although ΔS < ΔB and one may expect smaller critical field for ΔS, the critical field (~ 2.1 T) is too small compared to the Pauli paramagnetic limit using HP = ∆S √2μB and ΔS ~ 0.33 meV (Fig 1d left and Fig 2a). This may suggest that ΔS is experiencing a stronger depairing mechanism. However, to confirm it, one need to make ΔS and ΔB comparable. Signatures of ΔS is also observed in another sample with a 10 nm Au(111) (SM section -V). To confirm that ΔS and ΔB are subject to different depairing mechanisms, we obtain ΔS ≈ ΔB in a thinner (5 nm) Au(111) sample. ΔS ≈ ΔB allows us to compare their field dependence (or depairing mechanism) side-by-side. Similarly, we carry out dI/dV measurements across an epitaxially grown Te barrier and control the Te thickness so that tunneling is dominated. At μ0H = 0 T (Fig 3a), Page 6 of 27 dI/dV shows one pair of coherence peaks. However, the evolution of the dI/dV spectra under μ0H cannot be explained by a single superconducting gap. At low fields, the gap is very sensitive to μ0H. The gap gets quickly filled-up accompanied by a transition of the dI/dV spectra from a U- shape gap (Fig 3a, 3b) to a V-shape gap (μ0H ~ 3 T, Fig 3c). At higher fields (after the transition, or μ0H > 3 T), the gap widens up again (Fig 3d) and evolves back towards a U-shape gap compared to Fig 3c. Interestingly, at high fields, the gap becomes robust and is nearly unresponsive to μ0H, which is demonstrated by an overlapped dI/dV spectra in a wide range of fields from μ0H ~ 5.5 T to 8.0 T (Fig 3d). This implies that the low field gap and the high field gap have different origins. Further, the transition between U- to V-shape dI/dV spectra signifies a non-concurrent closing of multiple superconducting gaps, which has also been reported elsewhere, for example in Au(111) with EuS islands(12). Therefore, Fig 3a-d agree with the coexistence of two superconducting gaps in Au(111). Here, we note that the U- to V-shape transition is not due to other sub-gap states, which are resolvable in our high resolution dI/dV measurements, for example the Andreev bound states (ABS) resolved in Fig 3e and Fig 4a. To better demonstrate the non-concurrent gap closing, we carry out detailed dI/dV measurements as a function of μ0H with a fine step field increment (Fig 3e). The density plot in Fig 3e clearly outlines the fill-up and closing of the low field gap, which resembles that in Fig 2b. However, because ΔS ≈ ΔB at μ0H = 0 T, the fast closing of ΔS suggests that ΔS is subject to a stronger depairing mechanism. To further prove that the high field gap (Fig 3d) corresponds to the bulk gap (or ΔB), we carry out simultaneous transport measurements (Fig 3f). The fact that the sample resistance stays precisely at zero throughout the full scan of μ0H (Fig 3f) confirms that the bulk sample is superconducting. The stronger depairing of ΔS shown in Fig 3e is unusual for a two-dimensional superconductor under a planar μ0H. To describe the pair breaking, we recall Eq 1. Because the pair breaking energy 2α = ħ τk = (2μBH)2 ∆SO , we rewrite α = EZ2 μBHSO with ∆SO= 2μBHSO and EZ = μBH. Here EZ is the corresponding Zeeman energy due to the applied field μ0H, whereas HSO is introduced as an Page 7 of 27 effective field to account for SOC. Considering that superconductivity is destroyed at α ~ ∆, one would expect ΔS and ΔB to have similar critical field or close at similar μ0H (or EZ) because ΔS ≈ ΔB at μ0H = 0 T (Fig 3). When SOC is taking into account, we expect the surface/interface critical field HC,∥ S (corresponds to ΔS) is even higher, because stronger SOC is expected at the interface according to Fig 1b. To estimate the bulk critical field (HC,∥ B ), we fit the transport data according to Eq 1 (Fig 3f inset), which yields HC,∥ B ~ 8.1 T at 300 mK. To estimate HC,∥ S , we note that it shall be reached shortly after the fill-up of the low-field gap across the transition at μ0H ~ 3 T (compared to Fig 2b). Therefore, we have HC,∥ S < HC,∥ B . Such a stronger depairing on ΔS cannot be solely explained by μ0H, and one needs to consider other depairing mechanisms for surface/interface. To explain HC,∥ S < HC,∥ B , we consider a stronger depairing for ΔS at the Te/Au(111) interface. Here, we notice that the surface of Au(111) is also the interface between Au(111) and the tunnel barrier Te (Fig 1c), which can be chiral if it is in the trigonal phase. We rewrite EZ = 1 2 geffμBH with geff the effective Landé g-factor, which absorbs all the contributions that enhance the interface EZ. To find out the relationship EZ ~ H, we focus on the low field regime in Fig 3e by expanding the field dependence of the in-gap states and re-plot it in Fig 4a (inset). Thanks to the high-quality epitaxial Te barrier with small Γ (SM section-II), subtle in-gap states are resolved. These states reminiscent themselves as a pair of small dI/dV peaks moving with H in a linear way (Fig 4a), which suggests that they could be ABS. Also, the linear field dependence and the crossing of the peaks (Fig 3e and Fig 4a) indicates that the states are spin polarized and the change of energy under a magnetic field is ∝ EZ. To do a quantitative analysis, we fit the ABS peaks and plot their energy vs. H (with error bar) in Fig 4a. According to EZ = 1 2 geffμBH, we have ΔEZ = 1 2 geffμB(ΔH). The fitting in Fig 4a yields geff ~ 12. Such geff, a six-fold increase compared to g ~ 2 in either Au(19) or Nb(20), cannot be explained by any bulk properties of the sample. Since ABS is often an interface effect, the large geff is likely due to interfacing Au(111) with the Te barrier. In fact, a picture considering Page 8 of 27 geff ~ 12 at Te-Au(111) interface and g ~ 2 in bulk Au(111)/Nb is consistent with the combined experimental results in Fig 2 and Fig 3. Noting that the surface gap closes at α = EZ2 μBHSO S ~ ΔS with EZ = 1 2 geffμBHC,∥ S , we have HC,∥ S ~ 1 geff/2 √HPHSO S . Here HSO S is HSO at the surface of Au(111) (or at Te/Au(111) interface), and HP = ∆S √2μB as defined. According to the thickness dependence in Fig 1b, HSO S > HP is expected at the interface. Therefore, we estimate HC,∥ S > 1 geff/2 HP. Taking HP ~ 11 T for ΔS ~ 0.9 meV (ΔS ≈ ΔB), we obtain HC,∥ S > 1.8 T – consistent to the fast closing of ΔS as shown in Fig 3e. The substantially enhanced Landé g-factor, i.e. geff ~ 12, agrees with a spin active interface, which explains the observed ABS in Fig 3e and 4a(21,22). Such an interface is expected to host spin triplet superconductivity(21,23) and requires a generalized BTK formalism beyond Eq S1 to model(23,24). In fact, the nearly magnetic field independent dI/dV spectra in Fig 3d (or after the closing of ΔS) is very unusual (Fig 3d), which cannot be simply explained by a superconducting gap following Eq S1 under μ0H. Also, because HC,∥ B ~ 8.1 T (Fig 3f), one would expect a substantial gap reduction when μ0H is approaching HC,∥ B . However, Fig 3d shows that the gap is nearly unchanged up to μ0H ~ 8.0 T and even slightly increased at μ0H ~ 8.0 T compared to μ0H ~ 5.5 T. Such an unusual superconducting gap (Fig 3d), robust against μ0H, could hint the spin triplet superconductivity. While we extract geff using ABS, it is not yet clear why there are spin polarized ABS at μ0H = 0 T. Particularly, we notice that no magnetic material with a spontaneous magnetization is present. To answer this question, we study the crystal structure of the epitaxially grown Te layer that is used as a tunnel barrier. Using Raman spectroscopy, we observe distinct Raman peaks at A1 = 121.15 The vibration modes in correspondence to each of the Raman peaks are illustrated in Fig 4b (inset). The A1 mode (the major peak in Fig 4b) corresponds to the breathing mode of the Te helical chain. Page 9 of 27 We further carry out in situ angle-dependent reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) measurements on the Te layer (SM section-IV). The results suggest that the six-fold rotation symmetry of Au(111) facilitates the growth of trigonal Te, which also has six-fold rotation symmetry (Fig 4b inset and SM section-IV). Combining Raman and RHEED results, we conclude that the Te barrier layer, when carefully grown, can be an epitaxial trigonal Te. The helical Te chains in a unit cell (Fig 4b inset) may give rise to domains with a distinct chirality. The size of the domain and its crystallinity may depend on the quality of Te and could get enhanced by improving the epitaxial growth. Because the junction has a microscopic area (Methods), it may help probing a local region of trigonal Te with a distinct chirality on average. Also, the ABS is a subtle interface phenomenon, therefore it may sensitively depend on the interface quality and the chiral domains of Te. Nevertheless, the combination of chiral Te and a superconductor with strong SOC (Fig 1b and 1c) satisfies the needed components for CISS(6-8). Compared to other work where g ~ 2 is reported(2,3), we demonstrate a much larger geff ~ 12, which highlights the spin active interface and directly points towards CISS. Here, we note that the high-quality interface we created in situ under UHV could be a key factor leading to the substantially enhanced CISS phenomena, whereas in other work the interface was often created in an ex-situ way by the adsorption of organic chiral molecules on the surface of a superconductor(2-5). To further demonstrate the superconductor heterostructure Au(111)/Nb has excellent microwave (RF) performance and can potentially be used as a component for superconducting qubits, we fabricate resonators using ultra-thin Au(111)/Nb layers (Fig 4c). We follow the same coplanar waveguide (CPW) design (Methods) as those used in conventional Nb resonators, which are often consisted of Nb layers that are one order of magnitude thicker. We carry out superconducting resonator measurements at 35 mK and find out that Au(111) limits the defect formation, i.e. the formation of uncontrolled Nb oxides, in ultra-thin Nb. It has been shown that the native oxides of Nb are the main sources responsible for two-level defects (TLS), i.e. possible trapping sites for Page 10 of 27 quasiparticles, and additional dielectric losses in commonly used transmon qubits, which causes qubit relaxation or decoherence(26,27). Using resonators fabricated from Au(111)/Nb (Methods), a RF frequency ~ 5.747 GHz at 35 mK temperature in one of the resonators. The resonance peak is well-defined with a Lorentzian line shape, which is fit using the established diameter correction method (DCM)(28) to extract internal (Qi) and external (Qe) quality factors. An internal quality (Q)-factor Qi > 106 is achieved when the averaged microwave photon number 〈n〉 is large (Fig 4e). When 〈n〉 is reduced towards the single photon limit (Fig 4e), Qi decreases to values between 2 - 4 × 105 due to the contribution of saturable TLS to RF power loss(29). We note that the narrow conductor/gap dimensions in our CPW resonator design will result in lower Qi values than designs with larger dimensions which dilute the participation of surfaces and interfaces (Methods). The Qi values observed near and below single photon powers in these chips are comparable to values obtained in conventional resonators with one order of magnitude thicker Nb films (100 nm) based on similar CPW design on sapphire (SM section-VI and Fig S7). This suggests that these high- quality Au(111)/Nb structures perform well even for these ultra-thin (12nm) Nb layers and are suited for use in superconducting qubits such as transmons. In addition, the high Qi values observed suggests Au(111) limits the defects in Nb and thereby resulting minimal in-gap states. Discussion In conclusion, we have demonstrated an enhanced Zeeman field at Te(trigonal)/Au(111) interface giving rise to geff S ~ 12. Such an enhanced interface Zeeman field closes the surface superconducting gap of Au(111) while maintaining the bulk superconductivity, thereby providing an alternative route to creating a unique surface/interface superconductor. One may exploit such locally enhanced Zeeman field to construct a nanostructured topological superconductor (TSC) by patterning, for example, nanowires of trigonal Te over Au(111)(10,11). The Te layer may at the same time serve as a high-quality tunnel barrier – making it advantageous in fabricating multi- Page 11 of 27 terminal planar tunneling devices involving TSC(30,31). An epitaxially grown Te layer in its trigonal form on Au(111)/Nb could also be useful for superconducting spintronics. Also, we have demonstrated a substantially enlarged ΔS (Fig 3), several fold of increase compared to the prior report(13), achieving ΔS ≈ ΔB in 5 nm Au(111) grown on Nb. Theory simulations have shown that a larger surface superconducting gap may result in a larger topological gap giving rise to a robust TSC(10,12). Moreover, ΔS ≈ ΔB ensures that the whole Au(111) layer is fully gapped, which limits microwave loss due to quasiparticle excitations across the gap, as well as reducing TLS defects that lead to dielectric losses. These are essential for applying Au(111)/Nb in microwave resonators and superconducting qubits. Materials and Methods The Au(111)/Nb bilayers are grown using molecular bean epitaxy (MBE). The Nb layer thickness can be controlled down to a few nanometers and the Au(111) layer thickness down to a few angstroms. Following the growth, Au(111)/Nb samples are routinely taken out of the UHV chamber for transport and tunneling measurements in an Oxford 3He Heliox® cryostat. The point contact spectroscopy is carried out using a normal metal (gold) wire touching the sample surface forming a junction with a controlled tunnel barrier layer (Te or Se) added. The point contact wire is made in a way to allow four-terminal differential conductance (dI/dV) measurement through the junction (Fig 1c inset). The junction usually has an area of ~ 20 μm in diameter. dI/dV measurement is performed at a temperature ~ 300 mK with a modulation voltage ≤ kBT. The Au(111)/Nb CPW resonators are fabricated following a standard design consisting of eight inductively coupled quarter wave resonators in a “hanger” configuration with resonances falling between 4 - 8 GHz using standard photolithography steps and Ar ion milling. The CPW design chosen has conductor/gap dimensions of 6μm /3μm. These narrow dimensions are chosen to increase the participation of the surfaces and interfaces thus making the loss measurement more sensitive to their contribution(32). After resonator fabrication, the chip was installed in a Au-plated Page 12 of 27 Cu sample package using Al wire bonds. RF characterization of frequency multiplexed CPW resonators was performed in a dilution refrigerator having a base temperature of 35 mK. Each chip having dimensions 7.5 mm × 7.5 mm contains 8 frequency-multiplexed 1⁄4 wave hanger resonators with a central feedline. Power dependent transmission (S21) measurements were performed at base temperature spanning powers corresponding to ~106 to ~0.1 photon occupation in the resonator. Each resonator is measured using a vector network analyzer, and the Lorentzian spectra are fit using the established diameter correction method (DCM) to extract internal and coupling quality factors (Qi andQe) as a function of photon number(28). The signal and amplifier chain used is similar to that outlined previously(32) with amplifiers installed at 4 K and at room temperature. A Josephson parametric amplifier installed at the mixing chamber (35 mK) was used for all low power measurements (below ~ 103 photon occupation). For sample structure characterizations, ex-situ X-ray based analyses are performed using Rigaku GIXRD system. In situ reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) is carried out using a 7.5 mW electron beam. Ex-situ Raman spectroscopy is carried out using a Horiba LabRam system, in which a 532 nm unpolarized excitation laser with a 100μm spot size was used to scan the films.