Eliminating Surface Oxides of Superconducting Circuits with Noble Metal Encapsulation Ray D. Chang,1, ∗ Nana Shumiya,1, ∗ Russell A. McLellan,1, † Yifan Zhang,1 Matthew P. Bland,1 Faranak Bahrami,1 Junsik Mun,2, 3 Chenyu Zhou,2 Kim Kisslinger,2 Guangming Cheng,4 Alexander C. Pakpour-Tabrizi,1 Nan Yao,4 Yimei Zhu,3 Mingzhao Liu,2 Robert J. Cava,5 Sarang Gopalakrishnan,1 Andrew A. Houck,1 and Nathalie P. de Leon1, ‡ 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 2Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 3Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 4Princeton Materials Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 5Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA (Dated: August 26, 2024) The lifetime of superconducting qubits is limited by dielectric loss, and a major source of dielectric loss is the native oxide present at the surface of the superconducting metal. Specifically, tantalum- based superconducting qubits have been demonstrated with record lifetimes, but a major source of loss is the presence of two-level systems (TLSs) in the surface tantalum oxide. Here, we demonstrate a strategy for avoiding oxide formation by encapsulating the tantalum with noble metals that do not form native oxide. By depositing a few nanometers of Au or AuPd alloy before breaking vacuum, we completely suppress tantalum oxide formation. Microwave loss measurements of superconducting resonators reveal that the noble metal is proximitized, with a superconducting gap over 80% of the bare tantalum at thicknesses where the oxide is fully suppressed. We find that losses in resonators fabricated by subtractive etching are dominated by oxides on the sidewalls, suggesting total surface encapsulation by additive fabrication as a promising strategy for eliminating surface oxide TLS loss in superconducting qubits. Superconducting qubits are the basis of many large scale quantum processors, enabling demonstrations of quantum error correction [1–3], quantum many body physics [4–7], and quantum simulation [8–10]. Despite this progress, single qubit coherence remains a major lim- iting factor in building scalable processors based on su- perconducting qubits. Single qubit coherence is limited by dielectric loss, particularly at surfaces and interfaces [11–14]. Tantalum-based superconducting qubits have recently been discovered to enable record lifetimes and coherence times [15–17]. Losses in state-of-the-art tan- talum devices are dominated by TLSs in surface oxides and the bulk substrate . Avoiding the forma- tion of surface oxides would eliminate this loss channel, and recent studies have demonstrated that encapsulation with other materials can mitigate losses associated with surface oxides of niobium , pointing to a potential strategy for avoiding surface losses in tantalum (Ta). Here we encapsulate Ta superconducting resonators by depositing a noble metal (gold or gold-palladium) after the Ta deposition, before breaking vacuum. We characterize the film using x-ray photoelectron spec- troscopy (XPS), scanning transmission electron mi- croscopy (STEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), and energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to show that the tantalum oxide is completely suppressed with only a few nanometers of noble metal encapsula- tion. The noble metal encapsulation layer is a normal (non-superconducting) metal, so it may contribute to ad- ditional loss if the normal metal is not fully proximitized by the underlying superconducting film [22–25]. We fab- ricate resonators with these encapsulated films, and per- form microwave measurements to confirm the proximiti- zation of the noble metal layer and to determine the ef- fective superconducting gap of the heterostructure, which varies with encapsulation thicknesses. By fitting the de- pendence of the effective gap on encapsulation thickness with numerical solutions of the Usadel equations , we estimate an interface transparency and find that it is con- sistent with a high quality, Ohmic contact. By comparing materials characterization with microwave device mea- surements, we find a wide range of encapsulation thick- nesses that suppress the surface oxide while maintaining a high quality factor at base temperatures, from 3 nm to 26 nm. These results point to a promising strategy for eliminating surface oxide loss via total encapsulation and additive nanofabrication. We deposit gold (Au) or gold palladium alloy (AuPd) on top of 200 nm thick α-Ta films grown on 550 μm thick c-plane sapphire substrates with dc magnetron sputtering [27–31]. The Au (AuPd) encapsulation layer is deposited in situ right after the Ta film growth inside an ultra high vacuum chamber (with base pressure value of 5 × 10−9 Torr), avoiding the growth of native oxide, as verified by STEM [Figs. 1(a,b)]. In order to quantify the degree of surface oxidation, arXiv:2408.13051v1 [cond-mat.supr-con] 23 Aug 2024 2 Oxide suppression via noble metal encapsulation. (a) Survey annular dark-field (ADF) image of encapsulated Ta film cross section, green box indicates cross-sectional STEM region in (b). The scale bar is 20 nm long. (b) False colored EELS elemental map overlaid over ADF image shows spatial distribution of Ta (orange), Au (yellow), and oxygen (purple), found by integrating over the respective ionization edge. The Ta-Au interface is oxygen-free, demonstrating suppression of the tantalum oxide. The oxygen signal seen above the film comes from a permanent marker layer applied for protection against focused ion beam damage. (c) Ta4f XPS spectra of bare Ta (blue) and Ta encapsulated with Au (orange). The bare Ta spectrum exhibits four peaks, two from Ta metal and two from Ta2O5. The encapsulated Ta spectrum does not con- tain oxide peaks. (d) Atomic percentage of Ta2O5 for varying thicknesses of Au (orange) and AuPd (green) encapsulation, compared to the native oxide on a bare Ta film (blue). The Ta2O5 fraction is extracted from the ratio of normalized in- tensities of the Ta2O5 and metal Ta peaks. 2.5 nm of Au or 1 nm of AuPd is enough to suppress the tantalum oxide from forming. The vertical error bars reflect fit uncertainties and the horizontal error bars reflect instrumental thickness mea- surement uncertainties; for most data points these error bars are smaller than the plot markers we use XPS to measure the atomic percentage of tan- talum pentoxide (Ta2O5) in the Ta4f spectrum [Figs. 1(c,d)]. The Ta4f spectrum consists of 2 sets of dou- blet peaks, metallic Ta at 22 eV and 24 eV and Ta2O5 at 27 eV and 29 eV [Fig. The Ta2O5 peaks are not present in the binding energy spectrum of Au-encapsulated Ta, demonstrating that the amorphous surface oxides of Ta have been suppressed. We systematically investigate the encapsulation con- ditions needed to fully suppress the tantalum oxide by measuring Ta4f XPS spectra for various thicknesses of Au or AuPd encapsulation layers and extracting the in- tensity of the Ta2O5 peaks. Note that for very thin en- capsulation layers, we report an effective thickness based on deposition rates, see for more details. We obtain higher Ta2O5 intensity with nominal Au (AuPd) thick- ness less than 2.5 (1) nm, which we hypothesize is caused by an oxidation catalysis effect from small Au (AuPd) is- lands . However, we find that 2.5 (1) nm of encapsulating Au (AuPd) is enough to fully suppress the tantalum oxide [Fig. 1(d)], which indicates a material- dependent critical thickness at which the encapsulation film completely covers the Ta surface and forms an oxy- gen diffusion barrier. We measure the degree of proximitization of the noble metal encapsulation by fabricating coplanar waveguide (CPW) quarter-wave resonators on various encapsulated Ta films with designs that were used in our prior work . The losses associated with TLSs and quasiparticles (QPs) can be characterized by measuring the resonance frequency as a function of temperature, or alternatively by measuring the internal quality factor as a function of intracavity photon number and temperature . From these measurements, the effective superconducting gap energy can be extracted . Measuring the effective superconducting gap energy of encapsulated Ta films. (a) The measured frequency shift of two resonators with 50 nm (dark blue) and 5 nm Au (light blue) encapsulation layers as a function of temperature. The dashed grey lines are a fit to a model incorporating TLSs and quasiparticles . Vertical error bars reflect fit uncer- tainties, and are smaller than the plot markers. (b) Cartoon of a Ta-Au superconductor-normal metal bilayer with respec- tive Ta and Au thicknesses of dS and dN (left). Quasiparticle DOS in units of N0, the normal-state DOS at the Fermi sur- face, at different positions in the Ta-Au bilayer (right). The density of states is obtained by numerically solving the Usadel equations. Different colors correspond to different locations in the bilayer represented by the color map on the left, and each curve is manually offset for ease of viewing. The red ar- row denotes the location of the minigap’s opening in the Au (normal metal) layer. (c) Effective gap in units of ∆0, the bulk Ta gap, extracted from microwave measurements of res- onators with varying encapsulation thicknesses. The vertical error bars reflect uncertainties from the fit to the supercon- ducting energy gap and the horizontal error bars reflect in- strumental thickness measurement uncertainties. The dashed line is a fit to numerically calculated minigaps. As a representative example, the frequency shift of res- 3 onators with 5 nm and 50 nm Au encapsulation layers that are otherwise identical is markedly different in the high temperature regime [Fig. 2(a)]. In the low tempera- ture regime, the non-monotonic dependence of frequency on temperature is dominated by TLSs , and the two resonators exhibit similar behavior. At higher tem- peratures, the more rapid change in frequency with tem- perature is caused by thermal quasiparticles . With a thicker encapsulating layer we observe a larger change in the frequency shift at high temperature, indi- cating a larger population of thermal quasiparticles [Fig. 2(a)]. These effects can be parameterized by a reduction in the effective superconducting gap energy of the film. This softening of the gap can be understood through the superconducting proximity effect [22–25]. We quantitatively investigate the superconducting na- ture of encapsulated Ta films by extracting the effective gap of films undergoing additional iterative sputtering of Au to vary the encapsulation layer thickness from 5 to 323 nm [Fig. We observe a decrease in the effective gap in our devices as the encapsulation thick- ness increases. These results can be explained by distor- tions in the quasiparticle density of states (DOS) across the superconductor-normal metal interface caused by the proximity effect. Our measurements are particularly sen- sitive to higher populations of thermal quasiparticles in- duced by the opening of a superconducting energy gap smaller than the bulk Ta gap (∆0) in the normal metal layer denoted as the minigap, ∆mini [Fig. 2(b)]. Here, the microwave resonator measurements are domi- nated by changes in the surface impedance of the film, and are thus most sensitive to the properties of the nor- mal metal layer at the surface. To understand the evolution of minigap size with in- creasing thicknesses of encapsulating Au, we fit our data to numerically calculated minigaps using the Us- adel equations [Fig. 2(c)][26, 27, 38–42]. The only free fit parameter is the electron interface transparency, which we fit to a value of t = 0.24+.17 −.08 (see for de- tails on error estimations). This high interface trans- parency is consistent with the suppression of tantalum oxide and the formation of an Ohmic contact, and it is comparable with other reported transparency values of superconductor-normal metal interfaces grown via in situ sputtering . For Au encapsulation thicknesses of around 3 nm where the tantalum oxide is completely suppressed [Fig. 1(d)], the effective gap energy is still greater than 80% of the bulk Ta gap. We observe an ideal range of encapsula- tion thicknesses from 3 to 26 nm over which encapsulated resonators maintain a high quality factor (≈ 107) at base temperatures and high powers. These results indicate that encapsulated Ta films are a viable material platform for fabricating superconducting circuits with minimal re- duction in the effective gap. To characterize the surface and interface losses of en- Dielectric loss associated with TLSs of encapsu- lated Ta resonators. (a) Dependence of QTLS,0 on SPR. The SPR values are obtained through electromagnetic simulations of the electric field participation at the metal-substrate inter- face. Dashed lines are fitted surface loss tangents of devices fabricated with bare Ta (blue) from reference , and those encapsulated with Au (orange) or AuPd (green). Encapsu- lated devices have a higher fitted surface loss tangent. (b) Cross-sectional STEM-ADF image of an Au-encapsulated Ta resonator (top) and corresponding elemental map extracted from STEM-EDX measurements (bottom). The elemental map is formed by integrating over the Au M (yellow), oxygen K (red), and Ta M (blue) ionization edges. The presence of oxygen on the sidewall indicates tantalum oxide formation. The scale bar in both images is 20 nm long. (c) Dc finite element simulation of the electric field magnitude of a cross section in an encapsulated device. The film is modeled as a 200 nm thick Ta film, with a 3 nm thick sidewall oxide with dielectric constant 10, and a 4 nm thick encapsulating metal layer. Hot spots of electric field intensity are seen at the top and bottom corners of the device. The scale bar is 50 nm long. (d) Ratio of simulated electric field participation of the metal-air interface of sidewalls, pMA,side, to electric field par- ticipation of the total metal-air interface (including sidewalls and top surface), pMA,total. The ratio is plotted as a function of the distance, d, between the center pin and ground plane conductors of the CPW resonators (inset). capsulated resonators, we vary their geometry to change the surface participation ratio (SPR) of the electric field energy . By measuring the temperature- dependent frequency shift, as well as the dependence of internal quality factor on temperature and intracavity photon number, we can also extract the linear absorption due to TLSs, denoted as QTLS,0, see for details. This extracted parameter captures the contribution of TLSs to dielectric loss. We fit a linear relationship be- tween extracted QTLS,0 values and SPR, taking the fitted slope to be the surface TLS dielectric loss tangent [Fig. 3(a), Table I] . Fitted loss tangents for each film type are also plotted along with loss tangent values for 4 Film tan δ Bare Ta (15.9 ± 0.7) ×10−4 Au encapsulation (19.5 ± 2) ×10−4 [This work] AuPd encapsulation (25.8 ± 0.8) ×10−4 [This work] fit to SPR bare Ta devices obtained in our previous work as com- parison . Despite the suppression of surface oxides, we do not observe an improvement in the surface TLS loss, and we observe slightly higher surface loss tangents with en- capsulated films compared to bare Ta devices. Because our resonators are patterned by a subtractive etch pro- cess, the fabrication-exposed sidewalls are not encapsu- lated and thus grow surface oxide, which can be observed in TEM images [Fig. 3(b)]. To determine the contribu- tion of the sidewall oxide on device performance, we per- form dc finite element electric field simulations (Ansys Maxwell) on the cross section of encapsulated devices to determine the contribution of the sidewall oxide to the electric field energy’s surface participation. We assume a 3 nm thick oxide layer with dielectric constant 10 on the sidewall and a 4 nm thick encapsulation layer. These two layers make up the the modeled metal-air interface in our devices. We denote the total electric field energy partic- ipation in both of these two layers as pMA,total, and the electric field energy participation in the sidewall oxide as pMA,side. The sidewall oxide dominates the total partic- ipation ratio, accounting for more than 90% of electric field energy participation along the metal-air interfaces across all device geometries [Fig. 3(d)]. The large par- ticipation ratio of the sidewall oxide arises from the 2D geometry of the device, in which the field resides in the gap between metal structures and is concentrated at the corners [Fig. 3(c)]. Beyond the sidewall oxide, the slightly higher mea- sured surface loss tangents of encapsulated devices may arise from increased sidewall roughness. The multi- layer structure requires multiple etching steps in the res- onator fabrication process, and the additional etching step causes rougher sidewall profiles compared to bare Ta devices . Rougher sidewalls have higher surface area and can concentrate the electric field, and thus in- crease the surface participation ratio beyond the simu- lated value, leading to a higher fitted surface loss tan- gent. Here we have demonstrated complete suppression of the native surface oxide of Ta using noble metal encapsu- lation, and we find that these films remain superconduct- ing because of proximitization of the encapsulation layer by the underlying Ta. These encapsulated resonators ex- hibit performance that is similar to state-of-the-art Ta circuits at mK temperatures. Our ongoing work includes developing fabrication strategies that can achieve total Ta encapsulation to avoid the formation of oxides on the device sidewalls, for example by additive fabrication . Beyond improving the performance of superconducting qubits, our strategy for superconducting gap engineering via noble metal encapsulation may have applications in on-chip filters for quasiparticle trapping and multi- channel kinetic inductance detectors . Acknowledgements.— We thank Basil Smitham, Kevin Crowley, and Lev Krayzman for helpful discussions. This work was primarily supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, National Quantum Infor- mation Science Research Centers, Co-design Center for Quantum Advantage (C2QA) under Contract No. DE- SC0012704. Materials growth and analysis was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (RAISE The authors acknowledge the use of Princeton’s Imaging and Analysis Center (IAC), which is partially supported by the Princeton Center for Complex Materials (PCCM), a National Science Foundation Mate- rials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC; DMR-2011750), as well as the Princeton Micro/Nano Fabrication Laboratory. We also acknowledge MIT Lin- coln Labs for supplying a traveling wave parametric am- plifier. Princeton University Professor Andrew Houck is also a consultant for Quantum Circuits Incorporated (QCI). Due to his income from QCI, Princeton University has a management plan in place to mitigate a potential con- flict of interest that could affect the design, conduct and reporting of this research. ∗ These authors contributed equally to this work. † Present address: Archer Aviation, San Jose, California 95134, USA ‡ npdeleon@princeton.edu V. V. Sivak, A. Eickbusch, B. Royer, S. Singh, I. Tsiout- sios, S. Ganjam, A. Miano, B. L. Brock, A. Z. Ding, L. Frunzio, S. M. Girvin, R. J. Schoelkopf, and M. H. De- voret, Real-time quantum error correction beyond break- even, Nature 616, 50 (2023). R. Acharya et al., Suppressing quantum errors by scaling a surface code logical qubit, Nature 614, 676 (2023). A. Koottandavida et al., Erasure detection of a dual-rail qubit encoded in a double-post superconducting cavity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 132, 180601 (2024). A. J. Koll ́ar, M. Fitzpatrick, and A. A. Houck, Hyper- bolic lattices in circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nature X. Mi et al., Time-crystalline eigenstate order on a quan- tum processor, Nature 601, 531 (2022). T. I. Andersen et al., Non-abelian braiding of graph ver- tices in a superconducting processor, Nature 618, 264 T. I. Andersen et al., Thermalization and critical- ity on an analog-digital quantum simulator (2024), 5 arXiv:2405.17385 [quant-ph]. A. H. Karamlou et al., Quantum transport and localiza- tion in 1d and 2d tight-binding lattices, npj Quantum Information 8, 35 (2022). J. G. C. Martinez, C. S. Chiu, B. M. Smitham, and A. A. Houck, Flat-band localization and interaction-induced delocalization of pho- tons, Science Advances 9, eadj7195 https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.adj7195. A. H. Karamlou et al., Probing entanglement in a 2d hard-core bose–hubbard lattice, Nature 629, 561 (2024). A. P. Read, B. J. Chapman, C. U. Lei, J. C. Cur- tis, S. Ganjam, L. Krayzman, L. Frunzio, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Precision measurement of the microwave di- electric loss of sapphire in the quantum regime with parts-per-billion sensitivity, Phys. Rev. Appl. 19, 034064 N. P. de Leon, K. M. Itoh, D. Kim, K. K. Mehta, T. E. Northup, H. Paik, B. S. Palmer, N. Samarth, S. Sangtawesin, and D. W. Steuerman, Materials chal- lenges and opportunities for quantum computing hard- ware, Science 372, eabb2823 (2021). J. Krupka, K. Derzakowski, M. Tobar, J. Hartnett, and R. G. Geyer, Complex permittivity of some ultralow loss dielectric crystals at cryogenic temperatures, Meas. Sci. Technol. 10, 387 (1999). J. Krupka, K. Derzakowski, A. Abramowicz, M. Tobar, and R. Geyer, Use of whispering-gallery modes for com- plex permittivity determinations of ultra-low-loss dielec- tric materials, IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech. 47, A. P. M. Place et al., New material platform for supercon- ducting transmon qubits with coherence times exceeding 0.3 milliseconds, Nat. Commun. 12, 1779 (2021). C. Wang et al., Towards practical quantum computers: transmon qubit with a lifetime approaching 0.5 millisec- onds, npj Quantum Information 8, 3 (2022). S. Ganjam, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, A. Banerjee, C. U. Lei, L. Krayzman, K. Kisslinger, C. Zhou, R. Li, Y. Jia, M. Liu, L. Frunzio, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Surpassing mil- lisecond coherence in on chip superconducting quantum memories by optimizing materials and circuit design, Na- ture Communications 15, 3687 (2024). K. D. Crowley et al., Disentangling losses in tantalum su- perconducting circuits, Phys. Rev. X 13, 041005 (2023). R. A. McLellan et al., Chemical profiles of the ox- ides on tantalum in state of the art superconduct- ing circuits, Advanced Science 10, 2300921 (2023), https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/advs.202300921. M. Bal et al., Systematic improvements in transmon qubit coherence enabled by niobium surface encapsula- tion, npj Quantum Information 10, 43 (2024). M. C. de Ory, D. Rodriguez, M. T. Magaz, V. Rollano, D. Granados, and A. Gomez, Low loss hybrid nb/au superconducting resonators for quantum circuit applica- tions (2024), arXiv:2401.14764. W. Belzig, C. Bruder, and G. Sch ̈on, Local density of states in a dirty normal metal connected to a supercon- ductor, Phys. Rev. B 54, 9443 (1996). R. Barends, W. K. Daalman, A. Endo, S. Zhu, T. Zijlstra, and T. M. Klapwijk, Frequency and quality factor of NbTiN/Au bilayer superconduct- ing resonators, AIP Conference Proceedings 152 https://pubs.aip.org/aip/acp/article- pdf/1185/1/152/12248182/152 1 online.pdf. A. Gurevich and T. Kubo, Surface impedance and op- timum surface resistance of a superconductor with an imperfect surface, Phys. Rev. B 96, 184515 (2017). S. S. Ustavshchikov, A. Y. Aladyshkin, V. V. Kurin, V. A. Markelov, A. I. El’kina, A. M. Klushin, P. A. Yunin, V. V. Rogov, and D. Y. Vodolazov, Microwave impedance of thin-film superconductor–normal metal hybrid struc- tures with a high conductivity ratio, Physics of the Solid State 61, 1675 (2019). K. D. Usadel, Generalized diffusion equation for super- conducting alloys, Phys. Rev. Lett. 25, 507 (1970). See supplemental material at [url will be inserted by pub- lisher] for details on film growth, device fabrication, film characterization, and theoretical models. D. W. Face and D. E. Prober, Nucleation of body- centered-cubic tantalum films with a thin niobium un- derlayer, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 5, 3408–3411 (1987). L. Gladczuk, A. Patel, C. Paur, and M. Sosnowski, Tan- talum films for protective coatings of steel, Thin Solid Films 467, 150 (2004). S. Nakagomi and Y. Kokubun, Crystal orientation of beta-ga2o3 thin films formed on c-plane and a-plane sapphire substrate, Journal of Crystal Growth 349, 12 D. Mukherjee, P. Mukherjee, H. Srikanth, and S. Wi- tanachchi, Carrier-mediated interaction of magnetic moments in oxygen vacancy–controlled epitaxial Mn- doped ZnO thin films, Journal of Applied Physics 111, https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article- J. F. Moulder, W. F. Stickle, P. E. Sobol, and K. D. Bomben, Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: A Reference Book of Standard Spectra for Identification and Interpretation of XPS Data (Physical Electronics Division, Perkin-Elmer Corporation, Eden Prairie, MN USA., 1992). C. Hu, Z. Chen, C. Wei, X. Wan, W. Li, and Q. Lin, Au nanoparticles supported on iron-based oxides for soot oxidation: Physicochemical properties before and after the reaction, ACS Omega 6, 11510 (2021). H. Yang et al., Enhancing co oxidation activity via tuning a charge transfer between gold nanoparticles and sup- ports, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C 126, 4836 J. Gao, The Physics of Superconducting Microwave Res- onators, Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology C. M. Quintana et al., Characterization and reduction of microfabrication-induced decoherence in superconduct- ing quantum circuits, Appl. Phys. Lett. 105, 062601 L. Gr ̈unhaupt, Loss mechanisms and quasiparticle dy- namics in superconducting microwave resonators made of thin-film granular aluminum, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.117001 (2018). J. M. Martinis, G. Hilton, K. Irwin, and D. Wollman, Calculation of tc in a normal-superconductor bilayer using the microscopic-based usadel theory, Nuclear In- struments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 444, 23 (2000). P. G. De Gennes, Boundary effects in superconductors, 6 Rev. Mod. Phys. 36, 225 (1964). W. Belzig, F. K. Wilhelm, C. Bruder, G. Sch ̈on, and A. D. Zaikin, Quasiclassical green’s function approach to mesoscopic superconductivity, Superlattices and Mi- crostructures 25, 1251 (1999). N. Ashcroft and N. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Cen- gage Learning, 2011). N. Bobrov, L. Rybal’chenko, V. Fisun, and I. Yan- son, Point-contact electron-phonon interaction function in tantalum, arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.01800 (2015). R. Hennings-Yeomans et al., Controlling Tc of iridium films using the proximity ef- fect, Journal of Applied Physics 128, https://pubs.aip.org/aip/jap/article- C. Wang, C. Axline, Y. Y. Gao, T. Brecht, Y. Chu, L. Frunzio, M. H. Devoret, and R. J. Schoelkopf, Sur- face participation and dielectric loss in superconducting qubits, Appl. Phys. Lett. 107, 162601 (2015). I. Tsioutsios, K. Serniak, S. Diamond, V. V. Sivak, Z. Wang, S. Shankar, L. Frunzio, R. J. Schoelkopf, and M. H. Devoret, Free-standing silicon shadow masks for transmon qubit fabrication, AIP Advances 10, 065120 (2020), https://pubs.aip.org/aip/adv/article- M. McEwen et al., Resisting high-energy impact events through gap engineering in superconducting qubit arrays (2024), arXiv:2402.15644 [quant-ph]. M. R. Vissers, J. Gao, M. Sandberg, S. M. Duff, D. S. Wisbey, K. D. Irwin, and D. P. Pappas, Proximity-coupled ti/tin multilayers for use in kinetic inductance detectors, Applied Physics Letters 102, J. Hu, M. Salatino, A. Traini, C. Chaumont, F. Bous- saha, C. Goupil, and M. Piat, Proximity-coupled al/au bilayer kinetic inductance detectors, Journal of Low Tem- perature Physics 199, 355 (2020). Supplementary information for “Eliminating Surface Oxides of Superconducting Circuits with Noble Metal Encapsulation” Ray D. Chang,1, ∗ Nana Shumiya,1, ∗ Russell A. McLellan,1, † Yifan Zhang,1 Matthew P. Bland,1 Faranak Bahrami,1 Junsik Mun,2, 3 Chenyu Zhou,2 Kim Kisslinger,2 Guangming Cheng,4 Alexander C. Pakpour-Tabrizi,1 Nan Yao,4 Yimei Zhu,3 Mingzhao Liu,2 Robert J. Cava,5 Sarang Gopalakrishnan,1 Andrew A. Houck,1 and Nathalie P. de Leon1, ‡ 1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 2Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 3Condensed Matter Physics and Materials Science Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, USA 4Princeton Materials Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA 5Department of Chemistry, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA (Dated: August 26, 2024) CONTENTS I. Sample fabrication 1 A. Film growth 1 B. Device fabrication 2 II. Measurement apparatus 2 III. Crystallinity of tantalum films 2 IV. Surface morphology of encapsulated films 3 V. XPS characterization 4 A. Experimental and analysis details 4 B. Encapsulation layer dependent oxide thickness 4 VI. DC resistivity measurements 5 VII. Characterizing the surface TLS contribution to dielectric loss and the superconducting energy gap 6 VIII. Modeling superconducting gap of encapsulated films with Usadel equations 7 A. Overview 7 B. Fitting procedure 8