1 High-temperature Superconducting Oxide without Copper at Ambient Pressure S. Lin Er Chow,† Zhaoyang Luo, A. Ariando† Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117551, Singapore †Corresponding author: le.chow@u.nus.edu, ariando@nus.edu.sg The discovery of superconductivity in the Ba-La-Cu-O system (the cuprate) at the 30 K range in 1986 marked a significant breakthrough, as it far exceeded the highest known critical temperature (Tc) at the time and surpassed the predicted 30 K limit, which was thought to be the maximum before phonon-mediated electron pairing would break down due to thermal excitation. Despite recent successful observations of superconductivity in nickel-oxide-based compounds (the nickelate), superconductivity above 30 K at ambient pressure in a system that is isostructural and isoelectronic to the cuprate but without copper has remained elusive. Here, we report a superconducting Tc above 35 K under ambient pressure in hole-doped, late rare-earth infinite-layer nickel oxide (Sm-Eu-Ca- Sr)NiO2 thin films. Electron microscopy reveals a small thickness of ~ 2 nm of infinite-layer phase stabilised at present, which indicates a higher temperature superconductivity should be observable in clean bulk crystals. 2 A longstanding question in condensed matter is whether high-temperature (high-T") superconductivity above 30 K at ambient pressure is unique to quasi-two-dimensional copper oxide (cuprate) or ubiquitous among transition metal oxides in the periodic table of elements [1–4]. As one of the candidates that Bednorz and Müller attempted to synthesise for the realisation of high-T" superconducting oxides [5–7], intense efforts into the synthesis of nickel oxide (nickelate) have been undertaken for more than three decades [8– 11]. However, only a few members of nickelate superconductors have been successfully synthesised to date, where superconductivity at ambient pressure is only observed in the d#$% doped infinite-layer (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 [12–16] and quintuple layer Nd6Ni5O12 , while a high-pressure induced superconducting phase is recently observed in the d&'% nickelates . The challenging material synthesis and the limited number of superconducting members in the nickelates family have been bottlenecking fundamental understanding of the correlated system and its superconducting pairing mechanism [19–23]. For example, high-field transport studies on the hole-doped (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 show a drastic difference in the scale of upper critical fields between various rare-earth nickelates, where a large Pauli-limit violation in all directions is observed in the Ca/Sr-doped LaNiO2 , but absent in the Nd-nickelates counterpart . Meanwhile, the low-temperature penetration depth and superfluid density studies suggest a nodal gap in the La/Pr-nickelates, but a nodeless gap in the Nd-nickelates . Such an ambiguous distinction between different rare-earth nickelates begs the importance of discovering a new nickelate superconductor beyond the La/Pr/Nd rare earth elements. has a lower T" ~ 10 K . For the infinite-layer nickelates, their three-dimensional electronic structures mark the first deviation from cuprates’ quasi-two-dimensional single-band picture [7,31–35]. It is, therefore, critical to understand the rare-earth dependence superconducting T" , phase diagram, dimensionality, order parameter, Fermi surfaces, symmetries, and competing orderings of the strongly- correlated nickelates [21,36–39]. 3 Samarium-nickelate is the next candidate to expand the rare-earth infinite-layer nickelates families. Considering Sr-doped (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 are all superconducting at 20% Sr doping, 0.2 Sr-doped SmNiO2 is expectedly superconducting as well. We observed a metallic behaviour (with small resistivity upturn below 50 K) and low resistivity (~1 m Ω ∙ cm ) comparable to the superconducting hole-doped (Nd/Pr/La)NiO2 , but no sign of superconducting transition down to 2 K . This observation should not be considered conclusive. We then attempted to hole dope with a smaller cation, such as Ca2+ or Eu2+/3+, following our previous work on the dimensionality manipulation of superconductivity in the infinite-layer nickelates . In addition, we are encouraged by the possibility of better stabilising the hole- doped perovskite SmNiO3 through mix-valent Eu2+/3+ . With these considerations, we focus on synthesising doped Sm1-x-y-zEuxCaySrzNiO2 (SECS) infinite-layer nickelates. The crystal structure of this superconducting candidate is schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a. 4 sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) image of a representative superconducting Sm0.74Eu0.06Ca0.01Sr0.19NiO2 thin film. (c) Calculation of the atomic spacing in the best crystalline area. vs temperature R!(T) plot. (b) Phase diagram of various infinite-layer nickelates (R, A)NiO" showing R! sign crossover temperature T# as a function of hole doping, adapted from ref. . Fig. 1 shows the cross-sectional scanning transmission electron microscopy of a representative superconducting infinite-layer nickelates thin film Sm0.74Eu0.06Ca0.01Sr0.19NiO2 grown on NdGaO3(110). The c-axis lattice constant of the infinite-layer phase is calculated to be ~ 3.29 Å, which agrees well with the theoretical values for P4/mmm space group . A transition layer up to ~ 4 uc can be observed at the film-substrate interface in most parts of the film (Fig. 1b) . In addition, large areas of Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) type stacking faults are present throughout the film, suppressing the maximum achievable infinite-layer phase to ~ 3 uc – 5 uc (Fig. 1b-c). We note that this thickness is much smaller than those for hole-doped (Nd/Pr/La)NiO2, where the infinite-layer phase can be stabilised up to ~ 15 uc – 30 uc . The high defect density is reflected in the magnetoresistance of the infinite-layer 5 nickelates , where a small negative magnetoresistance is observed. The perovskite phase is mostly insulating below room temperature , similar to the previous reports on undoped perovskite SmNiO3 . Fig. 2 shows the Hall transport characteristics of the SECS infinite-layer thin films. The overdoped x + y + z = 0.26 SECS shows a sign change in Hall coefficients R- from negative at high temperatures to positive below T. = 110 K (Fig. 2a). This sign-change temperature T. is slightly higher than those of overdoped (Nd/Pr/La)NiO2 (Fig. 2b), suggesting smaller rare-earth electron pockets in the SmNiO2. On the other hand, underdoped Sm0.85Eu0.06Ca0.08Sr0.01NiO2 has negative R- and majority electrons charge carriers at all temperatures measured, which is consistent with the underdoped infinite-layer nickelate of earlier rare-earth elements. The underdoped Sm0.85Eu0.06Ca0.08Sr0.01NiO2 has a lower T" ≈ 7 K . We note that (for convenience, T" refers to T",01234 throughout this manuscript) T" value in this report should not be considered definitive, as a significantly higher (increase up to × 2) T" has shown to be achievable through synthesis advances in the hole-doped (Nd/Pr/La)NiO2 . 6 of several superconducting SECS samples. (b) Magnification of the ρ(T) curves at zero resistivity. (c) Magnetic field dependence ρ(T) for a representative SECS sample. The field was applied along the perpendicular direction (H ∥ c). Inset shows the upper critical field H$" − T taken at 50% transition criteria, with a linear fit. (d) 2nd order derivative %!& %'! (T) of the ρ(T) curve. The onset of superconductivity is defined as the temperature where %!& %'! drops below zero ( %!& %'! < 0) . Figs. 3-4 show the resistivities versus temperature plots of the superconducting infinite-layer Sm1-x-y-zEuxCaySrzNiO2 (SECS). We can reproduce superconductivity in more than ten samples, where a zero-resistance state is evidently present in Fig. 4b. The highest T",5 ≈ 27.1 K is the first superconducting nickelate which zero resistance state temperature surpasses the liquid hydrogen boiling point, while a higher T" remains promising for SECS, given much room for sample quality improvement. Fig. 4d shows 7 the highest onset of superconductivity observed at T",01234 ~ 37 K, where the onset of superconducting transition is taken as the temperature where 2nd order derivative 6!7 68! drops below zero H 6!7 68! < 0J, following the convention used in nickelates . Using other definitions of the onset of superconductivity would yield a T" value above 30 K as well, comparable to the first cuprate Ba-La-Cu-O (Fig. 3) . The suppression of superconductivity by applied magnetic fields is representatively shown in Fig. 4c and Ref. , supporting the observation of superconductivity in the hole-doped SmNiO2. We extract the upper critical fields along the perpendicular to ab plane (c-axis) direction using 50% transition criteria, μ5H"),95% (Fig. 4c inset). We fit the μ5H"),95%(T) to the linearised Ginzburg-Landau equation: μ5H"),95%(T) = ;" ! (5) H1 − 8 8%J where Φ5 is the flux quantum and ξ@A(0) is the zero-temperature Ginzburg-Landau coherence length, ξ@A(0) = 2.78 nm for this sample. A shorter coherence length is expected for the higher T" sample . The linear dependence μ5H"),95%(T) suggests a dominant orbital pair-breaking mechanism within this temperature range. Fig. 5 summarizes all the discovered superconducting nickelates at ambient pressure, where the maximum onset T" is observed at < 20 K [12–15], and up to ~25 K for optimally grown strained nickelates (hole- doped NdNiO2 on NdGaO3 and LSAT substrates). The newly discovered SECS grown on NdGaO3 (NGO) would have a small strain of ~0.26% if epitaxially strained, which should be insignificant for modulating T", as shown in the recent freestanding works . The realisation of superconductivity for infinite-layer nickelates grown directly on NGO substrate here also excludes the role of TiO2 interface in achieving superconductivity in doped RNiO2 grown on SrTiO3 substrate or buffer layer , and LSAT substrate . On the other hand, large regions of transition layer at the SECS/NGO interface and Ruddlesden-Popper type stacking faults bottleneck the thickness of the infinite- layer phase and maximum T" of SECS. At present material quality, only ~ 3 – 5 unit cells (< 2 nm) thickness of superconducting infinite-layer phase achieved, which should severely limit the 8 superconducting T" due to confinement effect, similar to those of few nm YBCO or Nb thin films . For the quasi-2D cuprate YBCO, a ~ 2.3 nm thick film has only ~ 56% of bulk T" . Considering the more 3D electronic structure of infinite-layer nickelates as compared to the cuprates [32,53–55], it can be extrapolated that their intrinsic bulk T" ≥ 37 K/0.56 ≈ 66 K. In addition, electron microscopy reveals that most parts of the lattice are oxygen off stoichiometric ANiO)', where apical oxygen is not completely removed , which drastically lowers the superconducting T" of SECS to the present value. It was demonstrated in the Sr-doped LaNiO2 where T" was doubled upon optimising the structural quality and stoichiometry. Therefore, for SECS, a much higher intrinsic T" ~ 60 − 70 K under ambient pressure can be reasonably expected in the clean bulk single crystal or thick monocrystalline film. On the other hand, T" enhancement effects under moderate hydrostatic pressure ~ 10 GPa have shown to monotonically increase (~ × 2 T") the superconducting T" of infinite-layer nickelates ; therefore, a high pressure enhanced superconducting T" ≈ 66 K × 2 = 132 K might be achievable in this system. Considering the thickness confinement effect, oxygen off stoichiometry, and high-pressure effect, the superconducting T" of SECS can potentially mark a new milestone in superconductivity. At present, it marks a new T" record for oxides without copper under ambient pressure (Fig. 6). 9 La, Pr, Nd, Sm and dopant A = Sr, Ca, Eu, are labelled by their A-site elements (R,A). A notable compressive strain ρ(T) curves of the infinite-layer nickelates (first reported) [12–16]. The maximum onset of superconducting T$ achieved since their first discovery is annotated. The curves are vertically shifted for clarity. (b) Superconducting T$ achieved vs the year of discovery [12–17] (at ambient pressure). In terms of nickel-based superconductivity, the present discovery of superconductivity above 30 K in SECS marks not only a new record in T" under ambient pressure but also the first successful demonstration of superconductivity in the late rare-earth nickel oxides. This step of material expansion is critical for the further understanding of the rare-earth dependence correlated orderings and pairing mechanism, which its uniqueness or universality would be the next to answer . As a favourable ambient pressure high-T" material platform for further experimental study, this opens the doorway for particularly the low temperatures experimental studies on the superconducting phase (condition T ≪ T" is more accessible to 10 reach), such as spectroscopy study of the superconducting gap symmetry. Establishing the correlation between T" and parameters such as antiferromagnetic J values may suggest a suitable interaction term for the Hubbard model description and provide critical insight into the theoretical understanding of the high-T" superconducting mechanism of cuprates and nickelates. Intriguingly, the trend in T" from the earlier rare-earth (La/Pr/Nd)NiO2 to SECS is uniquely different from the expected rare earth dependence in other systems. The largest difference is typically between La3+ and Pr3+, Nd3+, while the variation beyond Nd3+ is smaller or negligible, in consistent with their ionic size variation. Using the iron pnictides as an example, the maximum bulk T" of La[O1-xFx]FeAs is ~ 26 K , while T" of Pr[O1-xFx]FeAs is ~ 52 K , and 55 K for Sm[O1-xFx]FeAs . In contrast, the maximum superconducting T" of Sr-doped La-nickelate (T" ~19 − 25 K ) and Nd-nickelate (T" ~ 23 K ) are nearly identical, which makes the present observation of a much higher T" in SECS somewhat divergent from the expected rare earth dependence. However, we note that the normal state Hall coefficients R- is consistent with the expected rare earth dependence, whereas the R- sign-change temperature T. ~ 30 K for the hole-doped LaNiO2 and significantly higher T. ~ 100 K for the hole-doped (Pr/Nd/Sm)NiO2 including SECS. Therefore, the significantly higher superconducting T" in SECS does not correlate well with their normal state, at least in this aspect of electronic structure. On the other hand, previous experimental studies on the dimensionality of the superconducting state of infinite-layer nickelates suggested a crossover from 2D to 3D as T → 0 K that can be manipulated by the rare-earth ions and dopant size . We speculate the smaller Ca2+/Eu2+/3+ dopants might play a role here in the dimensionality tuning of superconductivity, and consequently, a modulation in T". Such a speculation can be further verified experimentally by comparing the T" of purely Sr2+-doped SmNiO2 and purely Ca2+/Eu2+/3+-doped SmNiO2. Nevertheless, the discovery of superconducting SECS should ignite momentum for theoretical and experimental investigations on the origin and pairing mechanism of this newfound high- T" superconductivity without copper. In principle, this report marks the first step towards direct evidence for a broad family of high-temperature unconventional superconducting oxides beyond copper. 11 Ambient-pressure Tc of oxides Acknowledgements: We acknowledge useful discussions with Hans J.W.M. Hilgenkamp, Dan Ferenc Segedin, Yi-Feng Yang, Yijun Yu, Bai Yang Wang, Kyuho Lee, and Wenzheng Wei. We thank the technical support from Qian He, Yang Ping, Ngee Hong Teo, Shengwei Zeng, Zhi Shiuh Lim, Saurav Prakash, and Xing Gao. This research is supported by the Ministry of Education (MOE), Singapore, under its Tier-2 Academic Research Fund (AcRF), Grant No. MOE-T2EP50121-0018 and MOE-T2EP50123-0013. 12 Authors contributions: S.L.E.C. and A.A. conceived the project and wrote the manuscript. S.L.E.C. synthesized the nickelate films, conducted the reduction experiments, performed the transport measurements, and analysed the data. Z.L. conducted the electron microscopy.