1 3D printed mesoporous superconductors with periodic order on three length scales and enhanced properties via block copolymer directed self-assembly Authors: Fei Yu1,2, R. Paxton Thedford1,3, Thomas A. Tartaglia1, Sejal S. Sheth1, Guillaume Freychet4,5, William R. T. Tait1,3, Peter A. Beaucage6, William L. Moore1, Yuanzhi Li7, Jörg G. Werner7,8, Julia Thom-Levy9, Sol M. Gruner9, R. Bruce van Dover1, Ulrich B. Wiesner1,10,11* Affiliations: 1 Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. 2 Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. 3 Robert Frederick Smith School of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. 4 National Synchrotron Light Source-II, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, New York 11973, United States. 5 University of Grenoble Alpes, CEA, Leti, F-38000 Grenoble, France. 6 NIST Center for Neutron Research, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20899, United States. 7 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States. 8 Division of Materials Science and Engineering, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, United States. 9 Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. 10 Department of Design Tech, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. 11 Kavli Institute at Cornell for Nanoscale Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, United States. * Corresponding author. Email: ubw1@cornell.edu Abstract: Solution-based soft matter self-assembly (SA) promises unique materials properties from approaches including additive manufacturing/three-dimensional (3D) printing. We report direct ink writing derived, hierarchically porous transition metal nitride superconductors (SCs) and precursor oxides, structure-directed by Pluronics-family block copolymer (BCP) SA and heat treated in various environments. SCs with periodic lattices on three length scales show record nanoconfinement-induced upper critical field enhancements correlated with BCP molar mass, attaining values of 50 T for NbN and 8.1 T for non-optimized TiN 2 samples, the first mapping of a tailorable SC property onto a macromolecular parameter. They reach surface areas above 120 m2/g, the highest reported for compound SCs to date. Embedded printing enables the first BCP directed mesoporous non-self-supporting helical SCs. Results suggest that additive manufacturing may open pathways to mesoporous SCs with not only a variety of macroscopic form factors but enhanced properties from intrinsic, SA-derived mesostructures with substantial academic and technological promise. Additive manufacturing / three-dimensional (3D) printing dramatically expands the accessible range of form factors and has been extensively used in the field of soft matter1. While new printing techniques continue to advance this field2–5, challenges remain in the 3D printing of self-assembly (SA) directed functional crystalline inorganic nanomaterials. Such materials may combine atomic lattices, SA-based mesoscale lattices, and 3D printing induced macroscopic lattices. This requires exquisite structure control over three separate length scales to achieve the desired properties, which explains why reports on such studies remain scarce. This is particularly true for quantum materials like superconductors (SCs), for which solution-based soft matter SA promises a combination of cost-effective synthesis approaches and mesostructure-induced property enhancements6. Block copolymer (BCP) SA-derived mesostructures, a hallmark of soft condensed matter science, have recently gained attention in 3D printing due to their exquisite structure control over mesoscale lattice parameters typically across 50-500 Å7,8. To the best of our knowledge, however, 3D printed BCP SA-based mesoporous SCs with periodically ordered lattices on three different length scales have not been reported. In fact, despite first reports on 3D printed BCP SA- directed mesostructured amorphous silica9,10, a large part of the periodic table of elements remains unexplored. Transition metals and their compounds (e.g., oxides and nitrides) are attractive candidates, as first experiments using large molar mass BCPs to structure direct mesostructured niobium nitride (NbN)-type materials have shown modified macroscopic SC behavior11,12. Compared to silica, however, their 3D printing is complicated by the rapid kinetics of the associated sol-gel synthesis processes13. Here, we report transition metal compounds accessible through sol-gel chemistry13,14 in the form of nitrides with periodic atomic rocksalt lattices and their precursor oxides structure- directed by low molar mass Pluronics-family BCPs into mesoscale lattices and 3D printed by direct ink writing (DIW, Fig. 1) into various form factors including periodic cubic woodpile lattices and periodic helices. Identifying appropriate 3D printing and thermal processing conditions in various environments enables the successful formation of hierarchically porous nitride SCs with self-assembled mesostructures and record high surface areas. For these materials, to the best of our knowledge, we demonstrate the highest nanoconfinement induced enhancements to date for the upper critical field of the SCs. This enhancement is controllable by BCP molar mass, thereby mapping a SC property onto a macromolecular characteristic. In addition, we show the first 3D printed mesoporous 3 superconducting helical structures, a non-self-supporting configuration particularly challenging to print, adding to the variety of achievable form factors. These results pave the way to classes of 3D printed SCs with substantial academic as well as technological promise. Fig. 1. Schematic of the processes to achieve direct ink writing (DIW) derived and Pluronics block copolymer (BCP) self-assembly (SA) directed mesoporous superconductors (SCs) with periodic structures on three different length scales. (a) The ink is composed of Pluronics-family BCPs mixed with transition metal sols hydrolyzed from metal alkoxides in acidic ethanol solutions. The syringe pump-type print head extrudes the ink into a dish containing either hexane for periodic cubic woodpile structures or gel-like 25 % Pluronic F127 by mass in water for periodic helical structures. After drying and annealing, (b) 3D printed Pluronics-sol hybrid woodpiles with self-assembled periodic hexagonal mesostructures and helices are calcined in air to yield (c) mesoporous transition metal oxides. After further heat treatments in ammonia and carburizing gas (mixture of methane, hydrogen, and nitrogen) at higher temperatures up to 950 °C, oxides are converted to (d) mesoporous superconducting transition metal nitride helices and hexagonally ordered woodpiles with cubic rocksalt atomic lattices. DIW derived and BCP SA directed porous superconductors with periodic lattices on three separate length scales We first selected amphiphilic Pluronics-family PEO-b-PPO-b-PEO ABA-type BCP F127 as the structure-directing agent for an inorganic niobia sol (Fig. 1). Directly writing the F127-niobia ink in air produced poor results, however, with solvent evaporation being too slow to lead to ink mechanical properties conducive to layer-by-layer depositions without 4 collapse of the printed structures (Fig. S1b). Rheological results confirmed a liquid-like ink with low moduli inappropriate for 3D printing (Fig. S1a). Fig. 2. 3D printed structures with periodic atomic, mesoscale, and macroscopic lattices derived from BCP-niobia sol. (a-c) Photos of as-printed periodic cubic woodpile of Pluronic F127-niobia sol hybrid. (d, g) Photos of resulting oxide (d) and nitride (g) woodpiles. (e, f, h, i) SEM micrographs at different magnifications of periodic hexagonal mesostructures of oxide (e, f) and nitride (h, i). (j, k) Optical micrographs of oxide woodpile in (d). (l) Photos of as-printed cylindrical woodpile of Pluronic F127-niobia sol hybrid. Blue (a-c) and orange (l) colors are from dyes dissolved in the ink. Inorganic additives could in principle take on the role of rheological modifiers in such extrusion-based printing4,15. Targeting a particular morphology, e.g., hexagonally packed cylinders, did not, however, leave much compositional leeway as the amount of inorganic sol relative to the BCP typically dictates the self-assembled morphology in the final BCP- additive hybrids16. To overcome this limitation, we improved ink printability by adopting a coagulation bath in which, upon extrusion, the polymer and/or additive would precipitate and gain the required mechanical strength for structure retention of printed parts17. Since 5 the polyethylene oxide (PEO) blocks in the Pluronic BCPs and niobia sol are hydrophilic, we found a hydrophobic alkane bath such as hexane suitable to induce precipitation while preventing outward diffusion of the ink. In rheological tests, the ink storage modulus increased by more than two orders of magnitude upon immersion in hexane (Fig. S1b). Furthermore, storage and loss moduli quickly switched relative magnitudes with immersion time, leading to the desired more elastic response with increasing moduli. A 7 × 7 × 7 mm3 periodic cubic woodpile could now be printed from such a DIW setup (Fig. 1 left side, Fig. S2, and movie S1), showing conformity to designed print paths and stable overhanging structures (Fig. 2a-c). Aside from a periodic cubic woodpile, other sample form factors could be printed as exemplified by a cylindrical woodpile (Fig. 2l). Fig. 3. Characterization of mesoscale and atomic lattices as well as materials properties of 3D printed structures. (a) Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) and (b) wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS) profiles for 3D printed Pluronic F127-niobia sol hybrid and resulting oxide and nitride-type structures. Ticks in (a) denote relative scattering vector (q) positions (1: 3:2) of Bragg reflections for hexagonal structures (symmetry group P6mm). Dark red and magenta ticks in (b) represent relative intensities and q respectively. They superimpose so closely that they are difficult to distinguish in (b). (c) Nitrogen adsorption (solid line) and desorption (dashed line) curves of mesoporous oxide and nitride. (d) Corresponding pore size distributions derived from the Barrett–Joyner– Halenda (BJH) model. V0 is the volume of adsorbed nitrogen gas at standard temperature and pressure p°. p/p°, gas pressure p divided by p°, is the relative pressure. V is the pore volume and W is the pore width. (e) Plot of magnetic moments normalized by sample mass 6 (μ) and (f) plot of electrical resistance (R) of nitride samples as a function of temperature (T). FC, field cooling; ZFC, zero-field cooling. Color codes in (c-f) are the same as in (a, b). After thermal treatments at lower temperatures (40 to 60 °C) to remove residual solvents and further the condensation of the niobia sol, calcination in air at 450 °C decomposed the Pluronics BCP and resulted in white niobium oxide woodpiles with each dimension isotropically shrinking by about 30% relative to the hybrids (Fig. 2d,j,k). Thermogravimetric analysis showed the largest weight loss between 200 °C and 300 °C (Fig. S3). Locally, as revealed by the lack of well-defined diffraction peaks in wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS, Fig. 3b), these oxides (like the hybrids) are atomically amorphous. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. 2e,f) suggested a hexagonally packed cylindrical pore structure on the mesoscale. This is corroborated by small-angle X- ray scattering (SAXS) results, showing Bragg reflections at relative q (scattering vector) positions of 1: 3:2 in reciprocal space (Fig. 3a), consistent with hexagonal lattices for hybrids and oxides. The observed shift of the primary peak position from 0.043 Å-1 in the hybrid to 0.062 Å-1 in the oxide corresponds to a 30 % reduction in mesoscopic periodicity, which is in agreement with the macroscopic sample shrinkage (compare panels in Fig. 2a and 2d). The conversion of low molar mass Pluronics BCP SA-directed amorphous oxide materials with periodic mesoscale lattices to crystalline nitrides in general, and superconducting nitrides in particular, has remained a major challenge18,19. The low molar mass of these BCPs and associated thin inorganic walls favor collapse of the porous mesostructure during nitride crystal formation due to crystal overgrowth. Careful systematic studies allowed us to overcome this problem by identifying the following two-step chemical conversion approach (Supplementary Information): a first heating step under ammonia conducted at temperatures around 550 °C, i.e., lower than suggested by earlier studies on large BCPs11,12 to prevent mesostructure collapse but high enough for nitride crystal precipitation; then, without cooling the material to room temperature in-between as suggested by earlier studies11,12, a second heating step to a higher temperature (750 to 950 °C) performed in carburizing gas (CH4, H2, and N2 with molar ratios of 16:4:80) to improve nitride-type crystal quality but suppress grain growth. Relatively high flow rates of ammonia at 20 L/h and carburizing gas at 15 L/h (see SI for details) minimized the formation of crystalline oxide while simultaneously driving conversions to the desired final nitride-type materials. After treating the white amorphous oxides in ammonia at 550 °C and in carburizing gas at 750 °C, woodpile structures turned reflective black (Fig. 2g). WAXS results on such 3D printed materials were consistent with phase-pure rocksalt δ-NbN (and/or NbC, Fig. 3b). Both macroscopic (Fig. 2g) and SAXS analysis based nanoscopic (Fig. 3a) structures and 7 dimensions barely changed from those of the oxides. SEM inspection corroborated SAXS results, showing hexagonal mesostructures were preserved (Fig. 2h,i). Vibrating sample magnetometry (VSM) measured a critical temperature, Tc, of around 7 K, at which point the samples started to become diamagnetic (Fig. 3e), the prototypical superconducting behavior known as the Meissner effect. At around 7 K, the electrical resistance also dropped to zero (Fig. 3f), which confirmed that solution-processed and 3D printed samples were indeed SCs after heat treatments. Furthermore, nitrogen sorption/desorption results on oxides and nitrides exhibited type IV(a) isotherms with a hysteresis loop intermediate between H1 and H2(b), with pore sizes for both materials narrowly distributed around 4 nm according to the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) model (Fig. 3c,d). For comparison, we also used non-local density functional theory (NLDFT) to estimate pore sizes, which typically came out larger than suggested by SEM (Fig. S4, Table S3). Brunauer–Emmett– Teller (BET) based data analysis yielded specific surface areas around 126 m2/g and 120 m2/g for oxides and nitrides, respectively. Similar sol-gel synthesis was applied to the Pluronic-titania sol system to check how much these approaches may be generalizable (Fig. 1). Non-optimized first results using a two- step heating protocol demonstrated mesoporous superconducting TiN and its oxides (Supplementary Information, Figs. S5, S6). Controlling BCP SA directed superconductor properties After establishing access to 3D printed and BCP SA directed porous SCs, we explored the ability to control SC properties using the Pluronic-niobia sol system. Heat treatments of oxide samples to 750 °C in the second step were at the lower end of temperatures necessary for achieving superconductivity, consistent with material heterogeneities as suggested, e.g., by kinks in the resistance curves (Fig. 3f). We therefore first carefully explored heating parameters to improve superconducting properties. To that end, we varied the first (under NH3) and second (under carburizing gas) heating step temperatures from 500 °C to 600 °C and 750 °C to 950 °C, respectively. For these ranges, we did not observe structure collapse, presumably because once nitrides are formed via the first-step treatment under ammonia, the temperature in the second-step treatment remains far below the nitride melting point (Tm(NbN) > 2,500 °C), minimizing Ostwald ripening12. The onset Tc increased from around 7 K for samples treated first to 550 °C and then to 750 °C to 8-9 K and 15.2 K for samples treated to 850 °C and 950 °C in the second step, respectively, with concomitant monotonic increase in saturated magnetic moment normalized by sample mass (Fig. 4a). From the slope of field-dependent magnetic moment measurements (Fig. S7), a magnetic flux exclusion of ≈ 20 % was estimated for the sample treated to 950 °C as compared to a dense NbN SC with the same external dimensions (Supplementary Information). SEM micrographs of samples treated up to 950 °C retained 8 hexagonally ordered mesostructures (Fig. 4a, inset), which was corroborated by SAXS data analyses. The periodic center-to-center distance between neighboring pores as calculated from SAXS results decreased from 11.7 nm, through 10.6 nm, to 10.3 nm for samples treated to 750 °C, 850 °C, and 950 °C, respectively (Fig. S8a). With increasing temperature in the carburizing gas treatment from 750 °C to 950 °C, the single-phase cubic unit cell sizes increased from 4.352 Å to 4.400 Å (Fig. S8b), while the coherently scattering domain sizes derived from Scherrer analyses of these data increased only slightly, from 4.0 nm to 4.7 nm, corroborating that substantial growth of crystalline domains was largely suppressed. Fig. 4. BCP directed superconductor (SC) properties. (a) Plot of magnetic moment normalized by mass (μ) of NbN-type samples treated to 550 °C in NH3 and higher temperatures in carburizing gas (inset: SEM micrograph of sample treated to 950 °C). (b) Plot of electrical resistance (R) of NbN-type sample treated to 500 °C in NH3 and 950 °C in carburizing gas. (c) Plot of field-dependent R of sample in (a) treated to 950 °C (inset: variation of upper critical field (Bc2) with T near Tc). (d) Plot of extrapolated Bc2 at T = 0 function of room-temperature aging time (t, in days) in air for NbN-type sample treated to 575 °C in NH3 and 950 °C in carburizing gas (error bars: extrapolation error; inset: schematic of aging). (e) Plot of field-dependent R for sample in (d) aged 34 days. (f) Plot of Bc2(0) for samples treated as in (c) as a function of Mn,PEO2/3, proportional to wall 9 thickness, d (top axis). For a given Mn,PEO, lighter blue points represent results from separate samples, while the dark blue point represents the average (error bars: standard deviation). The green point represents a hexagonally ordered sample derived from a tailor- made PI-b-PS-b-PEO. The light blue background is a visual guide. The teal line indicates the Bc2(0) value for bulk NbN averaged from refs. 20–22. The dotted pink and red lines represent Bc2(0) values of NbN in confined geometries from ref. 23 and ref. 24, respectively. The inset shows a plot of Bc2(0) values (error bars: extrapolation error) for F127-directed TiN samples (Supporting Information, Fig. S19) against the dotted green line, which indicates the Bc2(0) value reported for TiN under confinement from ref. 25. Elemental compositions have been shown to influence NbN-type SC’s behavior including critical temperatures (and fields, vide infra)20,26. In our synthetic approach, oxygen was anticipated to be present in the final materials, since nitridation in ammonia followed oxide formation in the first calcination step and nitrides are known to form surface oxide layers under ambient conditions, particularly relevant for the present high surface area materials (vide infra). Furthermore, we expected carbon in the final compositions, as methane in the carburizing gas treatment is expected to form radicals during decomposition at high temperatures and be reduced to carbonaceous species. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of 3D printed samples first treated to 550 °C under ammonia and then to 750 °C, 850 °C, or 950 °C under carburizing gas, as well as after etching attempts to remove carbonaceous species deposited on pore surfaces (Supplementary Information, Table S1), suggested decreasing oxygen and increasing carbon content with increasing carburizing gas treatment temperature (Figs. S9 and S10, and Tables S1 and S2). We refer to these niobium oxycarbonitrides consistently as NbN-type materials throughout this text. In contrast to typical metallic behavior, the resistance, R, of a 3D printed NbN-type material treated first to 500 °C and then to 950 °C increased upon cooling before reaching a Tc above 15 K (Fig. 4b). This behavior could be ascribed to scattering occurring at grain boundaries within polycrystalline metallic conductors27,28, consistent with the local granular structure revealed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of these materials (Fig. S11). This observed granularity in the BCP SA directed hexagonal mesostructure also hinted at a possibly shortened Ginzburg–Landau coherence length, ξ. For type-II SCs the upper critical magnetic field, Bc2, defined as Bc2 = Φ0 2πξ2, where Φ0 = h 2e is the magnetic flux quantum, h the Planck constant, and e the elementary charge, is inversely proportional to the square of ξ. Because of this high sensitivity to ξ, we investigated possible confinement induced enhancements in the upper critical field of our DIW derived and BCP directed SCs. According to WHH theory29, the upper critical field at T = 0, Bc2(0), can be extrapolated from the rate of change of Bc2 versus T near Tc via 10 Bc2(0) = 0.69Tc dBc2 dT T=Tc . Indeed, Tc values obtained from field-dependent resistance measurements of a 3D printed material first treated to 550 °C and then to 950 °C extrapolated to a Bc2(0) of 40 T (Fig. 4c). This is a substantial jump from bulk values20–22 found between 10 and 20 T as well as the Pauli paramagnetic limit30 of 1.84 T/K × Tc ≈ 23 T. Elevated critical fields have been observed in SCs with confined dimensions, such as ultrathin films, monolayer materials, or ultrafine powders23,24,31, but systematic studies of BCP SA based confinement effects on Bc2 in 3D printing derived mesostructured SCs remain unexplored. To demonstrate that BCP SA based wall thickness induced confinement effects contribute to observed Bc2(0) enhancements, we performed two control experiments. The first was to leave samples in the ambient air for extended periods of time allowing for surface oxide layer formation32. This should reduce nitride wall thickness of the porous BCP directed mesostructured SCs and therefore increase confinement effects. Aging in ambient air a NbN-type sample that had first been treated to 575 °C and then to 950 °C indeed increased the extrapolated Bc2(0) (Fig. 4d) to a value of 50.1 T at the longest aging time of about a month tested (top red graph of Fig. 4d, and Fig. 4e). The extrapolated Bc2(0) values obtained from aged samples also allowed estimates of the Ginzburg–Landau coherence length at T = 0, ξ(0) (bottom blue graph of Fig. 4d). Considering materials heterogeneities, lines connecting extrapolated data points for Bc2(0) and associated estimates for ξ(0) were obtained from fits with a Kohlrausch–Williams–Watts (KWW) stretched exponential function with exponent, β = 0.96. Asymptotically reaching a Bc2(0) value of 50.7 T obtained from this fit toward infinite time is consistent with self-limiting oxide surface layer formation. Estimated values for ξ(0) around 2.6 nm are well below the single-crystal NbN value of 0(0) > 6 nm35. As a result of the difference in pore sizes obtained from BJH and NLDFT models (Fig. 3d and Fig. S4b, respectively), the thinnest parts of the walls in the hexagonal mesostructures were estimated from SEM micrographs of a non-aged sample (Fig. 4a, inset) to be around 4.6 nm, i.e., somewhat below the bulk ξ(0) value for NbN. These estimates are all consistent with stronger mesostructural confinement associated with smaller physical nitride dimensions after oxidation leading to the observed increases in Bc2(0). Diffuse electron scattering at wall surfaces will decrease the mean free path, ltr of electrons; in the dirty limit [ltr ≪ 0(T)], Ginzburg-Landau theory predicts (T) = 0.855 no smaller than roughly 0.855 × (6 nm × 4.6 nm)1/2 = 4 ~ 5 nm, i.e., a value much greater than observed. We conclude that confinement introduces nontrivial effects on superconductivity in this system. The second set of experiments to demonstrate BCP SA-based wall thickness-induced confinement effects was tuning mesostructure-associated wall thickness by varying BCP molar mass. To that end, in addition to F127 (≈ 12.6 kg/mol), alternative Pluronics-family 11 BCPs F108 (≈ 14.6 kg/mol) and P123 (≈ 5.8 kg/mol) with larger and smaller molar mass, respectively, than F127 were chosen for the preparation of mesoporous NbN-type SCs (Figs. S12 and S13). In order to deconvolute the contributions of thermal history and confinement effects on Bc2(0), in these experiments all 3D printed and Pluronics BCP directed samples underwent identical 2-step thermal treatments to 550 °C under ammonia and then to 950 °C under carburizing gas (Figs. S14-S16). As a reference, a separate sample PEO) triblock terpolymer of a much larger molar mass (88.3 kg/mol), and then converted to the superconducting NbN-type materials (Fig. S17) employing established protocols (i.e., without DIW)12. Extrapolated Bc2(0) values as a function of the number average molar mass of the hydrophilic PEO block of the BCP (the block that mixes with the inorganic sols) raised to the power of 2/3, Mn,PEO2/3, as a measure for its thickness, d (top axis)36, are summarized in Fig. 4f. For each of the Pluronics BCPs, at least 3 NbN-type samples (light blue) were tested and results averaged (points and associated error bars in dark blue). This plot reveals a clear trend: the shorter the structure directing BCP chains, the larger the critical field, Bc2(0). The smallest BCP P123 resulted in the largest Bc2(0) averaging near 50 T, while the largest customized BCP showed a Bc2(0) close to bulk values. Similar confinement effects were demonstrated for TiN. Direct nitridation of as-made hybrids in ammonia mitigated crystal coarsening and better retained the mesostructure directed by F127 compared with a two-step treatment via the oxide (Fig. S18). Non- optimized single-step heat treatment combined with aging protocols resulted in confinement induced Bc2(0) enhancements up to values of 8.1 T from extrapolation (Fig. S19). This is a multifold increase over confinement induced values reported in the literature for TiN confined by varying film thickness, which are all under 1 T (Fig. 4f, inset)25. Results in Fig. 4d-f display, to the best of our knowledge, the highest nanoconfinement- induced Bc2(0)enhancement to date achieved for NbN-type and TiN SCs that are correlated with BCP molar mass, the first mapping of a tailorable SC property onto a macromolecular control parameter23,24,33,34. Such solution-based BCP SA controlled and confinement- induced SC properties should be translatable to numerous macroscopic form factors via 3D printing and subsequent thermal conversion processes. 3D printing complex non-self-supporting mesoporous structures One important application of high-Bc2 SCs is as coils in superconducting nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) magnets. Brittle SCs are often challenging to bend into the coil-type shapes of electromagnets. What if in the future one could directly 3D print such complex non-self-supporting shapes? Compared with woodpiles, where printed layers underneath act as a support for building an overhanging feature above, non-self-supporting structures such as helices are challenging to form via DIW. Towards this goal and taking inspiration from embedded printing and other variants37–39, a gel-like support matrix consisting of 25% F127 by mass in water was utilized to stabilize helical form factors printed from a F127- 12 niobia sol ink (Fig. 1, movie S2). Instead of selectively crosslinking the ink or the support matrix to enable separation of the two, however, we worked in a pH neutral environment of F127 in water to induce rapid condensation of the niobia sol in the ink, which itself is at a strongly acidic pH to prevent premature aggregation of the sol nanoparticles. This inhibited substantial diffusion of the ink into the support matrix. After cooling below the gel-to-fluid transition temperature (≈ 10 °C) for the F127 gel-like support, 3D printed periodic helices of various radii ranging from 2 mm to 4 mm and a pitch of 1.5 mm were removed and transferred to ethanol for rinsing (Fig. 5a). Helices in their hybrid state showed elastic behavior and could be reversibly compressed and released (Fig. 5b-d, movies S3 and S4). They could be scooped out of ethanol by tweezers for drying and subsequent heat treatments (Fig. 5e,f, movie S5). Freestanding inorganic oxide (Fig. 5g) and nitride-type (Fig. 5h) helices were obtained after calcination in air and the two-step heat treatments described earlier in ammonia and carburizing gas, respectively. While hybrids and oxides were again amorphous, WAXS profiles of the black nitride-type helices showed peaks matching those of rocksalt δ-NbN (and/or NbC, Fig. 5i). Fig. 5. Superconducting periodic helical structures via embedded printing of F127- niobia ink. (a) A helix in ethanol after removal from the support matrix used for embedded printing. (b-d) Visualizing the elastic behavior of a hybrid helix in ethanol. (e, f) Picking a hybrid helix out with tweezers (refraction causes apparent misalignment). (g) Oxide helix 13 after calcination in air to 450 °C (inset: view along helical axis). (h) Nitride helix after heat treatment to 950 °C in different environments (inset: helix dimension against a ruler). The helices in (a, g, and h) and (b-f) were printed with radii of 2 mm and 3 mm, respectively. (i) WAXS profiles of hybrid, oxide, and nitride helices (nitride heat treated in carburizing gas to 750 °C). Dark red and magenta ticks represent relative intensities and corresponding q positions of peaks of NbN (PDF #01-089-5007) and NbC (PDF #03-065-8781), respectively. (j) Nitrogen adsorption (solid line) and desorption (dashed line) curves of mesoporous oxide and nitride helices, and (k) corresponding pore size distributions derived from the BJH model. Same color scheme in (i) applies to (j, k). (l) Magnetic moment normalized by mass (μ) of nitride helix heat treated to 950 °C. Resulting 3D printing derived and Pluronics BCP SA directed oxide and nitride-type periodic helical materials treated first to 550 °C under ammonia and then to 750 °C in carburizing gas were highly porous, reaching BET specific surface areas of 298 m2/g and 129 m2/g, respectively (Fig. 5j), with the latter even slightly surpassing the value for the similarly treated NbN-type woodpile structures described earlier. Narrow pore size distributions were centered around 4 nm for oxide and nitride-type materials both characteristic of F127-directed mesostructures (Fig. 5k). VSM measurements confirmed that a mesoporous helix treated at 950 °C was a SC with an onset Tc of 13.5 K (Fig. 5l). To the best of our knowledge, the 3D printed and heat processed materials described herein (both woodpiles and helices) constitute the highest surface area mesoporous compound SCs, and the mesoporous helices the first non-self-supported 3D printed SCs reported to date40,41. Conclusions Mesoporous SCs and precursor oxides with Pluronics BCP SA-directed mesostructures were fabricated by direct ink writing and subsequent thermal treatments in various gas environments. Either a hydrophobic precipitation bath or a gel-like support matrix helped maintain the integrity of complex 3D printed structures, including non-self-supporting helices. The work combined the freedom to choose various macroscopic periodic form factors by additive manufacturing with the periodic mesostructural control of BCP SA directed highly functional inorganic materials with periodic atomic lattices. Results suggest that solution-based 3D printing approaches enable generation of hierarchically ordered porous SCs with properties substantially enhanced over bulk behavior by nanoconfinement, and variable form factors for a range of applications including sensing and energy. Furthermore, such SCs accessible from commercially available chemicals, polymers, and 3D printing equipment should enable a plethora of advanced studies in various scientific communities, e.g., linking the hitherto largely disconnected fields of additive 14 manufacturing, mesoporous materials, and interfacial properties of correlated electron systems, and facilitate bridging fundamental studies with application-oriented “proof-of- principle” device developments. 15